Apple South (APSO,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


OM Group Inc.(OMGI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


WNEW Gambles on Elite Rock Hybrid
For more than 25 years, WNEW-FM, New York, has stood tall in the world of rock music.
In the late 1960's, it helped create the sound of rock on FM radio, with longer songs and less familiar artists than Top 40 permitted.
It became known nationally as a station that took chances, one of the first to play Bob Dylan and a few years later, Elton John.


White House Lowers Estimate of Budget Deficit for Current Year
The White House said today that revised projections showed that the Federal budget deficit for the current fiscal year would now be $160 billion -- or $33 billion lower than previously estimated -- and that President Clinton's plan for balancing the budget in 10 years could probably succeed in 9.
Mr.
Clinton pronounced the latest figures good news, and his top aides acknowledged that the revised estimates might help to foster a compromise with the Republicans, who want to balance the budget in seven years with spending cuts that the Administration contends are unrealistically large.


Treasury Securities In Price Rise
Prices of Treasury securities were higher in modest trading yesterday as the market awaited new supply and an important economic report.
As many traders stayed on the sidelines, waiting for Friday's report on employment in July, data released yesterday were mixed.
Personal income and spending showed gains that were lower than expected, and a manufacturing report was stronger than expected.


Administration Won't Cut Off Nicaraguan Aid
Defying pressure from some Republican lawmakers, the Clinton Administration notified Congress today that it would not cut off economic aid to Nicaragua, even though the cases of more than 600 Americans who say their property was expropriated by the former Sandinista Government remain unresolved.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher informed Congress that he was granting Nicaragua a special waiver that would allow the $30 million in American aid to continue on the ground that Nicaragua has worked hard in recent months to resolve hundreds of the cases.


The Many Aspects of Complexions
The line snaked down Broadway and around the corner on Saturday night for the performance by the Complexions modern dance company at Symphony Space.
The barnlike theater was jammed, with the kind of young and racially mixed audience that producers dream of.
It's easy to understand the allure of Complexions, a company founded in 1993 by Dwight Rhoden and Desmond Richardson, both former Alvin Ailey dancers.
Mr.
Richardson is one of the great virtuoso dancers of his generation, and both men have an eye for great-looking young dynamos.
The 29 dancers assembled for the engagement included members of the Ailey, Dance Theater of Harlem and Joffrey Ballet companies, with the potent Carmen de Lavallade as guest artist.


Israel Commits Violence of Its Own
To the Editor:
"Mindless Murder in Israel" (editorial, July 27), your condemnation of the heinous terrorist bombing of a bus in Tel Aviv, would be more credible if you also criticized violence and terrorism by the Israeli Government.


Wheatley Close to Deal, but Gragg Out
There are indications that Tyrone Wheatley, the Giants' first-round draft pick, has agreed in principle to a multiyear contract and could report to camp as early as Wednesday.
That's the good news regarding the Giants' top two picks.
The bad news is that offensive tackle Scott Gragg will miss four to six weeks with a broken right foot.
On Sunday night Wheatley left Detroit, where he has been staying with his grandmother and aunt, and is now in the New York area.
It is the first time in weeks that Wheatley has come to New York.


Saberhagen Dealt (No Surprise) to Rockies (Surprise)
Bret Saberhagen began packing his bags after the Mets' 4-1 victory over the Pirates last night at Shea Stadium, thinking he was heading to Cincinnati with the rest of the team for a three-game series with the Reds.
But minutes later, the veteran right-hander learned he was heading farther west as the newest member of the Colorado Rockies.
Just like that, Saberhagen went from a last-place team building for the future to a first-place team in the midst of pennant fever.
In a trade completed about one hour before the midnight non-waiver trading deadline, the Mets sent Saberhagen and a minor leaguer to be named later to Colorado for a pair of right-handed minor league pitchers.


International Recovery Corp.(INT,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Tencor Instruments (TNCR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Berkley (W.R.) Corp.(BKLY,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


In Park Slope, a Rape and Killing Leaves Sense of Anger and Distrust Among Lesbians
Word spread fast: Through the women's softball league in Prospect Park.
Out of the lesbian bookstore on Ninth Street.
Along the many strands of the sisterly network of women who have made Park Slope, Brooklyn, one of the city's premier addresses for lesbians.
The facts were muddy at first, spawning panic.


Verner E. Suomi, 79, Pioneer in Weather Forecasting, Dies
Verner E. Suomi, a meteorologist who developed weather-forecasting technology that makes it easier to plan space missions, agricultural irrigation and family picnics, died Sunday at University Hospital in Madison, Wis.
He was 79.
Dr.
Suomi died of congestive heart failure, said a spokeswoman at the University of Wisconsin at Madison, where Dr.
Suomi had taught and done research since 1948.


Stewart Information Services Corp.(STC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Ripken Homers, Bonilla's Hit Not Enough to Rescue Orioles
Blue Jays 6, Orioles 3
Pat Hentgen pitched eight strong innings last night and the Toronto Blue Jays handed Jamie Moyer his first loss in nearly six weeks, chasing the Baltimore Orioles' left-hander in the sixth inning of a 6-3 victory at Camden Yards.
Lance Parrish and Devon White each had two runs batted in to help the Blue Jays to their fifth victory in six games.
Toronto led by 3-2 before pulling away with a three-run sixth.


Release the Report on Guatemala
The Inspector General of the Central Intelligence Agency has just completed a report on C.I.A. activities in Guatemala.
But neither the general public nor most members of Congress have been allowed to see it.
Instead the C.I.A. has released a bland and virtually useless summary.
The oversight committees can see the entire report, but the public and all legislators also deserve prompt access to it.
The report was commissioned after Representative Robert Torricelli accused the agency of indirect involvement in the disappearance of the husband of an American citizen, Jennifer Harbury.
Ms.
Harbury conducted a crusade to find out what happened to her husband, Efrain Bamaca Velasquez, after he was detained by the Guatemalan military.
These events led a group of senators to demand inquiries.
President Clinton ordered inquiries at the C.I.A., the Defense, Justice and State departments and the Intelligence Oversight Board.


Maderas y Sinteticos (MYS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Aging Air Traffic Computers To Receive Temporary Repair
The aging computers used to help keep airplanes safely separated in the sky have broken down so often lately that the Government is expected to announce a $50 million stopgap measure today to keep the system going until new equipment can be installed around 1999.
The breakdowns have limited how many airplanes air traffic controllers can manage at one time, forcing many planes to wait on runways around the country.
The new equipment, located between the network of radar dishes and the screens from which the controllers work, will process data more reliably, the Federal Aviation Administration believes.


CHRONICLE
Representative JERRY LEWIS, the California Republican, comes from the heart of the automobile culture in Southern California, but he is contemplating giving up driving.
The nine-term Congressman's car was stolen Sunday for the third time in four years, The Associated Press reported.


U.S. Trade Negotiator Urges Shift in Approach on Japan
In a sign that the United States might be seeking a new approach to trade relations with Japan, a senior Clinton Administration official repudiated the confrontational tactics employed by the two nations and called instead today for a new framework based on cooperation.
"A relationship between the world's two biggest trading nations that is characterized by one trade confrontation after another seems as anachronistic as the old gunboat diplomacy," Jeffrey E. Garten, the Under Secretary of Commerce for International Trade, said in a speech here.


Patriots' Brown Has Surgery
One of the New England Patriots' most valuable players, inside linebacker VINCENT BROWN, underwent minor knee surgery yesterday.
Brown, 30, underwent an arthroscopic procedure on his left knee at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston to alleviate swelling and soreness that had caused him to miss several practices at the beginning of the Patriots' training camp at Bryant College.
It was not clear how long Brown would be absent from practice.


Apple South (APSO,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Beijing Sees U.S. Moves As Plot to Thwart China
Many senior members of China's military and political establishment have come to believe in recent months that the United States is actively conspiring to undermine China politically, economically and militarily, Chinese officials and Western experts say.
In this view, ominous signs are everywhere: The United States is trying to split Taiwan from the mainland, it is blocking China's entry into the World Trade Organization, and it is sending spies like the American human rights advocate Harry Wu to collect evidence in order to fabricate stories about China's penal system.


Shared Medical Systems Corp.(SMED,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Maderas y Sinteticos (MYS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Eastern Utilities Associates (EUA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Wholesale Cellular USA Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Regulators See Conflict at Firm Tied to Clintons
The Arkansas law firm in which Hillary Rodham Clinton and several senior Administration officials were partners violated conflict-of-interest rules in representing a savings association at the center of the Whitewater investigation, Federal regulators said today.
In a summary report prepared by the Inspector General of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, investigators said the firm, the Rose Law Firm of Little Rock, had failed to disclose a conflict involving Webster L. Hubbell's representation of Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan Association after it was seized by the Government.


Panel Debates Clinton's Role In Waco Raid
Any veneer of bipartisan cooperation at the Congressional hearing on the Waco standoff eroded today as the White House and House Republicans traded accusations about whether President Clinton might have been involved in the decision to storm the compound where members of a religious sect were barricaded.
As the proceedings move toward a conclusion this week, Abner J. Mikva, the White House counsel, asserted today in a letter to the Republican chairman of the hearings that the chairman was irresponsible to suggest that the President was involved in deciding in April 1993 to use armored vehicles and tear gas against the compound.


Wisconsin Energy Corp.(WEC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Croats Widen Threat to Rebel Serbs, and Diplomats Seem to Acquiesce
Despite fears that a Croatian attack on this country's breakaway Serbian region could lead to a wider Balkan war, officials here say Western governments have not tried to discourage the Croats from a fresh offensive.
On the contrary, according to diplomats and United Nations officials, the Western allies are so frustrated by their own inability to contain Serbian aggression that some would welcome the Croats' reclaiming the contested crescent of land, known as Krajina, which the Serbs conquered four years ago.


Lawmaker Applies Pressure For Regulation of Nicotine
Representative Henry A. Waxman asserted on the House floor today that Philip Morris manipulated nicotine levels in at least two cigarette brands.
The accusation put pressure on the Clinton Administration to endorse a proposal by the Food and Drug Administration that nicotine must be regulated as a drug,
Mr.
Waxman's assertion could also seriously compromise Philip Morris's position in its $10 billion lawsuit against ABC.
Philip Morris Companies sued ABC after the network made a similar statement about manipulation in its Day One news program early last year.


Laurindo Almeida, Guitarist, 77; Mixed Pop and Jazz
Laurindo Almeida, a Brazilian guitarist who helped introduce Brazilian music in the United States and recorded with the Modern Jazz Quartet, Herbie Mann and Stan Kenton, died on Wednesday at the Valley Presbyterian Hospital in Van Nuys, Calif.
He was 77.
The cause was leukemia, said his wife, Deltra.


Simpson Defense Changes Glove Tactics
Prosecutors said today that they had videotapes of O. J. Simpson the sportscaster wearing the same leather gloves that the police found after the two killings with which Mr.
Simpson is charged.
But faced with that disclosure, defense lawyers abruptly withdrew testimony that might have allowed those tapes into evidence.
Mr.
Simpson's lawyers had planned to have a blood-spatter expert, Herbert MacDonell, describe an experiment showing, they contend, that even gloves soaked in blood do not shrink.
They hoped that testimony would prove that even before the blood of Nicole Brown Simpson and her friend Ronald L. Goldman covered those gloves, Mr.
Simpson could not have fit into them.


Dataflex Corp.(DFLX,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


CHRONICLE
It took ARMAN, the French-American sculptor who is known for his massive works incorporating urban refuse, 19 years to find the right place for his newest creation, "Hope for Peace."
The work will be unveiled tomorrow in the Yarze district of Beirut near the new presidential palace and the Defense Ministry.
"It is a lot of tanks embedded in concrete and is a 106-foot-tall pyramid that weighs 6,000 tons," Arman said, speaking from Beirut by telephone yesterday.


Crestar Energy reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Man Kills Wife and Himself
A Jersey City man, who was apparently worried that no one would care for his ailing 71-year-old wife if something happened to him, killed her with a single gunshot wound to the head and then turned the gun on himself, the Hudson County Prosecutor, Carmen Messano, said.
Mr.
Messano said a note found in the apartment where the couple, Nicholas and Jean Sprague, lived suggested that the woman's deteriorating condition from Alzheimer's disease led her husband, 79, to commit the murder-suicide, The Associated Press reported.


Morton Intl.(MII,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Assembling a Blockbuster Pact At Minimum Professional Wage
Disney's proposed deal to buy Capital Cities/ABC, though the largest announced so far this year, has not given deal makers any reason to whistle while they work.
From Wall Street's perspective, the deal is pocket change.
Investment bankers were not even consulted until Thursday, after Michael D. Eisner, the chairman and chief executive of the Walt Disney Company, and Warren E. Buffett, the investor who owns a 13 percent stake in Capital Cities, had hammered out an agreement in principle over dinner on Wednesday.


Mestek Inc.(MCC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


MORRISON KNUDSEN CORP. (MRN,N)
The Morrison Knudsen Corporation reported a $51.3 million loss yesterday for the first quarter.
Separately, the company said it could sign a definitive agreement with its creditors in the next 7 to 10 days for a new $30 million credit line, which is essential to the company's survival.


Fat-Signaling Hormone Is Clue to Weight Control
SCIENTISTS call it the set point: that vexing and seemingly immutable weight that even the most assiduous dieters keep drifting back to.
But the actual mechanism of the body's set point or fat-setting thermostat has long been elusive.
The discovery of a fat-signaling hormone last week has given new insight into the body's system of fat control and suggested promising new practical approaches to the treatment of obesity.
It may help solve the puzzles of how the body knows how much fat it has and why a person's weight seems always to be forced back to the set point.


F.A.A. to Defend Routing Plan
Officials of the Federal Aviation Administration will have to appear before a House subcommittee this fall to defend the agency's rejection of a routing plan for Newark International Airport that was intended to reduce aircraft noise for 685,000 New Jersey residents.
The F.A.A. angered some New Jersey politicians last week by turning down the proposal, made by a citizens' group, to reroute most aircraft over the Atlantic Ocean.
Instead, the agency said that it planned to move some flights slightly to the north, south and west, cutting back noise for 18,750 people in Union County.
F.A.A. officials have said the ocean plan was not only dangerous but would also have shifted the noise to other densely populated areas.


Life for Susan Smith
The unanimous jury in Union, S.C., that spared the life of the confessed murderer Susan Smith has provided a lesson in local justice that deserves to be studied for instruction on national policy.
Its sentence shows that neither fair verdicts in individual murder cases nor the safety of the public require the death penalty.
To be sure, there are those who will continue to react to the horror of Mrs.
Smith's crime by insisting that she should die.
But those who believe capital punishment to be both uncivilized and unconstitutional can use this case to make more sophisticated points.


Petro-Canada reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Infinity Broadcasting Corp.(INF,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


BRODERBUND AGREES TO ACQUIRE THE LEARNING COMPANY
Broderbund Software Inc. said yesterday that it would acquire the Learning Company in a deal that would merge two leading developers of educational software.
The companies valued the deal, a stock swap, at $440 million.
Under the terms of the deal, shareholders of Learning Company will receive 0.8125 of a share of Broderbund for each of their shares.
After the deal, Learning Company shareholders would own 23 percent of Broderbund.
Broderbund, which is based in Novato, Calif., is the developer of best-selling software games like "Myst" and "Where in the World Is Carmen Sandiego?" The Learning Company, which is based in Fremont, Calif., develops educational software for homes and schools.
The agreement was announced after the markets closed.
Earlier, shares of Broderbund fell $1 in Nasdaq trading, to $72, while shares of the Learning Company rose $1.50, to $39.


International Briefs; Lannet Deal Advances
Madge Networks N.V. of the Nethlerlands signed a definitive agreement yesterday that brought it a step closer to acquiring Lannet Data Communications Ltd. of Israel for $300 million in stock.
A preliminary agreement on the merger of the computer networking companies was announced on June 19.
The companies expect to complete the deal in the fourth quarter. (Dow Jones)


Oregon Steel Mills Inc.(OS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


METROPOLITAN GOLF REPORT
Women's Association  When an open championship is on the line, a five-foot putt seems a lot longer, especially in a three-way playoff.
But Marjorie Jones displayed nerves of steel on such an occasion last week.
Jones, the assistant at Old Westbury Golf and Country Club on Long Island, sank the five-footer on the first hole of a playoff and captured the Women's Open Championship of the Metropolitan Golf Association at the Rockaway Hunting Club in Cedarhurst, N.Y.


Mutual Funds' Stake in Capital Cities Deal
Warren E. Buffett is not the only investor who is probably smiling ear-to-ear about the Walt Disney Company's purchase of Capital Cities/ABC.
Many less well-known Americans have also made profits on the deal -- although they may not know it.
Capital Cities is a popular holding in some of the country's biggest mutual funds.
Even though most shareholders do not keep track of what their mutual funds own, they will benefit nonetheless from the 21 percent rise yesterday in Capital Cities' stock.


Officer Is Accused of Pulling Gun on Youths
An off-duty New York City police officer was arrested in Rockland County on Sunday after drawing a gun on a group of teen-agers he thought had stolen a chain from his son, the police said.
The officer, Neftali Medina, 36, of the 42d Precinct in the Bronx, was charged with five counts of menacing, a misdemeanor, as a result of the incident, said Sgt.
John Crowley, a police spokesman.


Chess
One of the most intriguing confrontations in chess is that between a positional advantage and a material advantage.
You can see the material advantage by merely counting.
That's the way my nonchess-playing aunt judged who was winning.
There was a lot to explain if you were a pawn ahead and lost.
The opposition between a concrete plus, like a pawn, and a nebulous plus, like superior mobility and the initiative, is what incites players to try gambits and their opponents to accept them.
This type of battle is bound to go on until some amazing computer manages, if ever, to produce a total solution to chess.


Host Marriott Corp.(HMT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 16


Board Seeks to Delay Suit Against N.B.A.
The National Labor Relations Board voted, 5-0, yesterday to seek a delay of the antitrust lawsuit brought by a group of players against the National Basketball Association.
Judge David Doty of United States District Court in Minneapolis has scheduled a hearing for Sept. 6 on the lawsuit brought by Michael Jordan, Patrick Ewing and others.
The N.L.R.B. wants the court to delay hearing the case until the N.B.A. players vote on decertification of the union and the vote is tallied.
The vote will be held late this month or early next month.


Westinghouse Bid on CBS Appears Near
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation is all but ready to announce its $5 billion bid to buy CBS Inc.
Most of the details of the $81-a-share cash deal were sewn up yesterday, and the CBS board is scheduled to meet this morning to approve the offer, people with knowledge about the negotiations said.
If CBS directors give their blessing, as expected, the acquisition will be announced this afternoon in New York.
A Westinghouse spokesman declined to comment.


State Bottleneck Delays Heat-Wave Aid
The Federal Government has set aside $11.5 million to help poor New Yorkers suffering from the oppressive heat wave, but state officials say they have not finished a plan to use the money and may not be able to distribute it while the weather is still hot.
Instead, state social service officials said yesterday, much of the money may be used to warm homes next winter.


Trism Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Howell Corp.(HWL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Help for Picturing Pictures on Screen
WHEN Kodak introduced Photo CD in 1992, it was intended to be a consumer product.
Photo CD was a bridge between film, Kodak's principal money maker, and the emerging digital technology.
Pop would shoot a roll of Kodacolor and get back from the photo shop not just snapshots, but a CD-ROM that could display the pictures on the screen of a television set or computer monitor.
Things did not work out that way.


Los Angeles Journal; A Teen-Ager's Violent Death Raises Tensions With the Police
About the only facts on which all sides agree is that a police officer fatally shot 14-year-old Antonio Gutierrez as he crossed the street to fetch a cigarette for a friend of his mother's.
The police said the actions of the officer, who said he feared he was about to be shot by the teen-ager who drew a semiautomatic weapon, were apparently justified.
But eyewitnesses who are friends or relatives of the victim, and the victim's parents, said the youth was shot needlessly while wielding a flashlight.


For one mutual fund company, memorable mayhem replaces more mundane images.
MOST advertising for giant mutual funds is baby-boomer pabulum: generic displays of Frisbee-catching dogs, handsome couples and grinning college graduates.
As mutual funds proliferate -- there were more than 6,000 at last count, more than double the number of companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange -- their advertising seems to appear more and more alike.
But not at Alliance Capital Management, one of the largest American mutual fund companies, with more assets under management than the gross domestic products of Greece and Ireland combined.


Suddenly, at ABC, The Future Is Now
Newly armed with the entertainment and merchandising might of the Walt Disney Company, the ABC television network has, with one bold stroke, become the prototype of the television company of the future.
The combined assets of ABC and Disney will transform the network into the dominant programming power in television, so strong that Wall Street analysts said yesterday that ABC's rivals, NBC and CBS, may be forced into similar mergers just to compete with the new ABC juggernaut.


Eastern Utilities Associates (EUA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


WHX Corp.(WHX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Israel Evicts Settlers From West Bank Camp
Israeli soldiers and police officers evicted hundreds of Jewish settlers camped on a disputed hill in the West Bank today as a rift deepened between the Government and its rightist opponents over its self-rule agreement with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
It was one of the biggest confrontations between the authorities and settlers in the West Bank since the signing of the Israeli-Palestinian accord in September 1993.


McKenzie Sides With Eagles
Chalk one up for the new Philadelphia Eagles coach, RAY RHODES, who beat out an old Eagles coach for the services of the veteran offensive lineman RALEIGH McKENZIE.
With McKenzie's 10-year career with the Washington Redskins over, two National Football League teams showed an immediate interest in signing him as a free agent: the Eagles, and Coach BUDDY RYAN's Arizona Cardinals.
"Ray Rhodes was more convincing than Buddy," McKenzie said yesterday.
"Ray had five Super Bowl rings to show for it. Buddy had some good teams in Chicago, but . . ." (AP)


Dime Bancorp (DME,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


E. F. Johnson, Retail Analyst, Is Dead at 73
Edward F. Johnson, the founder and director of the Johnson Redbook Service, which had grown from a typical brokerage firm analyst's report into an influential retailing research publication, died on Saturday in Brick Township, N.J.
He was 73 and was also the Mayor of Bay Head, N.J.
The cause of death was complications related to a brain aneurysm, a spokesman for Johnson Redbook, a division of Lynch Jones &amp; Ryan, a New York brokerage firm, said yesterday.


Panel Votes to Reject Packwood Hearings
The Senate Ethics Committee voted last night not to hold public hearings into accusations of sexual and official misconduct against Senator Bob Packwood, but it also agreed to make public the thousands of pages of documents in the case.
The vote is not the last word on the matter.
The panel plans to meet today to discuss sanctions against Mr.
Packwood.
And Senator Barbara Boxer said she would offer a resolution to force the full Senate to vote on whether to hold public hearings.


Sherritt Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Linear Technology Corp.(LLTC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


CHRONICLE
Broadway made its debut Sunday at 1:30 A.M. on QVC, a home shopping network, and if consumers can be considered critics, it was a hit.
After the curtain went down on "Smokey Joe's Cafe" on Saturday night, two of its stars, VICTOR TRENT COOK and B. J. CROSBY, went off to West Chester, Pa., to sell CD's and cassette tapes of the rock and blues revue.
They sang three of the songs by Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller from the show and sold out the 438 $28 CD sets in 15 minutes, as well as 320 cassette tapes.
"We were surprised, and so was QVC," Mr.
Cook said.
But the biggest surprise came yesterday when he was basking in the sun at Jones Beach in Wantagh, L.I.
"A woman came over and said, 'I saw you on QVC,' " he said.
"I told her, 'You must not only see the show, but buy the tape, too.' " Always the salesman.


Memory Fresh, Miami Braces for a Blow
With the memories of Hurricane Andrew still vivid -- indeed, with damage from that 1992 disaster still visible in some places -- it took only the slightest suggestion that another storm was taking aim at South Florida today to send residents home from work and rushing to hardware and food stores.
"It's a madhouse," said Louis Muhammad, 24, an employee at a Home Depot store in North Miami Beach, where shoppers waited for parking spots and carts and a crowd of 50 jostled at a bin of flashlight batteries.


WPS Resources Corp.(WPS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Apple South (APSO,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


The New Negotiations Are Still Languishing In the On-Deck Circle
If anyone thought the past four months of time off from labor negotiations would have changed the climate, nah.
It was four months ago yesterday that Federal Judge Sonia Sotomayor issued the injunction that prompted the players to end their strike and return to work.
Negotiators for the players and the owners have not conducted meaningful talks toward a new agreement since, not since the day before Sotomayor's order.


Noble Affiliates Inc.(NBL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Meanwhile, on the Field, Mets Win With Pulsipher
In what was only a subplot to the Bret Saberhagen watch at Shea Stadium last night, the Mets captured their third straight victory by beating the Pirates, 4-1.
It was a noteworthy accomplishment for the team, which had recently endured a six-game losing streak, and for the rookie pitcher Bill Pulsipher, who recorded his first complete-game victory in the major leagues.
With the midnight trade deadline approaching, most of the attention was focused on Saberhagen, who spent the game sitting in the Mets' dugout chewing gum and chatting with teammates before his last-minute trade to the Colorado Rockies.
But while Saberhagen was being monitored, the Mets did their best to prove why losing their ace pitcher might not be so catastrophic.
Rico Brogna belted a two-run homer and Carl Everett delivered a taste of his much-discussed potential with three hits as the Mets beat the Pirates for the third straight game.


Bit by Bit, Yankees Manage to Push Ahead in the East
Jim Leyland, the sage manager of the Pittsburgh Pirates, believes that pennant races do not begin until Aug. 1.
Yankee Manager Buck Showalter does not disagree.
To Showalter's relief, when the Yankees start August by opening a three-game homestand against the Milwaukee Brewers tonight, they will do so after some impressive shoring up at the end of July.
Thanks to their strong entry into the second half, the Yankees have put themselves in pretty good position in the tightening American League East race.


Host Marriott Corp.(HMT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 16


Nabors Industries(NBR,A) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


When Typical Teen-Agers Are Awesome Elders; Super Supy Girls Are Those Who Pass the Traditions Down to the Younger Ones
When the adults at Raquette Lake Girls Camp look at Anna Cannold, they cannot help remembering her performance as the princess in a production of "The Pale Pink Dragon" six summers ago.
At the show's climax, she knelt on stage, opened her big brown eyes astoundingly wide and whispered that she was "going to the bathroom" all over her lacy pink dress.
But the younger girls at camp see Anna, now 14, only as a near grown-up, or, in camp-speak, a Supy girl, a member of the oldest bunkhouse.
To them, Anna is not the little princess but the star of this year's "West Side Story," who sang the sensuous part of Anita with abandon.


Dime Bancorp (DME,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


For Disney Chairman, a Deal Quenches a Personal Thirst
Michael D. Eisner, the Walt Disney chairman and one of the most ferociously ambitious people in Hollywood, has hungered for a television network for nearly a decade.
And while there are many business reasons for buying Capital Cities/ABC, the personal ones are just as important.
Mr.
Eisner, who is 53, was drawn to ABC because it is the No. 1 television network in prime time and news, its daytime viewers have the most appealing demographics, its cable holdings (including the ESPN sports network) are especially lucrative and its family-oriented programs fit Disney's credo.
ABC, in fact, calls itself the family network.


Crestar Energy reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Rangers Regain Lidster by Dealing Wells
Neil Smith and Mike Keenan had their differences when Keenan was the Rangers' coach, but it did not prevent them from making a deal yesterday by exchanging two aging defensemen.
The trade brought Doug Lidster back to the Rangers and sent Jay Wells to St.
Louis.
Both played for the Rangers when the team captured the Stanley Cup in 1994, but Wells was one of Keenan's favorites.
Keenan used him in 79 games in the regular season and all 23 games in the playoffs that year, while using Lidster only sparingly.


Liberty Corp.(LC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Rufus Hessberg, 74, Surgeon and an Expert in Aerospace Medicine
Rufus R. Hessberg, a former paratroop surgeon who became one of the country's leading experts in aerospace medicine, died on Thursday at Alexandria Hospital in Virginia.
He was 74 and lived in Upper Marlboro, Md.
The cause was apparently a heart attack, said Pamela Day, managing editor of the Aerospace Medical Association, from which Dr.
Hessberg had retired in 1992 as executive vice president.


Senate Panel Will Release Documents on Packwood
The Senate Ethics Committee voted tonight not to hold public hearings into allegations of sexual and official misconduct against Senator Bob Packwood, but it also agreed to make public the thousands of pages of documents in the case.
The committee's 3-to-3 vote -- a tie vote results in no action -- is not the last word on the matter.
It plans to meet Tuesday to begin discussing sanctions against Senator Packwood.
And Senator Barbara Boxer said tonight she would offer a resolution, perhaps as soon as Tuesday, to force the full Senate to vote on whether to hold public hearings.


The Commodified Blonde, or, Marilyn as Text
AMERICAN MONROE The Making of a Body Politic  By S. Paige Baty  197 pages.
Illustrated.
University of California Press.
Cloth, $40; paper, $15.
Nunnally Johnson called her "a phenomenon of nature, like Niagara Falls and the Grand Canyon." Norman Mailer dubbed her "our angel, the sweet angel of sex." Earl Wilson hailed her as "the meteor of show business," whose "flash and fire" blotted out all the other dim, little stars.
And Groucho Marx declared her "Mae West, Theda Bara and Bo Peep all rolled into one."


Crestar Energy reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Blair Corp.(BL,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Infinity Broadcasting Corp.(INF,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


On My Mind; Victory Over the Stupids
The commandants of the gulags of the world and their security-ministry masters have two things in common, in whatever country they operate.
They have a taste for torture, and they are very stupid.
Perhaps part of the combination comes from genetics.
Some people seem to be born to fight for freedom and others to draw blood from them.


Severe Trauma May Damage The Brain as Well as the Psyche
SEVERE emotional trauma may put its victims in double jeopardy, not only searing the psyche, but physically damaging the brain.
New studies in trauma victims as diverse as Vietnam combat veterans and victims of childhood sexual abuse have found a shrinkage in the size of the hippocampus, a brain structure vital to learning and memory.
The very hormones that flood the brain to mobilize it in the face of an overwhelming threat can be toxic to cells in the hippocampus, the studies suggest.


Foodbrands America Inc.(FBAI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


The New Agencies Of Three Companies
Three marketers named agencies to handle their accounts last week.
The Motorola RISC microprocessor division of Motorola Inc. in Austin, Tex., selected the New York office of Anderson &amp; Lembke to handle its Power PC account, which had been at BBDO San Francisco, a unit of the Omnicom Group, for the last four years.
Although the billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $10 million to $12 million.
Anderson &amp; Lembke was awarded the account after a six-month review that was narrowed to that agency and one other finalist, Sicola Martin in Austin.


Host Marriott Corp.(HMT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 16


Treaty Partners Study Fate of Birds at Polluted Mexican Lake
THEY cross the border in countless numbers, unprotected and at the mercy of their new host country.
A few prosper.
Most survive.
Some die.
That is the normal cycle of life for the 250 species of North American birds that migrate from the United States and Canada, where they and their habitats are protected, to Mexico, where they generally are not.
But that cycle was brutally interrupted last December when some 40,000 birds died on the fetid water of an agricultural reservoir near this central Mexican city, causing what wildlife experts say was one of the worst bird kills in North American history.


Sampson to Shed Interim Label
The word interim will be erased from Steve Sampson's title tomorrow when he is named the full-time coach of the United States national soccer team by the United States Soccer Federation.
A news conference will be held just after noon at Giants Stadium, site of the Parmalat Cup that starts Friday night with the United States playing Parma of Italy in the opening game before Boca Juniors of Argentina meets Benfica of Lisbon.
Sampson was named interim coach in place of the dismissed Bora Milutinovic, who had Simpson as one of his assistants during the 1994 World Cup.
Sampson's stock rose recently after the success of the United States in the U.S.
Cup '95 and the America Cup.


International Briefs; Czech Move by Heinz
The H. J. Heinz Company said yesterday that it had bought a majority stake in a Czech baby food producer to help increase sales of infant formula throughout Eastern Europe.
The purchase of PMV/Zabreh, a unit of Prumysl Mlecne Vyzivy A.S., the former state dairy organization, is Heinz's second acquisition in Eastern Europe.
Last month, Heinz increased its holding in the Hungarian food processing company Kecskemeti Konzervgyar R.T. to 97 percent from 48.5 percent.
Heinz declined to disclose terms of either transaction. (Bloomberg Business News)


Young Man Goes West to Prosper in Class
The graduation tassle does the hula from his rearview mirror, the report card is being framed and the cap and gown hang where none has hanged before: in his mother's matchbox South Bronx apartment.
In New York, he was 16 going on 32; here in the desert, he is 18 going on 12.
They cook him pork chops here, tape his picture to the refrigerator, lend him the key to the gym, measure his height on an 8-foot kitchen cabinet.
Elias Ayuso, who at the age of 9 renamed himself Larry out of shame, has grown one inch while living with a family that does not give an inch.
His 11 P.M. weekend curfew is a virtual ball and chain.


David G. Roth, Jewish Group Coordinator, 55
David G. Roth, an official of the American Jewish Committee who was the organization's chief liaison to ethnic groups, died on Saturday at Rush Presbyterian St.
Vincent Hospital in Chicago.
He was 55 and lived in Riverwoods, Ill.
The cause was complications from heart surgery he had undergone two weeks ago, said Arthur S. Berger, a committee spokesman in New York.


Healthcare Compare Corp.(HCCC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Pillowtex Corp.(PTX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Rookie Has Trouble Telling Left From Right
Every 10 seconds or so, Hugh Douglas made a towel out of his soaked shirt and mopped his brow.
It was near noontime today, and virtually all the other Jets were showering in the locker room.
Douglas needed more work and stayed on the practice field.
He has been so nervous while trying to absorb the pro game that he is often exhausted before practice has peaked.
This is far different from the way he was asked to play at tiny Central State of Ohio.


Homestake Mining Co.(HM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
BIOWHITTAKER INC., Walkersville, Md., a maker of health care products, said it planned to sell its line of diagnostic test kits to Wampole Laboratories, Cranbury, N.J., a division of Carter Wallace Inc.
Terms of the transaction were not disclosed.
DELRINA CORP., Toronto, a maker of computer networking and communications products, said it would buy the NET SatisFAXtion line of fax software products from Intel Corp., Santa Clara, Calif., for an undisclosed amount.


INSIDE
Money for Flight Computers  The computers used to help keep airplanes safely separated have broken down so often that the Government is expected to announce a $50 million stopgap measure to keep the system going until 1999.
Page A12.
The Body's Fat Thermostat?
Findings about the fat hormone in animals may be the key clue to how the human body's set point is set and why it is so hard either to lose or to gain weight.
Science Times, page C1.
Saberhagen Sent to Rockies
The Mets dealt pitcher Bret Saberhagen to the Colorado Rockies less than an hour before last night's midnight trading deadline.
Page B7.
China Fears U.S.
Motives
Many senior Chinese officials suspect that the United States is trying to undermine their country, experts say, making it harder for the Clinton Administration to come up with an effective China policy.
Page A2.
The User's Windows 95
On first use, Windows 95 appears to be a cosmetic makeover of DOS and Windows that solves many problems and offers several new features.
Personal Computers, page C1.


XEROX CORP. (XRX,N)
The Xerox Corporation said yesterday that its net income rose 42 percent in the second quarter, driven by productivity improvements and revenue growth from its Latin American operations.
For the three months ended June 30, the company earned $238 million, or $2.07 a share, compared with $168 million, or $1.31 a share, in the corresponding period a year earlier.


Scorekeeping in the Live-TV Wars
Federal law enforcers and high officials have been taking fire from so many directions and on so many channels lately that you need to be a nimble surfer to keep up.
Herewith, for assistance, a review of who has been doing what to whom.
Last week, witnesses encouraged by Republican Representatives investigating the raid on the Branch Davidians in Waco, Tex., peppered the F.B.I.
Democratic Senators compelled to investigate the suicide of Vincent W. Foster Jr. sent a uniformed Secret Service agent into befuddlement after Republicans harrassed the Park Police.
And in Los Angeles a lawyer for O. J. Simpson -- as who is not? -- assaulted an F.B.I. toxicologist.


Officers Found Unfit to Drive
"Corrections officers should be held to a higher standard," said Glenn Cunningham, public safety director for Hudson County.
That is why 40 Hudson County correction officers, who were found to have suspended or invalid driver's licenses during a routine insurance check, now have 30 days to correct the problem or face disciplinary action.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6  NO CURBS ON CROATIAN MOVE  Croatian officials said Western Governments had not tried to deter them from moving against Serbs, and some diplomats said the West would welcome the move.
A6  The WEST'S BALKAN OUTPOST  Increasingly, Croatia is becoming the strongest link with the Western allies in the Balkans, reclaiming a role of ethnic and political buffer that it had long maintained.
A6  Allegations of sniper fire by Government troops in Sarajevo.
A6  CHINA'S FEAR OF CONTAINMENT  Many senior Chinese officials have come to believe that the United States is actively conspiring to undermine China politically, economically and militarily.
A2  IN RUSSIA, HISTORY AS REVELATION  The former chief of psychological warfare for the Soviet military is racing with his cancer to complete a biography of Stalin drawn from archives he says have fundamentally reversed his views.
A3  ISRAEL EVICTS SETTLER PROTESTERS  Israel evicted hundreds of settlers camped on a hill in the West Bank who were protesting Palestinian self-rule.
The confrontation deepened a rift between the Government and rightist opponents.
A3  The Clinton Administration resisted pressure to cut Nicaragua aid.
A5  United Nations Journal: Tying up colonialism's loose ends.
A4  National A8-13  2 PLANS ON WELFARE  At a meeting of the nation's governors in Vermont, President Clinton and Senator Bob Dole presented competing visions for overhauling welfare.
A1  DISNEY TO BUY ABC'S PARENT  The Walt Disney Company plans to acquire Capital Cities/ABC in a deal valued at $19 billion that will create one of the world's largest entertainment companies.
A1
AN AMBITION FULFILLED  The chairman of Walt Disney, Michael D. Eisner, has hungered for a television network for nearly a decade -- for personal reasons as well as business reasons.
A1 REVERSAL ON ENVIRONMENT  House Republicans succeeded in undoing a defeat they suffered last week and restored limits on the Government's ability to enforce pollution laws.
A1  NO PACKWOOD HEARINGS  The Senate Ethics Committee voted not to hold public hearings into accusations of sexual and official misconduct against Senator Bob Packwood, but it also agreed to release documents in the case.
A13  HURRICANE THREAT IN FLORIDA  Florida prepared for the possibility of its first hurricane since Andrew in 1992.
A8  DEBATE ON SIMPSON GLOVES  Prosecutors said they had videotapes of O.J.
Simpson wearing the same gloves police officers found after the two murders with which Mr.
Simpson is charged.
A8  MOVE FOR FLIGHT COMPUTERS  The aging computers used to help keep airplanes safely separated have broken down so often that the Government is expected to announce a stopgap measure to keep the system going.
A12  TRADING CRITICISM ON WACO  The White House and House Republicans traded accusations about whether the President might have been involved in the decision to storm the Branch Davidian compound.
A12  MORE BARBS ON TOBACCO  Representative Henry Waxman said that Philip Morris manipulated nicotine levels in at least two cigarette brands.
A12  LOWER DEFICIT PREDICTED  The White House said revised projections showed that the Federal budget deficit for the current fiscal year will now be $33 billion lower than previously estimated.A11  VIOLATIONS AT ROSE LAW FIRM  Regulators said he Arkansas law firm in which Hillary Rodham Clinton had been a partner violated conflict-of-interest rules in representing a savings association involved in the Whitewater inquiry.
A11  Los Angeles Journal: A teen-ager death brings a state of alert.
A8  Metro Digest B1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C13-17  WNEW-FM gambles on a hybrid-rock format.
C13  Atlanta's Cultural Olympiad.
C13  Steve Buscemi, cult actor, is about to direct his first film.
C13  Theater: Shakespeare's young lovers.
C13  Dance: Complexions.
C14  Books: "American Monroe." C17  Television: Scorekeeping.
C18  Science C1-11  Achieving the first complete genome of an organism.
C1  The fat hormone may explain how the body's set point is set.
C1  Personal Computers: What is Windows 95 really like?C1  Emotional trauma may harm the physical brain.
C3  Mexican Bird deaths a test case for panel set up by trade treaty.
C4  Q&amp;A C6  Peripherals C8  Sports B7-12  Baseball: Saberhagen traded to Rockies.
B7  Other star pitchers traded before deadline.
B9  Yanks on the move.
B7  Mets' Pulsipher wins.B9  Columns: Rhoden on Schultz.
B7  On Baseball.
B9  Football: Giants and Wheatley close to contract.
B7  Hugh Douglas's ordeal.
B12  High Schools: Ayuso's move.
B7  Hockey: Lidster returns.
B12  Racing: The stretch run.
B11  Soccer: Sampson U.S. coach.
B10  Obituaries D19-20  Laurindo Almeida, guitarist  Trekkie Parsons, artist  Fashion B6  Hear this, you suits: Shape up!
Patterns  By Design  Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15  Editorials  Squaring off on welfare.
Release the report on Guatemala.
Life for Susan Smith.
Letters  Russell Baker: Don't look back.
A.
M.
Rosenthal: Victory over the stupids.
Benjamin R. Barber: From Disney World to Disney's world.
Fred Kammer: Block grants will worsen poverty.
Chronicle B4  Chess C10  Crossword C14


Drowned Man's Body Is Found
The body of a 30-year-old man from Beachwood, who may have drowned while trying to rescue his two small sons, was recovered from Lake Carasaljo Sunday night.
Dean W. Clark and his two sons, Cristian, 5, and Kenneth, 3, were in an inflatable rubber raft in an area of the lake usually used for fishing, said Lieut.
Frederick Capper of the Lakewood police.


Milgray Electronics Inc.(MGRY,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 2


Providian Corp.(PVN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


U.S. Builds Influence In Croatia
At the Defense Ministry here, 15 Americans, retired military men, are training Croatian officers in what is termed "democracy transition."
When the Presidents of Bosnia and Croatia met last week and decided on joint military action against rebel Serbs, the only foreign diplomat to attend was Peter W. Galbraith, the American Ambassador in Zagreb.


Dataflex Corp.(DFLX,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


A Record for Weekend Traffic
Traffic on the Atlantic City Expressway set a record over the weekend, the A.P. reported.
The toll road handled 392,171 vehicles on Saturday and Sunday, beating the previous record of just over 387,000, which was reached in 1993, also on a July weekend.
Officials of the South Jersey Transportation Authority attributed the increase in traffic to the heat wave, the departure of vacationers whose July rentals at the shore were about to expire, and the tennis match on Saturday between Monica Seles and Martina Navratilova.
TERRY PRISTIN


Blair Corp.


Lovers, Outdoorsy And Shakespearean
Shakespeare's lovers, at least those of the comic variety, have a definite tendency to shout.
They are usually young, of course, and, surprised by new passions and their bewildering complications, they respond with emotional gymnastics that lend themselves to exaggerated postures and high-decibel whoops of joy and dismay.
These excitable creatures flourish in outdoor productions in a way that the Hamlets and Macbeths, with their introspective mumblings, usually do not.
Actors can declaim and rant and wail with gratifying audibility without worrying much about breaking character.


Tyson Foods Inc.(TYSNA,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 1


METRO DIGEST
DEATHS AFTER SURGERY PROMPT INQUIRY Just after dawn on April 25, two patients arrived for scheduled surgery at Long Island Jewish Hospital in New Hyde Park, Queens.
Denise Verbeeck was about to undergo routine elective surgery on a damaged kneecap.
Lloyd Reback was facing a more complicated, but hardly life-threatening, operation to remove a benign tumor from his jaw.
Three days later the patients were in intensive care, near death.
They also said that 10 other rides inspected as a precaution were in good condition.  [ B3. ] OFFICER ARRESTED ON MENACING CHARGES An off-duty New York City police officer was arrested in Rockland County after drawing a gun on a group of teen-agers he thought had stolen a chain from his son, the police said.
The officer, Neftali Medina, 36, of the 42d Precinct in the Bronx, was charged with five counts of menacing, a misdemeanor, as a result of the incident, said a police spokesman.  [ B3. ] U.N.
The new law, which will be applied beginning this fall, also requires administrators to notify the police or other law enforcement authorities when students are caught with guns on school grounds.  [ B4. ] Chronicle B4  Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves B5


WALT DISNEY TO ACQUIRE ABC IN $19 BILLION DEAL TO BUILD A GIANT FOR ENTERTAINMENT
In the second-largest corporate takeover ever, the Walt Disney Company moved yesterday to create the world's most powerful media and entertainment company, announcing that it would acquire Capital Cities/ ABC Inc. for $19 billion.
The combined company would bring together the most profitable television network and its ESPN cable service with Disney's Hollywood film and television studios, the Disney Channel, its theme parks and its repository of well-known cartoon characters and the merchandise sales they generate.


Trimac Ltd. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Adding Up the Costs Of Using Windows 95
THERE is only one sure way to know if you will be happy with Windows 95 on your machine: Install it.
But the operating system is just the beginning.
Before you rush out to place your order, consider some hidden costs:
Memory and processor.
Windows 95 can run on a 386DX machine with four megabytes of random access memory only if you think the word "run" means "crawl." A faster processor is nice, but more memory is mandatory.
On any four-megabyte machine, few programs will work well; some, like the Microsoft Network, will not work at all.
Microsoft recommends eight megabytes of RAM as a workable minimum; fair enough, but even on my 90 megahertz Pentium machine with 16 megabytes of RAM, no jury would convict applications of exceeding speed limits.


Suspension Now Required For Taking Gun to School
Students caught carrying guns to school must be suspended for at least a year under legislation that Gov.
George E. Pataki signed today.
The new law, which will be applied beginning this fall, also requires school administrators to notify the police or other law enforcement authorities when students are caught with guns on school grounds.


We're Creating Jobs In the Third World; A.I.D.'s Role
To the Editor:
"Sweatshop Beneficiaries" (column, July 24) outlines difficult worker conditions and low wages in several developing countries.
The Clinton Administration has taken an active role in addressing the issues Bob Herbert raises, insuring that taxpayer dollars go to develop new markets for United States products while creating jobs in the United States.


Performance Food Group (PFGC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Transactions
Baseball American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Activated Chris Hoiles, catcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Cesar Devarez, catcher, to Rochester of the International League.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Purchased the contract of Rene Gonzales, infielder, from Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
Optioned Andy Allanson, catcher, to Vancouver.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Recalled Chris Snopek, infielder, from Nashville of the American Association.
Assigned John Snyder, pitcher, to Birmingham of the Southern League.
Promoted Ray Noriega, infielder, from Birmingham to Nashville.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Signed Danny Darwin, pitcher, to a minor-league contract and assigned him to Oklahoma City of the American Association.
Called up Lou Frazier, outfielder, from Oklahoma City.
Optioned Terry Burrows, pitcher, to Oklahoma City.
National League  COLORADO ROCKIES -- Acquired Bryan Hickerson, pitcher, from the Chicago Cubs for future considerations.
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Agreed to terms with Mike Marriott, pitcher.
Basketball National Basketball Association  NBA -- Named Chris Brienza director of media services.
SEATTLE SUPERSONICS -- Named Bill McKinney vice president of basketball operations.
Football National Football League  CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Signed David Dunn, wide receiver, to a three-year contract.
Placed Dave Cadigan, guard, on the reserve-did not report list.
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Agreed to terms with Craig Powell, linebacker, on a four-year contract.
Waived Bill Johnson, defensive lineman.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Announced the retirement of Terry Connealy, defensive tackle.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Waived Darryl Wren, cornerback. Signed Brian Jones, linebacker.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed Clarence Williams, tight end.
Waived Bryce Burnett, tight end, and Bernard Ford, wide receiver.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Waived Ty Stewart, kicker.
ST.
LOUIS RAMS -- Released Tony Miller, wide receiver.
Signed Olaf Hampel, guard.
Canadian Football League  BALTIMORE STALLIONS -- Added Corris Ervin, cornerback; Nick Subis, center, and Alvin Walton, linebacker, from the injured list.
Dropped Malcolm Goodwin and Greg Tucker, linebackers.
BIRMINGHAM BARRACUDAS -- Added Steve Henley, linebacker, and York Kurinsky, offensive lineman, from the reserve list; Kevin Little, linebacker, from the suspended list, and Rickey Royal, defensive back, and Darrell Wallace, running back, from the injured list.
Transferred Roosevelt Patterson, offensive lineman, to the reserve list.
BRITISH COLUMBIA LIONS -- Added Sean Millington, Zedrick Robinson and Francois Belanger, running backs, from the reserve list.
Added Tyrone Chatman, linebacker, and Kelly Sims, defensive back, from the injured list.
Transferred Belanger, Tony Collier, defensive back, and Cory Philpot and Ryan Hanson, running backs, and Richardo Washington, linebacker, to the injured list.
CALGARY STAMPEDERS -- Added Kevin Allen, defensive back, and Mark Pearce, defensive end, from the injured list.
Transferred Stu Laird, offensive tackle, to the injured list.
EDMONTON ESKIMOS -- Added Sandy Annunziata, and Bennie Goods, offensive tackle, from the reserve list; and Clinton Woods, tackle, from the injured list.
Transferred Goods to the injured list.
HAMILTON TIGER-CATS -- Added Luigi Cafazz, offensive tackle; Derrick McAdoo, running back, Steve McKee, linebacker; Richard Nurse, slotback; and Simon Taylor, offensive lineman; Marcus Cotton, defensive end, to the roster.
Transferred Tony Baily, defensive end; Doug Favies, center; Hank Ilesic, kicker; Kelvin Means, running back; and Frank Marof, slotback, to the injured list.
MEMPHIS MAD DOGS -- Added Keith Benton, quarterback; Michael Brooks, safety; and Todd Young, offensive tackle.
Transferred Donald Smith, cornerback, to the injured list.
Dropped Tracy Boyd, guard, and Nick Mystrom, kicker.
OTTAWA ROUGH RIDERS -- Added Mark Ricks, cornerback.
Transferred Eric Geter, defensive back, to the injured list.
SAN ANTONIO TEXANS -- Added Brett Bech, wide receiver; Ephesians Bartley, linebacker; Tony Jackson, running back; Jeff Swayer, defensive end; Daryle Smith, offensive lineman; and Kitrick Taylor, wide receiver, from the injured list.
Transferred Taylor to the reserve list; James King, defensive end, and Jimmy Lee running back, to the injured list.
Dropped Jackson, Bartley and Smith.
SASKATCHEWAN ROUGHRIDERS -- Added Scott Hendrickson, guard, and Elbert Turner, wide receiver, from the injured list.
Transferred Wayne Drinkwalter, tackle, to the injured list.
Dropped Timothy Broady, linebacker.
SHREVEPORT PIRATES -- Added Dulack Guerrier, defensive end; Kim Phillips, defensive back; Terry Beanford, guard; and Terry Smith, wide receiver, to the injured list.
Transferred Brandon Hamilton, cornerback; Alonzo Reed, guard; Raymond Savage, defensive end; and Wayne Walker, wide receiver, to the injured list.
TORONTO ARGONAUTS -- Added Lee Gissendaner and Ainsworth Morgan; wide receivers; Marvin Graves, quarterback; and Chris Gioskos, guard, from the reserve list.
Added Calvin Tiggle, linebacker, from the injured list.
Transferred Graves and Norm Casola and Paul Masotti, wide receivers, to the injured list.
Dropped Brett Collins, linebacker, and John Terry, offensive lineman.
WINNIPEG BLUE BOMBERS -- Added Blaise Bryant and Michael Oliphant, running backs, and David Williams amd Marcus Dowdell, wide receivers, from the reserve list.
Added Brian Jones, linebacker, from the suspended list.
Transferred Dowdell, Oliphant, Gerald Wilcox, slotback, and Kevin Williams, linebacker, to the injured list.
Dropped Brian Jones, linebacker.


Long, Fruitful Partnership Atop Capital Cities
When Thomas S. Murphy needed advice on how to persuade the Walt Disney Company to acquire his company, Capital Cities/ABC, he turned to his longtime friend and partner, Daniel B. Burke.
Meeting for lunch at ABC's New York headquarters last Tuesday, the two men hammered out a proposal for Disney to buy the company with a combination of stock and cash.
Walt Disney's chairman, Michael D. Eisner, ultimately bought the idea, and six days later the two companies announced a $19 billion merger.
For Mr.
Murphy, the chief executive of Capital Cities, and Mr.
Burke, the former chief executive, the deal is the capstone to one of the most durable and successful partnerships in corporate America.


CLINTON AND DOLE PRESENT PROGRAMS TO ALTER WELFARE
President Clinton and Senator Bob Dole, his leading Republican rival for next year's Presidential race, presented competing visions of welfare reform to the nation's governors today.
Playing both to the governors and to a broader public widely disillusioned with current welfare programs, Mr.
Dole and Mr.
Clinton each said welfare must be changed, but they disagreed about the role the central Government should play in fashioning assistance to the poor.


We're Creating Jobs In the Third World
To the Editor:
Bob Herbert's "Sweatshop Beneficiaries" (column, July 24) misses the mark on the beneficiaries of United States companies sewing clothing in the Caribbean and Central America.
Our company, like many of our competitors, has been manufacturing brassieres in the Dominican Republic, Jamaica, Haiti and Colombia for the past 25 years.


Heat and Pollution Equal Death
To the Editor:
Your July 20, 24 and 27 news articles on the increased death toll during the heat wave that has swept the Middle West and Northeast miss an important public health message that could help save lives: air pollution from smokestacks and motor vehicles increases substantially during heat waves, and has likely contributed to heat-related deaths.


Complications -- A special report.; Post-Surgery Deaths Promp Inquiry at a Queens Hospital
Just after dawn on April 25, two patients arrived for scheduled surgery at Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park, Queens.
Denise Verbeeck, a mildly retarded, 27-year-old former athlete, was about to undergo routine elective surgery on a damaged kneecap.
Lloyd Reback, a strapping, 25-year-old bodybuilder, was facing a more complicated, but hardly life-threatening, operation to remove a benign tumor from his jaw.
After a nurse examined each patient, they changed into gowns and headed toward the operating suite.
Mr.
Reback waved to his mother, Myrna.
"Goodbye, Ma, I love you," he said.


International Briefs; British Airports Profit
BAA P.L.C., the British airport operator, said yesterday that its first-quarter pretax profit rose 14 percent, but the gain was less than some analysts had expected.
Pretax profit increased to $:127 million, or $203.2 million, in the three months that ended on June 30, helped by a gain of $:6 million on the sale of property.
Analysts' expectations had been for a pretax profit of $:130 million, said Tony Shepard, an analyst at Greig Middleton &amp; Company. (Bloomberg Business News)


Squaring Off on Welfare
Two clever politicians, anticipating next year's Presidential election, addressed the nation's governors yesterday on a subject of sure-fire appeal -- welfare reform.
Both Senator Bob Dole and President Clinton called for more work and less welfare.
But only Mr.
Clinton addressed the needs of the poor.
Mr.
Clinton and Mr.
Dole, the Senate majority leader, tried deftly to navigate the tricky political challenges they face inside their parties.
Mr.
Dole's proposals seemed tough enough to win the support of Congressional Republicans, yet were not nearly as punitive as those advanced by Senator Phil Gramm, a rival Presidential candidate.
Mr.
Clinton also offered stiffer welfare rules.
But he pledged to help liberal Democrats preserve the safety net that guarantees Federal help to every poor family.


Peoplesoft Inc.(PSFT,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


ICN Pharmaceuticals Inc.(ICN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


DSG International Ltd.(DSGIF,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Excerpts From Dole and Clinton Speeches on Redoing Welfare
Following are excerpts from today's addresses at the National Governors' Association meeting in Burlington, Vt., by Senator Bob Dole, the Republican leader, and President Clinton, as transcribed by Reuters and the Federal Information Systems Corporation, a private transcription service.


Prime Hospitality (PDQ,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Mesa Inc.(MXP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


RLI Corp.(RLI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Mayor Seeks Layoffs Approval
Mayor Albio Sires is seeking approval from the State Department of Personnel to lay off 60 of West New York's 300 nonuniformed employees.
The Mayor blamed his predecessor, Anthony DeFino, who was mayor for 24 years, for leaving the town with a deficit of $8.7 million.
Mr.
Sires said the deficit was largely a result of expenses that should have been included in Mr.
DeFina's last budget, but will now have to be incorporated in the budget for the current fiscal year.


Disney's Stock Defies Usual Rules of the Game
The Walt Disney Company is a master at marketing.
Yesterday, even as it announced plans to issue 155 million more shares, it persuaded Wall Street that its shares had a scarcity value and that it did not want to part with them.
That helped to explain the $1.25 rise in Disney's share price, to $58.625, after it announced it had agreed to buy Capital Cities/ABC for cash and stock.
Share prices of corporate acquirers usually fall when deals are announced, but Disney shares were an exception.


5 Are Named to Top C.I.A. Posts
The head of the Central Intelligence Agency, John M. Deutsch, announced a new group of senior officials today, choosing a long-time intelligence analyst to run the agency's covert-operations division and selecting the lone hero of the Aldrich Ames affair for a crucial spy-catching post.
Mr.
Deutsch chose as his chief of spies David Cohen, who has spent 26 of his 30 years at the C.I.A. as an analyst, not in covert operations.
The move was seen in the agency as a triumph for the desk-bound analysts and a loss of face for the old guard in covert operations who conduct espionage operations overseas.


Hear This, You Suits: Shape Up!
The Italian suit as designed by Giorgio Armani, made famous in the 80's and copied everywhere, was an emblem of a businessman's arrival.
Distinctive, expensive and monotone, its soft shoulders, no-vent jacket and generous draped trousers were for the man who had made it on his own.
It showed not inherited wealth or prestige but a modern man who was thinking for himself -- not in his father's hand-me-down style but in a style for his own time.


BT Office Products reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Patterns
Hilfiger Mixes It Up
There was a jarring difference between segments of Tommy Hilfiger's spring 1996 runway presentation last week.
Mr.
Hilfiger used two different stylist teams, and in a highly unusual move, mixed in non-Hilfiger clothing in a hip-hop segment.
Most of the show was styled as usual by Hilfiger employees.
But in a decision that was as much about politics as it was about style, Mr.
Hilfiger enlisted Sybil Pennix, director of artist development for Uptown Records, and Kidada Jones to pull together the street looks.


Berkley (W.R.) Corp.(BKLY,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


With Titles on Horizon, Lukas Cavalry Set to Charge
On the day after the son of Easy Goer won the Jim Dandy Stakes and the sport's grandest filly outran colts again in the Haskell, the stage was set for three months of interesting racing that will peak on Oct. 28 at Belmont Park with the $10 million Breeders' Cup championships.
Composer, who won the Jim Dandy, will go on to compete in the next milestone event, the $750,000 Travers on Aug. 19.
Serena's Song, who won the Haskell, will not.
Thunder Gulch, who won the Kentucky Derby, will run and probably be the favorite.
His stablemate, Timber Country, will skip it and point toward the Jerome two weeks later.
And Julie Krone will not make the cast, at least not as the jockey aboard Star Standard, who will make it.


Foodbrands America Inc.(FBAI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


U.N. Journal; Committee From the Past Lingers in the Present
The basement conference chamber was spacious enough to accommodate well over 100 delegates, but hardly more than a dozen sat behind the plastic nameplates of their countries, dwarfed by the concentric rings of polished wooden tables, microphones and tan upholstered chairs.
Draft resolutions circulated.
A rank of simultaneous interpreters beavered away, translating the diplomatic discourse into French, Spanish, Chinese, Russian and English.


Sola Intl.(SOL,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Wisconsin Central Transportation Corp.(WCLX,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Dataflex Corp.(DFLX,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Observer; Don't Look Back
California's power to cloud men's minds must never be forgot.
Under its spell we submitted for eight years to the governance of Ronald Reagan, who had trouble distinguishing history from old movie plots.
Under its spell we submitted for six years to the governance of Richard Nixon, who only did what they all do, I'm told, but did it so ineptly that he broke the California spell and had to resign.


Linear Technology Corp.(LLTC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Two Players Plead Not Guilty
Two National Basketball Association players, TYRONE HILL and BRIAN GRANT, who played college ball at Xavier of Ohio, pleaded not guilty yesterday to charges related to a run-in with police officers.
Hill, 27, of the Cleveland Cavaliers, was charged with resisting in the arrest of another person and disorderly conduct, police said.
Grant, 23, of the Sacramento Kings, was charged with resisting arrest.
They did not appear at their arraignment in Hamilton County Municipal Court.
Lawyers entered written pleas of innocent for them.


Berkley (W.R.) Corp.(BKLY,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Berkley (W.R.) Corp.(BKLY,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 3626,000


I.A.A.F. President Under Fire
PRIMO NEBIOLO, the longstanding president of track and field's ruling body, has touched off a furor in Sweden when he responded to a reporter's questions by asking about her sexual habits.
BRITT-MARIE MATTSSON, a Swedish Television reporter, asked Nebiolo about his autocratic style and other sensitive issues during an interview Sunday in his Goteborg hotel.
Nebiolo replied by asking Mattson what she would think if he asked her how many men she had slept with.
Nebiolo, 75, then broke off the interview and had the journalist removed from his suite.


Security Capital Pacific Trust (PTR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Mapco Inc.(MDA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
Disney to Buy ABC In $19 Billion Deal The Walt Disney Company announced plans to acquire Capital Cities/ABC in a deal valued at $19 billion -- the second largest takeover ever.
Disney said it would pay one share of its stock and $65 in cash for each share of Capital Cities/ABC.
Investment bankers were not even consulted until after the two sides had already reached an agreement.  [ D5. ] CBS Expected to Vote on Bid  Westinghouse is all but ready to announce its $5 billion bid to buy CBS, and the CBS board is reportedly scheduled to meet this morning to approve the offer.  [ D5. ] I.B.M.
Mr.
Waxman read papers showing that Philip Morris scientists discovered a number of ways to manipulate the nicotine in cigarettes.  [ A12. ] Fuji Denies Kodak Contentions  Fuji Film denied it engaged in unfair trade practices to keep Eastman Kodak out of the Japanese market.  [ D2. ] A Different Sort of Fund Ad  Alliance Capital Management has put together a tongue-in-cheek series of TV commercials that say, in effect, investing in stocks is complicated, so don't take the do-it-yourself approach.
Advertising.  [ D4. ]


First Sequencing of Cell's DNA Defines Basis of Life
LIFE is a mystery, ineffable, unfathomable, the last thing on earth that might seem susceptible to exact description.
Yet now, for the first time, a free-living organism has been precisely defined by the chemical identification of its complete genetic blueprint.
The creature is just a humble bacterium known as Hemophilus influenzae, but it nonetheless possesses all the tools and tricks required for independent existence.
For the first time, biologists can begin to see the entire parts list, as it were, of what a living cell needs to grow, survive and reproduce itself.


Protecting New York City's Water Comes First
To the Editor:
Concerning the proposed sale of New York City's water system, First Deputy Mayor Peter J. Powers is wrong to accuse Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi of playing politics at the expense of the city's schoolchildren (news article, July 27).
Mr.
Hevesi has been trying to protect the city's water supply for as long as he has been in office.


Judge Approves $850 Million Settlement in Case of Plastic Pipe
A Tennessee judge tentatively approved an $850 million settlement by the Shell Oil Company and the Hoechst Celanese Corporation yesterday to replace leaking plastic plumbing pipe in homes throughout the United States.
But the agreement appears unlikely to end years of legal feuding in several states.
A lawyer representing homeowners in cases brought in Texas and Alabama said he would seek to have the agreement thrown out, asserting that Shell had estimated the cost of new plumbing at $7.2 billion.
Homeowners could also choose, by Sept. 13, not to be part of the settlement and seek damages separately.
Shell is a unit of the Royal Dutch/Shell Group.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the ethics case of Senator Bob Packwood misstated what Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, a Packwood supporter, told colleagues in a discussion of the matter.
He said only that any decision about what to do next should be left to the Senate Ethics Committee.
He did not oppose public hearings, an issue he did not address.


Sports of The Times; The Third Life of Dick Schultz
THESE are not the best of times to extol the virtues of sport.
But even with the acts of misconduct and abuse by athletes that are occurring virtually every week, sport's redeeming value remains unchanged: the sanctity of the second chance.
A baseball team has three outs, a football team has four downs.
Just ask Dick Schultz.
In 1993, when he was regarded as one of the most honest and scrupulous administrators in sports, he resigned as executive director of the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
Schultz was brought down by a skeleton in his locker: an internal investigation concluded that he had known about improper loans to University of Virginia athletes during his tenure there as athletic director.


Ivax Corp.(IVX,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Japanese Regulators Suspend a Credit Union
Regulators suspended operations of a Japanese credit union this evening after depositors swarmed to the institution earlier in the day to withdraw their money.
Weekend reports about financial troubles at Cosmo Shinyo Kumiai, Tokyo's largest credit union, prompted several thousand customers to withdraw the equivalent of about $680 million in cash, or about 14 percent of total deposits.
But because credit unions have little influence in the Japanese banking system, and because Cosmo's operations appeared limited to the Tokyo area, regulators and analysts said that today's panic withdrawals and the suspension of Cosmo's operations were unlikely to have an impact on the nation's financial system.


Taking On Wal-Mart, Ahead of Time
EVEN before developers submitted plans for the lot on Route 1 and Spencer Plain Road, Mark Reeves smelled a Wal-Mart.
"If you sniffed around," he said, "the evidence was there."


G.O.P. House Leaders Succeed In Advancing Limits on E.P.A.
Republican leaders in the House of Representatives succeeded tonight in reversing an embarrassing defeat as the House voted to restore provisions that would limit the Environmental Protection Agency's ability to enforce pollution laws.
The leaders had sought to restore 17 provisions that were removed on Friday from a spending bill for several agencies in what had been the first major victory for environmentalists in the House this year.
The proposal to reverse Friday's vote resulted in a tie of 210 to 210, with 14 not voting.
A majority was needed to sustain the vote.
Tonight, 50 Republicans voted against their leadership, one less than on Friday.


Homestake Mining Co.(HM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


International Briefs; Westpac of Australia Bids for Challenge Bank
The Westpac Banking Corporation offered $689 million (Australian), or $507.6 million (United States), for Challenge Bank Ltd. yesterday.
The bid is the second in a week for Challenge, a regional bank in Perth, Australia.
On Thursday, St.
George Bank Ltd. offered $581 million (Australian) for Challenge.
St.
George, which owns nearly 11 percent of Challenge, said yesterday that it did not plan to match Westpac's offer.
Both Westpac and St.
George are based in Sydney.


DSG International Ltd.(DSGIF,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Joseph Mazo, 56; Was Dance Writer
Joseph H. Mazo, a dance writer and an editor at Dance Magazine, was found dead in his Manhattan apartment on Friday.
He was 56.
The cause was heart disease, the Medical Examiner's Office said.


Rivals Switch Places At Life Master Pairs
The Life Master Pair Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals here ended in some confusion Sunday night.
At first it appeared that victory had gone to Bill Root, 71, of Boca Raton, Fla., perhaps the game's most famous teacher, and Richard Pavlicek of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
But their closest rivals, Allan Siebert of Little Rock, Ark., and Joseph Kivel of Corona Del Mar, Calif., discovered a minuscule but significant error: A score of 80 had been recorded as 70, and when this was corrected they were the champions.


Playing, Then Living, the Role of a Director
Bulgy-eyed, frail-looking, snaggle-toothed Steve Buscemi is a movie star now; if you don't remember the name you'll remember the face, from "Reservoir Dogs," "Pulp Fiction" and the new "Living in Oblivion."
The other day Mr.
Buscemi was sitting in a restaurant in Greenwich Village, and the waitress kept walking over to his table and refilling his coffee cup.
"She's probably worried about her tip," said Mr.
Buscemi.
"She's seen 'Reservoir Dogs.' " In Quentin Tarantino's film, Mr.
Buscemi plays a cold-blooded killer called Mr.
Pink, who in the beginning has a disarmingly bland argument about the ethics of tipping a waitress in a coffee shop before he goes on to participate in some of the most realistic violence in recent film history.
The 37-year-old Mr.
Buscemi (pronounced boo-SHEM-ee), is also known for playing out-of-control directors ("In the Soup," "Living in Oblivion"), and is now preparing to direct a film of his own.
His first feature, "Trees Lounge," is a working-class tale set in his hometown, Valley Stream, L.I.
Naturally, he hopes he fares better than the directors he has portrayed.
As the edgy, exhausted-looking Nick in "Living in Oblivion," he nervously tries to direct a feature on a very low budget while just about everything goes wrong.
The vain leading man is involved with his co-star; the female assistant director is eying the leading man, to the chagrin of her boyfriend, the cinematographer; the boom keeps getting in the shots; rap music interrupts the sound in the middle of a take, and during a dream sequence the smoke machine explodes.
To make the nightmare complete, in the middle of it all Nick's mother suddenly appears on the set.
"I'm shooting a dream sequence without a smoke machine!" Nick screams.
"I've got my mother inside thinking she's at a circus wedding!"
Mr.
Buscemi's own film, which is scheduled to begin shooting in August, takes its title from the name of his longtime favorite bar, Trees Lounge, in Valley Stream and is in some ways autobiographical.
As Mr.
Buscemi did in real life, the main character drives an ice cream truck.
"I tried to imagine what it would be like had I never left Valley Stream," he said.
Everything goes wrong in that imagined world of modest dreams.
The main character, played by Mr.
Buscemi, hangs out in faded bars, is fired from his job as a mechanic and loses his girlfriend, who may be carrying his child, to his former boss.
As a child, Mr.
Buscemi lived in East New York.
His father, John, is a retired New York City Sanitation Department worker.
Mr.
Buscemi grew up in a large, close-knit Italian-Irish family.
When he was 8, the family moved to Valley Stream, where despite his slender physical appearance -- "I have a lot of strength for my weight," he said -- he was a jock.In Mr.
Buscemi's high school class, you were either a jock or a nerd.
Still, when he tried out for a high school play, he got a sudden rush.
"I liked the reaction from the audience," he said.
"I liked the attention." Mr.
Buscemi knew no one who had ever been an actor except for his "Uncle Pete," the actor Peter Miller, a childhood friend of his father's, who played a student in "Blackboard Jungle."
At his father's suggestion, he took the test for the New York City Fire Department.
"My father wanted all his sons to take the Civil Service test," he said.
"It was a nice, secure job." Today, one of Mr.
Buscemi's brothers works for a cable television company, another for the Transit Authority.
A third is an actor.
When Mr.
Buscemi took the Civil Service test, there were no jobs available as a fireman.
So he drove an ice cream truck and worked for a moving company.
One day his father suggested he go into New York and look into acting classes.
He ended up studying at the Lee Strasberg Institute, paying for the lessons with money from a settlement for a childhood accident.
He tried to get auditions, faking his resume.
He did comedy acts.
Then he moved to the East Village and became part of the late 70's downtown performance scene.
During this time, he met his future wife, Jo Anders, a performance artist, choreographer and film maker.
They have a 4-year-old son, Lucian.
Then, in 1980, Mr.
Buscemi's name came up at the Fire Department.
He went to work with Engine Company No. 55 on Broome Street in Manhattan.
At first he told no one of his secret life as an actor.
Most of the men in his company lived in places like Valley Stream.
"You didn't have firefighters living in the East Village," he said.
Finally, he told his secret to another actor-fireman, who introduced him to a theater group at Westbeth, the artists' housing complex.
The film director Bill Sherwood saw Mr.
Buscemi in a play at Westbeth and gave him his first film role, as an AIDS victim in "Parting Glances." Mr.
Buscemi took a leave of absence to be in the movie.
When he saw himself on film, he began to believe he could get steady work as an actor, and in 1985 he quit the Fire Department.
He went on to win roles in "Miami Vice" and in Jim Jarmusch's "Mystery Train." Mr.
Tarantino saw him on film and offered him the part in "Reservoir Dogs." In 1992 he appeared in "In the Soup" as a young movie director trying to find financing for a 500-page script.
The director becomes involved with a con man (Seymour Cassel), who actually decides that he wants to produce it.
When Alexandre Rockwell, the director of "In the Soup," needed a film within a film for his project, he suggested that Mr.
Buscemi make one himself.
His wife showed him how to shoot it.
For the last three years, Mr.
Buscemi has been trying to raise the $1 million he needs to make "Trees Lounge." "There were always conditions," he said.
"They would say it would be easier to raise money if you have a more positive ending. I had no interest in making a movie just to get it made. But if your film doesn't have a strong point of view, you end up alienating all audiences." Recently, he was able to find backing through Live Entertainment.
Starring with him in the film will be his brother Michael, Chloe Sevigny from "Kids," Carol Kane, Mr.
Cassel and Mark Boone Junior, his partner from his theater days.
"It's scary going into a burning building," Mr.
Buscemi said, thinking back to his life as a fire fighter.
"The only feeling I ever got that compares to it is acting. There's the nervousness before you go in, but once you're there, there's no time to be nervous. It's critical to your job. And afterward, you've gone through an experience nobody else can have."


Healthcare Compare Corp.(HCCC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Western Beef Inc.(BEEF,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Investigation Concludes Bosnian Government Snipers Shot at Civilians
French peacekeeping troops in the United Nations unit trying to curtail Bosnian Serb sniping at civilians in Sarajevo have concluded that until mid-June some gunfire also came from Government soldiers deliberately shooting at their own civilians.
After what it called a "definitive" investigation, a French marine unit that patrols against snipers said it traced sniper fire to a building normally occupied by Bosnian soldiers and other security forces.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.77
4.34
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.44
5.41
4.35
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.39
5.36
4.75
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.42
6.46
7.10
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.84
6.90
7.39
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.72
7.77
8.17
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.19
6.18
6.33
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Mylan Laboratories Inc.(MYL,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Rolland Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Blair Corp.(BL,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


By Design; Not Just for Cleaning House
Take a triangular scarf, or fold a square one into a triangle; wrap it around the head with the ends tucked under the hair in back, and the scarf is reborn.
Women cleaning house often protect their hair this way, but it is also the latest thing in hip head wear.
Designers like Anna Sui and Marc Jacobs tied kerchiefs on models' heads in their fall shows, and that was imprimatur enough for their followers.
It's one more instance of the mod influence.
In the 1960's, women used the style to cover the spot where falls of hair were attached.


No Headline
"I literally passed Tom Murphy on the street and said, 'Tom, I think the time is right now. Every part of your company is working. Every part of our company is working.' " MICHAEL EISNER, chairman of the Walt Disney Company  [ A1:5. ]


Pataki, Catching His Breath, Caters to the G.O.P. Faithful
Gov.
George E. Pataki stripped off his jacket in the studio, fussed with the headset and joked, "I don't have a clue what I'm doing." But when the introductions rolled on WHAM radio in Rochester, Mr.
Pataki, for the moment New York's newest conservative talk-radio host, clicked into his usual cool, disciplined focus on the message.
"All right, well, thank you, Shari," he said to one caller.
"We've got a lot to talk about: the entire area of crime. I know the particular question of sex offenders is important here in Monroe County and throughout the state. We have welfare reform."


A Guilty Plea in Murder Spree
A 34-year-old printer whom prosecutors described as a spurned lover pleaded guilty yesterday to three counts of murder for the 1993 killing of an Atlantic City woman, her live-in companion and their 2-year-old daughter.


DSG International Ltd.(DSGIF,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


As Dole Counts Calories, Gramm Weighs In
Even though the the main topic was welfare, and the speeches to the National Governors' Association were several hours apart, President Clinton and Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader, managed to debate another topic today: personal health.
Mr.
Dole, who spoke first, proclaimed: "My weight is lower than Clinton's. My cholesterol is lower than Clinton's. My blood pressure is lower than Clinton's. But I am not going to make health an issue in 1996."


Blair Corp.(BL,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


ICN Pharmaceuticals Inc.(ICN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


I.B.M. Chief Concedes OS/2 Has Lost Desktop War
Just as a new battle for the heart of the desktop computer has begun, Louis V. Gerstner, the chief executive of I.B.M., appeared to concede defeat yesterday.
In his annual session with analysts, Mr.
Gerstner admitted what many industry watchers have been saying for years: that I.B.M. has failed in its multibillion-dollar attempt to establish an alternative to the Microsoft Corporation's stranglehold on the software that runs personal computers.
Obsessing about operating systems is "fighting the last war," he told the group, later adding that it is "too late to go after the desktop."
"We have to go on to the next thing," he said.
Mr.
Gerstner's comments came only three weeks before Microsoft is to introduce Windows 95, the successor to the Windows and MS-DOS programs that now control about 80 percent of all personal computers.
Most analysts believe that the new program will gain wide acceptance, cementing Microsoft's primacy in a market that it has dominated since 1980, when I.B.M. licensed MS-DOS for its first personal computer.
I.B.M. has since tried to challenge Microsoft with a program called OS/2.
Although many analysts say OS/2 is technologically superior to both the current version of Windows and the soon-to-be-released Windows 95, it has never caught on with more than a small minority of consumers.
Some I.B.M. executives have argued that the introduction of Windows 95 will help OS/2 because consumers will be forced to make a change and will see the benefits of I.B.M.'s offering.
But others within the company have countered that it would be futile and a waste of money to go head to head against Microsoft where it is strongest.
Yesterday, for the first time, Mr.
Gerstner appeared to side with those pragmatists.
He said I.B.M. would aggressively sell OS/2 to large companies and institutions that use it on application servers, which allow networks of desktop computers to share a variety of computer programs.
"Our focus is in the large enterprise," he said.
OS/2 has dominated the market for such servers in recent years, but many analysts said the company was quickly losing ground to another Microsoft program, Windows NT.
"NT is displacing OS/2 servers extremely rapidly," said Rob Enderle, a senior research analyst at Dataquest, an industry consultant based in San Jose, Calif.
He estimated that I.B.M. had more than a 2-to-1 advantage at the beginning of the year in the number of servers running OS/2 compared with NT, but that Microsoft had probably pulled even and was likely to overtake I.B.M. by the end of the year.
I.B.M. still has a chance, Mr. Enderle said, "but it is narrowing fast."
"A lot of premier I.B.M. accounts have indicated that they will be pulling off OS/2 in the next 12 to 18 months," he added.
During his 90-minute session with analysts, Mr.
Gerstner expanded on a theme that he has been warming to since he arrived at I.B.M. two years ago: that I.B.M. is now focused on providing value to its customers rather than simply foisting the latest technology on them.
He said that the company had identified five groups of customers that it would now try to serve: large enterprises and institutions; small and medium-sized businesses; consumers; other hardware manufacturers, and resellers and other distributors.
Asked if I.B.M.'s recent $3.5 billion acquisition of the Lotus Development Corporation was an admission that the company had failed to plan properly for its future, Mr.
Gerstner admitted that it was.
"It is an indictment of things we did wrong in the past and I am glad that we had the opportunity to fix it," he said.
But he added that he and his management team now spend a lot of time thinking ahead.
"There is a very strong preoccupation in the company today to understand where the industry is going and get there first," he said.


Eastern Utilities Associates (EUA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Dime Bancorp (DME,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Pilot Writing Book About Bosnian Rescue
Doubleday announced yesterday that in November it would publish Capt.
Scott O'Grady's book about being shot down over Bosnia on June 2.
It will be written with Jeff Coplon, a freelance journalist.
The financial terms were not disclosed.


Westburne Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Ivax Corp.(IVX,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Nalco Chemical Co.(NLC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Movie Crews Demand That Life Stop for Them
To the Editor:
"Cost of 'Quiet on Set' Is Escalating" (news article, July 27) portrays the moviemaking industry in Los Angeles as the poor victim of money-hungry citizens who "stick up" movie production crews for protection money in return for letting filming go on in public in silence.


Mapco Inc.(MDA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Liberty Corp.(LC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


N.I.T. to Stay at the Garden
After a heated debate, the Metropolitan Intercollegiate Basketball Association, which sponsors the National Invitation Tournament, decided to spurn a more lucrative offer from the Knickerbocker Arena in Albany and keep both the pre- and post-season N.I.T. at Madison Square Garden.
The association and the Garden announced yesterday that they had reached agreement on a multiyear deal that calls for the semifinal and championship doubleheaders of both tournaments to be held at the Garden.
The terms of the agreement were not released.
The Garden has been home to the N.I.T. since its inception in 1938.
The preseason N.I.T. began in 1985.


For the Dreamworks Studio, An Unsettling Development
Seven months ago the new studio Dreamworks signed a lucrative deal with Capital Cities/ABC Inc.
The deal called for ABC to create a television studio in partnership with the owners of Dreamworks, Steven Spielberg, Jeffrey Katzenberg and David Geffen.
Today the three men were wondering about the arrangement, after the Walt Disney Company agreed to buy Capital Cities/ABC.
The problem is that Messrs.
Spielberg, Geffen and Katzenberg are barely on speaking terms with their new boss, Michael D. Eisner of Disney.


International Recovery Corp.(INT,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Tower Automotive Inc.(TWER,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Writing History, Soviet General Finds Revelation
Col.
Gen.
Dmitri A. Volkogonov, historian and former chief of the Soviet military's psychological warfare department, knows that he is dying, and indeed should be dead.
But General Volkogonov, 67, who was operated on twice for colon and liver cancer four years ago, has work left to do on what has become his life's mission: to finish his book, drawn from secret Kremlin archives, about the seven leaders who ran the Soviet Union in its 74 years of "Triumph and Tragedy," as he called his revelatory biography of Stalin.


Transportacion Maritima Mexicana S.A. de C.V.  (TMM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


United Asset Management Corp.(UAM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Healthcare Compare Corp.(HCCC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


International Briefs; Abbey National's Net Up 14% for Six Months
Abbey National P.L.C., the British financial services company, said yesterday that its pretax profit for the first six months of the year rose 14 percent, primarily because of increased retail banking business and a smaller provision to cover possible bad loans.
Abbey posted pretax profit of $:483 million, or about $773 million, in the first half of the year, compared with $:423 million during the first half of 1994.


Homestake Mining Co.(HM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


BT Office Products reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Contenders' Last-Minute Shopping Is for Arms
If the National League playoffs began today, the Colorado Rockies would play the Cincinnati Reds.
In an effort to make sure they each reach that stage two months from today, when the season ends, the Rockies and the Reds made dramatic moves late last night to bolster their starting pitching rotations.
The Rockies acquired Bret Saberhagen from the Mets, and the Reds obtained David Wells from the Detroit Tigers.


Inquiry Verifies Metal Stress as Cause of Thrill-Ride Failure
Concluding their investigation of a Coney Island thrill ride that spun out of control over the weekend and injured 13 people, city officials said yesterday that repeated stress on a metal band, which held part of the ride together, caused it to snap.
They also said that 10 other rides inspected as a precaution were in good condition.
The ride that broke down, the Hell Hole, will remain closed until the owner, Bella Belle Amusement of Brooklyn, makes major repairs, said Norman Holl, chief inspector for the City Department of Buildings, which examines the rides annually.
Inspectors looking at three other rides operated by the company found no violations and -- aside from fixing a bolt here or a pin there -- made no recommendations and issued no summonses, Mr.
Holl said.


Winn-Dixie Stores Inc.(WIN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 28


Foodbrands America Inc.(FBAI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


International Briefs; Coles Myer-G.E. Pact
Coles Myer Ltd., Australia's largest retailer, said yesterday that it was selling its credit card business to GE Capital Services, a subsidiary of the General Electric Company, for $180 million (Australian), or $133 million (United States).
The sale will result in a profit of $100 million (Australian) for Coles Myer.
It may get an additional payment based on the future performance of the business, Coles Myer said.
The business involves more than 2.1 million private-label credit cards issued for about 700 retailers throughout Australia. (Bloomberg Business News)


Tops Appliance City Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 27


Howell Corp.(HWL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


We're Creating Jobs In the Third World; Reprisals in Guatemala
To the Editor:
Re "Sweatshop Beneficiaries" (column, July 24): Sweatshop conditions are not the only difficulties faced by Central American workers producing clothing for United States retailers.
Those who fight back seeking fair wages and their basic rights do so at great risk, as events in Guatemala illustrate.


Ireland's Real Issue
To the Editor:
Re "New Plan Drawn to Promote Irish Peace Effort" (news article, June 25) and "Talking Peace in Ireland" (editorial, same day): I read with continued dismay your coverage of affairs in Northern Ireland.
When I came to the United States from Ireland a year and a half ago, I was surprised at your insistence on using the religious background of the groups in the conflict as a shorthand to their political position.


Browns Sign Their Top Pick
CRAIG POWELL, the Cleveland Browns' first-round draft pick this spring and the 30th overall draft choice, agreed to a four-year contract yesterday and then took part in two practices at the team's Berea, Ohio, training camp.
ART MODELL, the Browns' owner, and Coach BILL BELICHICK had been disappointed by the Ohio State linebacker's 18-day holdout.
"It never should have gone on this long," Modell said.


Sexual Attack on Youth Shows 'Megan's Law' Limit
The residents of the New Dover apartment complex in Dover Township, N.J., knew that John Edward Greene was a convicted sex offender, but prosecutors said yesterday that the community's knowledge could not protect a 15-year-old boy from attack.
Prosecutors said the assault last Friday in Dover Township points to the limits of the state's law requiring community notification of the presence of sex offenders.
They said that Mr.
Greene, who was arrested shortly after the attack, had registered with the police as required by the so-called "Megan's Law."


Personal Computers: What Is Windows 95 Really Like?
OPERATING systems are essentially programs meant to run other programs.
Once upon a time they had self-effacing names like DOS and CP/M and p-system, silently intervened between computer programs and the hardware on which they ran and were utterly alien to anyone outside the computer world.
Times have changed.
Now operating systems come with flashy handles like Warp and Windows, earn more notoriety than Kevin Costner movies and breed on-line brawls of religious ferocity.
Although it will not be generally available until Aug. 24, the Microsoft Corporation's long-delayed Windows 95 has already become such a household name that it is mentioned facetiously in a radio commercial for Hawaiian Airlines.


BT Office Products reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Blair Corp.


Assistant to Get St. Peter's Job
RODGER BLIND, an assistant basketball coach at St.
Peter's since 1985, will be named head coach of the Peacocks today, people close to the college said late yesterday.
Blind, 44, replaces TED FIORE, who was fired in June, less than three months after leading St.
Peter's to its second National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament berth in five years.
"I would be honored to get the job, but I have no comment at this time," Blind said by telephone from his West Orange, N.J., home.


MDU Resources Group (MDU,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Complications -- A special report.; Post-Surgery Deaths Promp Inquiry at a Queens Hospital
Just after dawn on April 25, two patients arrived for scheduled surgery at Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park, Queens.
Denise Verbeeck, a mildly retarded, 27-year-old former athlete, was about to undergo routine elective surgery on a damaged kneecap.
Lloyd Reback, a strapping, 25-year-old bodybuilder, was facing a more complicated, but hardly life-threatening, operation to remove a benign tumor from his jaw.
After a nurse examined each patient, they changed into gowns and headed toward the operating suite.
Mr.
Reback waved to his mother, Myrna.
"Goodbye, Ma, I love you," he said.


Disney Move Seen Clearing Regulators
The Walt Disney Company's blockbuster move to acquire Capital Cities/ABC Inc. has left competitors gasping and consumer advocates grousing.
But media analysts and Government officials said yesterday that the $19 billion merger was likely to clear most big hurdles in Washington.
By buying Capital Cities, Disney will become the first media company with a major presence in four key distribution channels: filmed entertainment, cable television, broadcasting, and -- through its joint venture with three regional Bell operating companies -- telephone wires.


Q&amp;A
'Weight' in Space
Q.
I heard that the American astronaut Dr.
Norman Thagard lost weight while he was on the Russian space station.
How do you weigh a person (or anything else) in space?
A.
"Since we can't actually weigh astronauts in weightlessness, we use body mass measurements to determine any change in weight," that is, what the astronaut would weigh under the influence of earth gravity, said Eileen Hawley, a spokeswoman for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Johnson Space Center in Houston.


Ties to Olympics For Two Big Names
The McDonald's Corporation is getting a head start on its sponsorship of the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta by introducing a national Olympics promotion nearly a year before the Games begin.
And the Coca-Cola Company has awarded an Olympics advertising assignment.
Steve Bender, a spokesman for McDonald's, in Oak Brook, Ill., said this was the first time the company had begun a promotion so far in advance of an event, adding that it was part of a series of promotional and advertising programs tied to the Olympics.
The Olympic Games Giveaway, created by the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago, features game pieces on food and beverage packaging.
It begins today and runs through Aug. 24.
The Games start on July 19, 1996.


A Chase Shuts the Expressway, and an Island Gets Longer
For the second time in five days, a police investigation disrupted the morning commute for thousands of Manhattan-bound drivers, this time closing the westbound lanes of the Long Island Expressway for seven hours.
The shutdown this morning stemmed from the chase of a burglary suspect who fled in a van at speeds as high as 100 miles per hour, traveling against the traffic on three highways before crashing into a police cruiser at 1:25 A.M. and critically injuring a police sergeant, the police said.


Excursion by 17 Salvadorans Ends in Van Crash That Kills 2
It was a rare weekend outing for Jose Lazaro Zavala, a chance to get away from the Flushing, Queens, apartment he shared with five or six friends, a break from the landscaping job he worked to support his wife and five children back home in El Salvador.
For Ana Delsa Martinez, it was a long-anticipated family reunion.
Ms.
Martinez, who moved here from El Salvador a year ago, was enjoying visiting aunts and uncles in Alexandria, Va., watching a Sunday afternoon soccer match, and feasting on a lunch of roasted meat in a sunlit, grassy field.


Berkley (W.R.) Corp.(BKLY,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 3626,000


Sierra Health Services Inc.(SIE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Varco International (VRC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Orion Capital Corp.(OC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A GLITCH IN TELLER MACHINES AT CHEMICAL
As many as 60,000 people who tried to get cash from Chemical Bank automated teller machines in the New York area at lunch time yesterday were left empty-handed because of a computer glitch.
The machines refused to give cash to 50 to 75 percent of the people trying to withdraw cash during a two-hour period, said John J. Stack, a managing director at Chemical, which is a unit of the Chemical Banking Corporation.
The bank installed new A.T.M. software in its central computers over the weekend, and the software apparently became overwhelmed and stopped responding to requests from the machines for authorization to dispense cash.
The problem affected Chemical customers and those of other banks trying to use the NYCE network to get cash from Chemical machines.
Chemical customers using machines of other banks were largely not affected.


Clinton Vows to Veto Bill on Telecommunications Decontrol
President Clinton threatened this evening to veto the bill sponsored by House Republicans to deregulate the nation's telecommunications industries, saying that it would discourage competition.
The bill is aimed at dismantling the regulatory barriers that separate long-distance telephone, local telephone and cable television companies.
The bill's Republican backers, Representative Thomas J. Bliley Jr. of Virginia and Representative Jack Fields of Texas, contend that deregulation would foster competition.


Joan L. Hafey; Advertising Executive, 67
Joan L. Hafey, a retired vice president for the New York advertising agency Young &amp; Rubicam who was active in public-service advertising campaigns, died July 24 at Tisch Hospital of New York University Medical Center.
She was 67 and lived in Manhattan and Southbury, Conn.
The cause was pulmonary fibrosis, a spokesman for Young &amp; Rubicam said.


No Headline
"Had we not acted when we did, and Koresh brought things to a sudden and violent finish, as he had rehearsed, we would probably be here today anyhow, and you would be asking me why I had not done something sooner, why we had not tried to use tear gas to resolve the situation." -- ATTORNEY GENERAL JANET RENO  [ A14:2. ]


Governors Seek Formula for Medicaid
Sensing a rare opportunity to seize "the keys to the car," as Gov.
Tommy G. Thompson of Wisconsin put it, the nation's governors plan to spend August trying to find a consensus on how to distribute Federal Medicaid money among the states.
Mr.
Thompson, the new chairman of the National Governors' Association, told the group's closing session today that governors "are taking the lead in the most radical shift of power since the Great Depression" as they plan how to distribute Federal money for the program providing health care for the poor.
He said they would spend August trying to agree on a formula for distributing the money, because if they cannot agree Congress would divide it in ways they would not like.


A Wedding Divides a Church, And a Minister Loses His Job
The act of officiating at the marriage of a lesbian couple has apparently cost a Long Island minister his job and bitterly divided a congregation whose church was established more than 200 years ago by colonists seeking a free and open place to worship.
By a vote of 84 to 67, the members of the Congregational Church of Patchogue voted Monday night to dismiss their minister, the Rev.
Renwick Jackson.


Army Officer Tells of Assault
A United States Army Reserve officer who previously pleaded guilty to sexually assaulting a drunken female enlistee testified against his two co-defendants in Federal court yesterday, saying that all three of them took advantage of the woman's condition.


Cancer From Mantle's Liver Spreads to Right Lung
Cancer from Mickey Mantle's liver, removed in transplant surgery two months ago, has invaded his right lung, turning his remarkable progress into a grim prognosis.
Mantle's doctors, downcast and shaken, made the announcement today at Baylor University Medical Center, where he has been receiving aggressive chemotherapy.
Although his doctors studiously avoided making predictions, they implied, and other specialists confirmed, that the chemotherapy was not a cure.


Trekkie Parsons, 93, Artist in Bloomsbury Group
Trekkie Parsons, a British artist to whom Leonard Woolf expressed love, died on July 24 in a hospital in Lewes, England.
She was 93 and lived in Lewes.
Her death was reported on Saturday by The Independent, which said that as a widower Woolf had written to her, "To know you and love you has been the best thing in life."


Keeping Wages Down
To the Editor:
Re "Can Merger Save the Unions?" by Michael Weinstein (Editorial Notebook, July 31): When Mr.
Weinstein writes, "Competition from abroad and a 20-year slowdown in productivity have stripped unions of their power to raise wages," he couldn't be more wrong.


St. Peter's Names Basketball Coach
St.
Peter's today named Rodger Blind, an assistant for the Peacocks for the last nine years, to replace the dismissed Ted Fiore as the college's new head basketball coach.
The school dismissed Fiore after he had guided the Peacocks to the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference tournament championship and a National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament berth.
The St.
Peter's athletic director, Bill Stein, cited a clause in Fiore's contract that allowed the college to terminate the coach's contract without cause.
Fiore, a candidate for an assistant coach's job with the Nets, is considering legal action.


AMERICAN EXPRESS GETS DELTA FREQUENT-FLIER CARD
After an extended selection process, Delta Air Lines said yesterday that it had chosen American Express to issue a credit card that would give miles on its frequent-flier program.
The card, to be called the Delta Skymiles Optima card, would be American Express's first venture into co-branded cards, part of a strategy to earn more money from interest on revolving credit.
Details of the features of the card were not announced; it will not be introduced until next year.


Sushi 101: Learning a Culinary Art at a Master's Hand
FIRST, Fred Sabo, the executive chef at Tropica, a seafood restaurant in the Met Life Building, placed his little bamboo mat on the wrong side.
Then he spread the wasabi on the rice from right to left, not left to right as he had been shown.
Was Tadao Teranishi, a burly Japanese sushi chef, teaching sushi techniques to a 5-year-old or to an experienced chef?
"I've been working in professional kitchens for 10 years, but it may not seem like it today," Mr.
Sabo said.


How New York Republicans Can Be Heard
To the Editor:
"Fairness Denied in New York" (editorial, July 24) highlights the fact that Senator Alfonse D'Amato and Gov.
George E. Pataki are hijacking democracy by shutting out Republican contenders for President other than their hand-picked candidate, Bob Dole.
Both Governor Pataki and Senator D'Amato are making sure that others cannot collect signatures to qualify for the 1996 Presidential primary in New York.


CIGNA CORP. (CI,N)
The Cigna Corporation reported second-quarter results yesterday that exceeded Wall Street's estimates, with operating profits rising 58 percent, as a narrower loss in its property and casualty insurance business offset slightly weaker health care earnings.
The company said its profits, excluding investment gains, rose to $189 million, or $2.60 a share, from $120 million, or $1.65 a share, in the corresponding period a year earlier.
Analysts had been expecting about $2.09 a share in the latest quarter, according to Zacks Investment Research.
The results were announced after the stock market closed.


International Briefs; Regulators Question Lufthansa-S.A.S. Link
The European Commission has said it has "serious doubts" about plans by Deutsche Lufthansa A.G. and Scandinavian Airlines System to coordinate flights and marketing activities.
The commission, the executive agency of the European Union, said yesterday that it had sent the airlines a letter, expressing its concern that the alliance would shut out competition on airline routes in Northern Europe.


Coventry Corp.(CVTY,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Singapore's No Site For Free Debate
To the Editor:
I wonder whether Prof.
Chander Kant ("Mere Allegations," letter, July 25) ever noticed when he was a Fulbright Scholar in Singapore the Singapore Government's special talents in orchestrating "spontaneous" demonstrations against its detractors, and the enthusiasm with which the controlled domestic press reports them even before they have taken place.


NBC Fields Calls From Suitors
As two rival broadcast networks were wooed and sold in the same week, NBC busied itself with fielding phone calls from interested suitors.
Robert C. Wright, the president of NBC, said yesterday that the deals for ABC and CBS "leave us in a surprisingly stable position."


McFerrin Leads the Philharmonic
As a conductor, Bobby McFerrin may not have the most incisive baton technique.
But he is bursting with music and the irrepressible desire to communicate, as some 70,000 people discovered on Monday night when Mr.
McFerrin made his conducting debut with the New York Philharmonic in a free concert on the Great Lawn of Central Park.
It's been a long time since the Philharmonic has won such lusty ovations.
Mr.
McFerrin, a top-of-the-charts jazz and pop vocalist, brings certifiable credentials to the podium that most of his longtime fans don't know about.
His father, a baritone, was the first black man to sign a full-time contract with the Metropolitan Opera.
"I was an opera brat," Mr.
McFerrin told his audience, and he studied classical music through college before drifting into jazz.
His program on this occasion was drawn from the works he loved as a child, including Dukas's "Sorcerer's Apprentice" and Bizet's "Arlesienne" Suite No. 1.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: MARKET PLACE -- Broadcast Networks Come Back Strong; Capital Cities and CBS Have Happy Investors
It has been little more than a decade since Thomas S. Murphy and Laurence A. Tisch made their moves on television networks, in actions that began within a few months of each other in 1985.
Now both are getting out.
Shareholders have reason to be happy with both men, although Mr.
Murphy's Capital Cities/ ABC did better.
Indeed, CBS stock has risen more than the overall stock market since Mr.
Tisch began running the company.
The Loews Corporation, which Mr.
Tisch controls, more than doubled its money in CBS.
And Capital Cities outpaced CBS by any measurement.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Westinghouse and CBS Agree to $5.4 Billion Deal  Westinghouse has agreed to pay $5.4 billion, or $81 a share, for CBS, the last independent television network and once the crown jewel of broadcasting.
Westinghouse has decided to borrow heavily to bet on broadcasting, its most profitable operation.
The deal would create a company with 15 television stations and 39 radio stations, with access to more than a third of the nation's households.  [ Page A1. ] Laurence A. Tisch's venture into media ended up tarnishing his reputation.
That, according to many of his friends, is a bitter pill for a man who took the top job at CBS to enhance his power and broaden his legacy.  [ A1. ] Roger C. Altman, the investment banker turned Deputy Treasury Secretary whose Washington career fizzled last year, is the lead adviser to Westinghouse, and that has Wall Street buzzing.  [ D7. ] Conventional media companies, though in demand now, still face a challenge from new media technologies, analysts say.
He promised to begin pouring millions of dollars immediately into helping unions enroll new members.  [ A9. ] F.T.C.
Accuses Car Dealers  The Federal Trade Commission accused the a California car dealers Association of conspiring to restrain trade and deprive "consumers of truthful information" by withdrawing advertising from The San Jose Mercury News.
Advertising.  [ D3. ]


BMC West Corp.(BMCW,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


House Rejects Embargo
The House voted 298-128 to give final passage to a bill ordering President Clinton to halt American participation in the United Nations arms embargo against Bosnia.
Article, page A6.


Tobacco Analysts' Files Subpoenaed in Suit
The records, files and personal notes of five prominent securities analysts who specialize in tobacco stocks were subpoenaed yesterday by a consortium of 60 plaintiffs' law firms as part of a giant class-action suit against the nation's seven largest tobacco companies.
Although stock analysts have been subpoenaed in cases of securities fraud and trademark infringement, an expert on civil procedure, Prof.
Geoffrey C. Hazard Jr. of the University of Pennsylvania Law School, said that issuing subpoenas to analysts in a class-action tort case was "unprecedented."


Major Leagues to Fill New Post: President
Though they still have no plans to hire a commissioner without a new labor agreement, the baseball owners have decided to hire a business and marketing executive who will have the title of president of Major League Baseball.
People in and out of baseball said yesterday that Arlen Kantarian will be the man, and one person said that once his talks with baseball officials are concluded, Kantarian will assume the position in January.
He is currently chief operating officer of entertainment and marketing at Radio City Music Hall.


Ex-Treasury Deputy Back on Merger Scene
Wall Street has been buzzing about Roger C. Altman's reappearance on the mergers-and-acquisitions scene as the lead adviser to the Westinghouse Electric Corporation in its bid to acquire CBS.
The investment banker turned Deputy Treasury Secretary, whose Washington career fizzled last year over his handling of the Whitewater scandal, has been handling Westinghouse's negotiations from a small office at the law firm of Simpson,


Clinton Lashes Out At Congress, Citing Pollution and Guns
Declaring that "this Congress is on the wrong track," President Clinton lashed out today at the 104th Congress as the captive of polluters and gun lobbyists.
And he threatened to veto the bill that pays Congress's administrative expenses unless it makes faster progress in passing Federal spending bills to his liking.
At the same time, Mr.
Clinton repeated his hope that he can yet find "common ground" with the Republican majority on Capitol Hill on welfare overhaul, campaign finance reform and a balanced budget, and said that the challenge of doing so has "not been debilitating, it's been invigorating."  [ Excerpts, page A12. ]


U.S. Not Embracing Call for a Shift on Japan
Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown said today that one of his top aides was not speaking for the Administration when the aide called for a less confrontational and more cooperative trade relationship with Japan.
The aide, Jeffrey E. Garten, the Under Secretary of Commerce for International Trade, did not put his speech, given Monday in Tokyo, through the interagency review process and was expressing his personal views, Mr.
Brown said in a telephone interview this afternoon.


PATTERN EMERGES IN BOMBER'S TRACT
In what was described as an important advance in the hunt for an elusive serial bomber, the Federal Bureau of Investigation said yesterday that it had traced a years-long pattern of academic involvement that took the self-described anarchist from the Chicago area to Salt Lake City to Berkeley, Calif.
By matching his 17-year record of carnage against an analysis of a densely argued 35,000-word tract he sent to The New York Times in June, Government officials say they have concluded that the bomber is a student of the history of science who may have taken classes at or hovered around major university campuses from the late 1970's to the mid-1980's.  [ Excerpts from the tract, page A16. ]


Old List of Klan Members Recalls Racist Past in an Indiana City
When Don Roberts, a building contractor, opened an old trunk he found in a barn loft here recently, he discovered a list of signatures on brittle paper, dated in the early 1920's, bearing the names of some of the community's most prominent men of that era.
It was a membership list of the Ku Klux Klan from 1923 to 1926.


Bank of Japan Rescues Troubled Cosmo Credit Union
Breaking a longstanding taboo, financial authorities rushed in with funds today to rescue a Japanese credit union whose troubles had threatened to spark turmoil in the nation's banking system.
It was the first time in three decades that the central bank, the Bank of Japan, had issued special loans, this time to prevent a run on Tokyo's largest credit association, the Cosmo Credit Corporation, from alarming jittery depositors at other financial institutions.


Harris Chemical North America Inc. reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 24


An End to Hearings, None to Hateful Faxes
The fax machines kicked in early and venomously on the final day of the Waco hearings, one of the Capitol's sultry summer reruns of bad news.
A quote from Hitler's "Mein Kampf" was creeping out of one House fax even as Attorney General Janet Reno, around the corridor in a Congressional hearing room, was stressing a need for the nation to see the complex tragedy in all its shattered pieces.


A Lobster in Every Port
FOR a city that has 578 miles of coastline, New York is lamentably short of waterfront dining opportunities.
And it is all the more painful in summers like this, when heat and humidity have been neck and neck.
In a quest for some dining spots in or near the city that offer spectacular water views -- and to get out of Manhattan during a heat wave -- I took up the offer of Keith Meyers, a boat owner and a photographer for The New York Times, to get a gull's eye view of the options.
Dodging thunderstorms and lightning, and ever on the lookout for floating debris and freighters as large as moderate-size New England towns, we took five days to complete our mission last week.


M/I Schottenstein Homes Inc.(MHO,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Book Notes
All Around the Town
There's something about the rhythms of New York City that grabs a writer's imagination.
Its streets and subways and parks provide wacky but rich settings for comedies, dramas and suspense, fiction and nonfiction alike.
But writing about New York City itself can be a daunting task.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.50
5.97
4.21
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.41
5.44
4.32
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.38
5.39
4.72
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.46
6.42
7.10
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.90
6.84
7.40
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.77
7.72
8.18
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.19
6.19
6.30
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Merger Not Expected to End A Sharp New York Rivalry
For three decades, WINS-AM and WCBS-AM have waged a spirited rivalry as New York City's two leading all-news stations.
But even with the prospect of a single owner if the Westinghouse Electric Corporation completes its deal for CBS Inc., industry executives say, the two stations are not likely to change much, at least in their broadcasts.
The assumption is that Westinghouse will operate them both, letting them continue to compete with each other.
The executives, who are familiar with both stations and spoke only on condition of anonymity, offer a number of reasons for that forecast -- about four million of them.


RESULTS PLUS
SWIMMING  Schwenk Sets U.S. Record
Tripp Schwenk set an American record in the 200-meter backstroke and the former Olympians Mel Stewart and Summer Sanders lost their events last night at the Phillips 66 National Championships in Pasadena, Calif.


Emerson Electric Co.(EMR,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Foster's Papers: What Executive Privilege?
Bernard Nussbaum invoked executive privilege when, as White House counsel, he denied Justice Department investigators access to some of Vincent Foster's papers after Mr.
Foster committed suicide.
When Mr.
Nussbaum testifies before the Senate Whitewater committee, perhaps next week, he should be pressed to explain why he thought that response was justified.


Bethlehem Journal; The Old Mayor's New Lament: Christian Exodus
To hear Elias Freij talk about Bethlehem's trials and tribulations, it seems as if the issues have not changed in this town since Jesus was born here.
In the past two millenniums, political control has shifted from pagan Romans to Eastern Christians to Muslim dynasties and various European crusaders.
Early this century, it fell into the hands of the Turks, then the British, the Jordanians and finally the Israelis, who took control of the West Bank in 1967.


International Briefs; NatWest Net Up 13.7% In First Half of Year
National Westminster Bank P.L.C. reported yesterday that its pretax profit for the first six months of the year rose 13.7 percent, to $:872 million, or $1.40 billion, from $:767 million last year.
The results for the London-based company were lower than most analysts had expected.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-7  NATO EXPANDS SHIELD IN BOSNIA
The NATO allies extended the protection of Western air power to the "safe areas" in Bosnia, including Sarajevo, that have not been overrun by Serbian forces.
A1  HOUSE REJECTS ARMS EMBARGO
The House of Representatives gave final passage to a bill ordering President Clinton to halt American participation in the United Nations arms embargo against Bosnia.
A6  RUSSIAN LIFE EXPECTANCY SHRINKS
Life expectancy in Russia, already lower than in other developed countries, has plummeted again, and scientists cannot explain why.
A1  AMERICANS AND CHINESE CONFER
Secretary Warren Christopher and the Chinese Foreign Minister met but made little progress on issues dividing their countries.
A3  ISRAEL MOVES ON EXTRADITION
The Israeli Government took the first legal steps to bring the man identified as leader of the Hamas movement from the United States to Israel for trial.
A3  Zimbabwe's President delivered a harsh attack on homosexuals.
A7  Bethlehem Journal: The mayor laments a Christian exodus.
A4  National A8-17  RENO'S DEFENSE ENDS HEARINGS
Attorney General Janet Reno told a Congressional committee that responsibility for the deaths of more than 80 Branch Davidians rested solely with the sect's leader.
A1  WESTINGHOUSE TO BUY CBS
Westinghouse Electric has agreed to pay $5.4 billion for CBS.
The announcement comes a day after Walt Disney agreed to acquire Capital Cities/ABC for $19 billion, a merger that would make Westinghouse's task of reviving CBS much more difficult.
A1  CBS CHIEF'S MIXED RECORD
Laurence A. Tisch, the chief executive of CBS, has orchestrated a deal that will earn the Loews Corporation, his family-controlled company, $1 billion.
Still, the deal may end up tarnishing his reputation.
A1  CLINTON CRITICIZES CONGRESS
President Clinton lashed out at Congress as the captive of polluters and gun lobbyists, and he threatened to veto the bill that pays Congress's administrative expenses.
A1  DELAY ON MEDICARE PLAN
Congressional Memo: Having watched the Clinton health plan die a slow death, the Republicans' strategy on on their overhaul of Medicare is too delay the details until as late as possible.
A1  NEW CLUES IN UNABOMB CASE
By matching 17-year record of bombings against an analysis of a 35,000-word tract sent to The New York Times, Federal officials say they have concluded that an elusive serial bomber is a student of the history of science who now lives in the Sacramento or San Francisco Bay areas.
A1  STORM MOVES ASHORE IN FLORIDA
Hurricane Erin swept across Florida's Atlantic Coast near Fort Pierce with heavy rain and winds of 85 miles an hour.
A8  UNCOVERING A TOWN'S KLAN TIES
When a man opened an old trunk he found in a barn, he found a 1920's-era membership list of the Ku Klux Klan in his home town.
A8  TEEN-AGE MOTHER, ADULT FATHER
Half of the babies born to teen-age girls are fathered by adults, according to a new study.
A10  GOVERNORS WORK ON MEDICARE
The nation's governors said they would spend August trying to find a consensus on how to distribute Medicaid money to the states.
A12  CASE OF THE MISSING INDEX
Vincent W. Foster Jr.'s secretary told the Senate Whitewater panel that an index of some papers of the Clintons was missing when Mr.
Foster's office was searched soon after his suicide.
A14  MORE TALK OF SIMPSON GLOVES
Prosecutors said they planned to introduce tapes of O.J.
Simpson wearing what they say are the same kind of gloves worn by the killer of Nicole Brown Simpson.
A15  BREAST CANCER'S CHANGE
Researchers say that when a woman moves to a new country, her risk of dying from breast cancer either rises or falls to match that of women native to the new country.
A17  A leading cigarette maker said a lawmaker misled the public.
A8  The A.F.L.-C.I.O. chose Thomas Donohue as interim president.
A9  Metro Digest B1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  A young actor will lead London's re-created Globe theater.
C11  Ad executive gets top post at League of Theaters.
C11  Film: "Art for Teachers of Children." C16  Music: Bobby McFerrin leads the Philharmonic.
C11  Dance: Varone and Ahn.
C16  Books: "China Pop." C15  Book Notes C16  The Living Section C1-8
C1  From grill to salad, in a snap.
C1  On the street with John Hockenberry: Life in an everyday war zone.
C1  Metropolitan Diary C2  Food Notes C2
Off the Menu C2  Sushi 101.  C3
At the Nation's Table C4
Plain and Simple C4  You may be thirstier than you feel.  C8
Wine Talk C7  Health Page C9  Personal Health: More help for erectile dysfunction.
C9  The lasting effects of a glancing blow to the head.
C9  Sickle-cell patients found to need less blood before surgery.
C9  Sports B7-12  Baseball: Mantle's cancer has spread.
B7  Yankees beat Brewers.
B7 Bonilla is all smiles.
B7  Mets lose to Reds.
B9  Columns: Vecsey on baseball.
B7  Obituaries D19-20  Rudolph F. Zallinger, scientific muralist D19  Canray Fontenot, Creole singer and violinist D20  Trekkie Parsons, British artist D19  Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials  Media mergers.
Packwood papers: not enough.
The billion-dollar lemon.
Attack on family planning.
Letters  Frank Rich: Beverly Russell's prayers.
Lester Brickman: Foster's papers -- what executive privilege?
Rosellen Brown: Paranoia on Main Street.
Chronicle B2  Crossword C16


Paul H. Douglas, 37, An AIDS Researcher
Paul Harding Douglas, an AIDS researcher at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center and co-author of two reference books on the disease, died on Friday at New York Hospital.
He was 37 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS, said Dr. Michael F. Giordano, a colleague at the medical center.


A Monorail For Kennedy Is Granted Key Approval
The Federal Aviation Administration gave a crucial approval yesterday to a long-stalled plan to build a monorail system at Kennedy International Airport, an aging facility whose bewildering layout often makes getting from terminal to terminal seem like a journey all its own.
The agency authorized the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey to collect a $3 tax on airline tickets to finance the 7.5-mile monorail, which would connect terminals, rental car agencies, parking lots and the subway station at Howard Beach, Queens.
The target date for completion of the monorail is 2002.


Journal; Beverly Russell's Prayers
"Bev was a church man, active in the Christian Coalition, and he was big on prayer. My father sometimes called Bev 'Thank you, Jesus' instead of his name. I usually went along with Bev's prayer circles, but I couldn't help being a little repelled by what I felt was the hypocrisy of the man.
"A couple of years earlier, Susan had confessed to me that her stepdad had molested her."
-- David Smith in "Beyond All Reason: My Life With Susan Smith"


Tisch's Legacy: Healthy Profit, Ailing Network
When Laurence A. Tisch announced the sale of CBS Inc. to the Westinghouse Electric Corporation yesterday, he was beaming.
Nine years after taking the job of chief executive at the network, the billionaire Mr.
Tisch had orchestrated a $5.4 billion deal that made the Loews Corporation, his family-controlled company, $1 billion richer.
But Mr.
Tisch may very well have been smiling as much from relief as from joy.
His venture into the media world ended up tarnishing, not burnishing, his reputation.
And that, according to many of Mr.
Tisch's friends, is a bitter pill for a man who gives away millions of dollars in philanthropy and who took the top job at CBS to enhance his power and broaden his legacy.


Howard Bruenn, 90, Roosevelt's Doctor In Last Year of Life
Dr.
Howard G. Bruenn, a naval physician who attended to President Franklin D. Roosevelt in the year before his death, died on Saturday in Sorrento, Me.
He was 90 years old.
Mr.
Bruenn and his wife, Dorothy, had a summer home in Maine, but kept their permanent residence in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.


In Hartford, The Courant Is Cutting Staff
The Hartford Courant, a newspaper owned by the Times Mirror Company, announced today that it would reduce its staff by more than 10 percent as part of the company's effort to cut costs and increase profitability.
Michael E. Waller, The Courant's publisher and chief executive, said the newspaper would seek to eliminate 150 of 1,365 full-time positions through a voluntary buyout.
If the program falls short, the paper will consider layoffs for what many believe would be the first time in its 231-year history, Dennis Schain, a spokesman, said.


Officer Sentenced In a Fatal Shooting
The first New York City police officer convicted of homicide since 1977 was sentenced to one to four years in prison yesterday for fatally shooting a man on the Lower East Side of Manhattan.
The officer, Jonas Bright, an 18-year veteran of the housing police who has retired since the shooting, showed no emotion as Judge John A. K. Bradley pronounced sentence in Manhattan Criminal Court.
The judge rejected a plea from Mr.
Bright's lawyer for a suspended sentence.


Reclaiming A Lost Zone; One-Man Drive Helps Tenants Battle Drugs
Lee Morgan, a 58-year-old woman living in one of Brooklyn's most crime-wracked neighborhoods, scoffed at the young man with the leather eye patch and the tinted-blond braids when he made his pitch about restoring decency to the building she calls home.
"I wasn't interested in anything he was going to do with this building," said Ms.
Morgan, describing her view of Lyndrew Nesmith.
To her, he was just another tenant-organizing quack talking as if he could summon Jesus himself to cast out the drug addicts infesting the hallway of her four-story East New York walk-up, wash away the urine and graffiti and sweep up the empty crack vials that crunched underfoot in the stairwells every morning.


Stock Prices in Retreat, With Dow Dropping 8.10
Stocks stumbled yesterday after a sharp decline in bond prices raised concern that interest rates, and corporate borrowing costs, were headed higher.
The selloff in bonds followed the release of two unexpectedly strong economic reports.
The price of the 30-year Treasury bond fell 26/32 , driving its yield up to 6.98 percent, from 6.84 percent on Monday.
Higher rates threatened to hamper corporate earnings growth, which has driven the market's recent rally.


Signs of Economic Strength Send Treasury Prices Down
Prices of Treasury securities tumbled yesterday after stronger-than-expected reports on manufacturing and construction showed a rebounding economy.
The reports bolstered the market's view that the Federal Reserve was unlikely to reduce short-term interest rates soon.
The data also revived fears that inflation could creep up if the economy continued to accelerate.


Metropolitan Diary
TO be filed under "R," as in "relative merits":
Fifty-something woman on phone, incredulous: Four?
Four?
I'm No. 4 on your speed dial?
How can I be 4?


Flagstar Cos. (FLST,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Big Network Deals May Force Rethinking Of TV Programming
How will the Walt Disney Company's proposed $19 billion acquisition of Capital Cities/ABC and Westinghouse's $5.4 billion offer to buy CBS affect the sports world?
At CBS Sports yesterday, shortly after Westinghouse announced its intentions toward CBS, the mood was one of definite uncertainty.


Killer Being Held for Court Date Escapes in Downtown Brooklyn
A Brooklyn man who had been serving a prison term for killing a bystander in a gunfight four years ago escaped from Brooklyn Family Court yesterday afternoon by slipping out of a holding cell, a city correction official said.
The prisoner, Gregory Webb, 28, walked out of the Family Court building at 283 Adams Street in downtown Brooklyn about 2:20 P.M. and was still at large last evening, the police said.


Personal Health; With more help available for impotence, few men seek it.
ASTONISHING progress has been made in the last decade both in understanding the myriad causes of impotence and in correcting or circumventing them.
Today a way can be found to help nearly every man who is interested in having his sexual potency restored.
Yet only about 5 million of the more than 30 million men with serious erectile problems have sought professional help.
Few men are willing to discuss problems of impotence even with their sexual partners.
To reduce the perceived stigma and embarrassment of impotence and encourage more men to seek treatment, urologists now refer to the condition as erectile dysfunction.


MBIA Inc.(MBI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


The New Globe Picks a Puckish Director
A 35-year-old actor with a passion for Shakespeare and a risk-taking approach to some major theatrical roles was appointed today as the first artistic director of the Globe, the re-created Elizabethan playhouse nearing completion on the south bank of the Thames.
Mark Rylance, looking like Puck but sounding more like Romeo (both of whom he has played), was chosen to oversee productions and put together a brand-new 32-member company over the next three years.
Workshops are to be held in the partially built theater beginning next week, but it will not stage its first full-scale production until sometime around next June.


Review Ordered on Handling By Police of Highway Crashes
Conceding that his officers should not have shut down the Long Island Expressway for seven hours on Monday morning to investigate a crash, the Suffolk County Police Commissioner today ordered a review of how his department handles accident and crime scenes on the expressway.
"I have to agree with our critics on this one," said the Commissioner, Peter F. Cosgrove.
"While it does take time to process a crime scene, it shouldn't take seven hours. There should have been a way to open at least one lane to traffic. That has to be a priority."


Lynch Corp.(LGL,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Canray Fontenot, 72, a Singer And Violinist in Creole Style
The singer and violinist Canray Fontenot, a leading exponent of the Creole music of southwestern Louisiana, died on Saturday at his home in Welsh, La.
He was 72.
The cause was lung cancer, said his daughter Joyce Windoskey.


Violence Act Safeguards Women
To the Editor:
Anita K. Blair is clearly no friend of the bipartisan Violence Against Women Act.
However, your readers should know that her July 25 Op-Ed article ("Bad Problem, Wrong Solution") contains falsehoods and distortions.


Defendant in Terror Trial Denies Seeking Bomb Parts
An American-born Muslim accused of being the weapons supplier for a group charged with a terrorist conspiracy in New York declared on the witness stand yesterday that in "no shape, form or fashion" had he participated in the purported plot.
Clement Hampton-El, a 57-year-old hospital technician from Brooklyn who was wounded while serving with Afghan fighters battling the Soviets in the 1980's, was the first defendant to testify in the Manhattan trial of 11 men charged in the bombing conspiracy.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Activated Spike Owen, infielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Rod Correia, infielder, to Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.


TIME WARNER OFFICIAL MOVES TO CENTURY 21 JOB
Robert W. Pittman, a Time Warner executive who has been heading Six Flags Theme Parks Inc. for the media giant, was named chief executive of the Century 21 Real Estate Corporation yesterday.
Mr.
Pittman, 41, who also created MTV and five other cable television channels, will take over on Nov. 1, succeeding Richard J. Loughlin, who will become president emeritus of the company.
The management change was the first move by Century 21's new owner, Hospital Franchise Systems Inc., the country's leading residential real estate chain.
Hospitality Franchise, based in Parsippany, N.J., acquired Century 21 for $200 million from the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company in a deal announced in June.
Hospital Franchise's stock closed at $43.25 yesterday, down 75 cents.


Plunging Life Expectancy Puzzles Russia
Life expectancy in Russia, already lower than in any other developed country, has plummeted again this year, and scientists and public health officials say they cannot explain the continuing steep decline.
For the last several years health statistics here have been hard to believe: no country that reports to the World Heath Organization has a life expectancy as low.
Life expectancy for men born in Russia this year is lower than in India, Egypt or Bolivia.


Nigeria Enjoys Peace Of the Graveyard
To the Editor:
Re "Nigerian Leader Moves Toward Elections" by the Nigerian Ambassador, Zubair Kazaure (letter, July 26):


Real Estate; In downtown Los Angeles, a former department store will have new life as state offices.
A GOVERNMENT partnership is buying a historic department store building in a neglected section of the downtown here as part of a larger effort to revive the area.
The building, the 450,000-square-foot former Broadway Department Store, will house state offices.
It was purchased for only $1.8 million by the Los Angeles State Building Authority, a partnership of the State of California and the Los Angeles Community Redevelopment Agency.
The seller was the Resolution Trust Corporation, the Federal agency entrusted with selling the assets of insolvent savings and loan associations.


Ex-Mayor Charged in Dog Death
A former township Mayor has admitted he fatally shot his neighbor's Samoyed puppy on Sunday because he could not stand its constant barking, The Associated Press reported.
The former Mayor, Paul Nemeth, who was charged with malicious killing of an animal and is to be arraigned on Friday in Hunterdon County Courthouse in Flemington, said he was ashamed of what he did.


Sports of The Times; Old Phrase In the Bronx: Catch Boston
YOU can't exactly say there's a pennant race.
That's an old-fashioned concept, going back to when baseball had no divisions, no wild-card teams, no playoffs.
Just one pennant race.
Winner take all.
It was special.
It's gone.
At least there is action in the Bronx for the next two months.
The team in Queens has shipped off its two best ballplayers, Bret Saberhagen and Bobby Bonilla, nevertheless informing the public that Shea Stadium is open for business during renovations.


Bold Moves For Lithe Automatons
Outdoor dance performances are difficult to pull off.
Subtlety is largely out of the question, but who wants a steady diet of the obvious?
Doug Varone and Sungsoo Ahn surmounted the problem in a shared program on Friday night at the Summerstage festival in Central Park.
Their choice of scores was a key, along with impressive performances and sensitive lighting by Mr.
Ahn, Howard Thies and David Ferri.
Mr.
Ahn used propulsive music by Philip K. Bimstein for "Bim" and set "Queen" to a bouncy song whose sexual lyrics caused a scandal in India, where it was created.


Fewer Transfusions Urged for Sickle Cell Patients
DOCTORS can reduce the number of preoperative blood transfusions typically given to patients with sickle cell disease without increasing the surgical complications that the transfusion are intended to prevent, a major multicenter study has found.
The five-year study, involving 36 medical institutions, also found that the limiting of transfusions halved the number of complications associated with using transfused blood, like illness that can result from using blood not ideally matched to a patient's own.


Steady Gains By New Media Pose a Threat
Remember movies-on-demand?
That was to be the first big money-making business in the portfolio of new technologies that in theory was going to bring the imminent demise of television networks, newspapers and other traditional media.
But this vision of the "information highway" -- interactive television, movies and libraries of books at the touch of a TV-style remote control button -- has faded quickly.


International Briefs; BMW Reports Gain In Six-Month Earnings
The German car maker Bayerische Motoren Werke said yesterday that its earnings rose in the first half of 1995.
The gain, however, was less than industry analysts had expected.
BMW said that its net profit, including results of the Rover Group of Britain, was 305 million marks, or $221 million.
That compared with 290 million marks for the first half of 1994, which did not include Rover.


Sylvia Weinberger, 89; Built Thriving Business on Chopped Liver
Sylvia Weinberger, who used a sprinkling of matzoh meal, a pinch of salt and a dollop of schmaltzmanship to turn chopped liver into a commercial success, died on July 23 at a hospital in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
She was 89 and had lived in Boca Raton, Fla.
Mrs.
Weinberger started making chopped liver for a luncheonette she and her husband, Irving, had opened in 1944 on the Grand Concourse at 169th Street in the Bronx.
She ended up presiding over a $2 million-a-year operation as the proprietor of the semi-eponymous Mrs.
Weinberg's Chopped Liver.
She once said her name had been shortened because of typographical necessity when her first labels were printed: "My whole name wouldn't fit."


A Shipping Executive Is Indicted
The president of a failed Rockville, Md., shipping company was indicted yesterday on charges that he defrauded the United States Navy out of hundreds of thousands of dollars.


U.S. Vehicle Sales Edged Lower in July
Sales of cars and light trucks in July drifted below June's moderate pace, but appeared to narrowly beat the results of July 1994 because of hefty rebates, according to reports released today by most auto companies.
Although all companies have not yet reported, July appeared to have been the first month this year in which industry sales topped 1994 levels.
But July 1994 was a particularly weak sales month, because strong demand earlier in the year had depleted dealer inventories that had not been refreshed with 1995 models.


Schoolboy Star Pleads Guilty
RANDY MOSS, West Virginia's top high school football player, pleaded guilty yesterday to misdemeanor battery stemming from a racial fight at school, then announced he will play at Florida State.
Moss was sentenced to 30 days in the South Central Regional Jail in Charleston, W.Va., with three to be served beginning last night and the rest within 18 months.


Thomas E. Morgan Dies at 88; Was Congressman for 32 Years
Dr.
Thomas E. Morgan, a longtime Democratic member of Congress who had championed bipartisanship as head of the House Committee on International Relations for 18 years, died on Monday in Greene County Memorial Hospital in Waynesburg, Pa.
He was 88 and lived in Fredericktown, Pa.
For much of his 32-year tenure, Dr.
Morgan was the only practicing physician in Congress.
His medical skills came into play on March 1, 1954, when four Puerto Rican nationalists, firing from a spectators' gallery, sprayed the House chamber with bullets, wounding five members.
"Doc" Morgan, as he was affectionately known, applied bandages and in one case a tourniquet to the victims.


Teen-Ager Accused of Killing 8-Month-Old Cousin in Queens
A Far Rockaway teen-ager who the authorities said had a history of psychiatric problems was charged yesterday with killing his 8-month-old cousin while baby-sitting the child.
The teen-ager, Rendell Williams, used the handle of a bullwhip to beat the baby, Kehia Shields, because she would not stop screaming, and then tried to stifle her cries by placing his hands, then a pillow, over her tiny face, the authorities said.


Insilco Corp.(INSL,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Aon Corp.(AOC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CHRONICLE
From philanthropy to diplomacy: President Clinton has nominated JAMES A. JOSEPH, the president and chief executive of the Council on Foundations, to be Ambassador to South Africa.
Mr.
Joseph, 60, an ordained Congregational minister, has had careers in business and education and has served in Government positions under four Presidents.


Agency Fails Children, Says Suffolk Panel
The agency charged with protecting abused and neglected children in Suffolk County is in disarray and is failing in its mission, according to a grand jury report released today.
The grand jury found that caseworkers for the agency, Suffolk Child Protective Services, were poorly trained, loosely supervised, hobbled by the state bureaucracy, protected from dismissal by Civil Service laws and left on their own to make critical judgments that sometimes determined whether children lived or died.
It detailed several examples of faulty judgment that led to deaths.


Media Mergers
The self-congratulation attending the merger of Walt Disney and Capital Cities/ABC has not left much need for anyone else to comment, but there are some things to like about the deal.
Michael Eisner of Disney wants quality cartoons and other children's programs on Saturday morning, upgrading the broadcasts aimed at an audience that the networks resolutely assault with trash.
The manner in which Mr.
Eisner and Thomas Murphy of Capital Cities/ABC conducted negotiations was also refreshing.
They completed the deal with minimal input from extraneous investment bankers and without the barrage of trash talk that often attends such purchases.
Compare that record with the boisterous rumors that swirled around yesterday's announced purchase of CBS by Westinghouse, or Viacom's takeover of Paramount.


Thiokol Corp.(TKC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Vincent Foster's Secretary Says Index of Clinton Data Vanished
The secretary to Vincent W. Foster Jr. in the White House counsel's office told the Senate Whitewater panel today that an index to some papers of President and Mrs.
Clinton was missing when the office was searched after Mr.
Foster's suicide two years ago.
The secretary, Deborah L. Gorham, said she had prepared the index and left it in a drawer in Mr.
Foster's office.
She said that when she was summoned into the office by the White House counsel, Bernard W. Nussbaum, to go through the file drawers with him two days after Mr.
Foster's death, the index had disappeared.
An electronic version of a Foster index was found on a computer in the counsel's office, but Ms.
Gorham said she was unable to say with certainty whether it was the same one she had put in Mr.
Foster's office.


Entergy Corp.(ETR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Timothy Mawson, A Bookseller, 54
Timothy Mawson, who combined passions for literature and horticulture in an influential gardening bookstore in New Preston, Conn., died on Monday at his home in nearby Washington Depot.
He was 54.
The cause was AIDS, said his companion, Gael Hammer.


Paranoia on Main Street
For many years, from the beginning of the 1970's, my family and I lived in Peterborough, a town of about 5,000 in southern New Hampshire.
Thornton Wilder was in residence there when he wrote "Our Town," which used, unchanged, the names of the nearest mountain and river and exemplified the community's peace, modesty and common sense.
Though we moved to Houston 13 years ago, we return to our old neighbors every summer, to the secure, nurturing society in which our children grew up.
This is a town where shopkeepers still walk fearlessly down Main Street carrying their bags of cash-register money to the bank.
Where a newpaper headline that read "Crack Found in High School" referred to the condition of its walls.


Ideal Vision Helped Create Edison School
On paper, schools in the Edison Project are slices of educational heaven: Students are motivated, classrooms are automated and teachers receive all the training and support they need.
Edison's educational philosophy is based on the theory that privately run schools can provide a more intimate, effective and rigorous education than traditional public schools for the same amount of money.


Corrections
An article on Monday about partygoing in the Hamptons over the weekend referred incorrectly in some editions to the man who was conversing with Donna Karan at a party given by the president of the Sony Corporation of America.
He was the rock star Mick Jones, not the designer Arnold Scaasi.


$5.4 BILLION DEAL
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation, an early broadcasting pioneer, said yesterday that it had agreed to pay $5.4 billion for CBS Inc., the last independent television network and once the crown jewel of broadcasting.
Westinghouse, primarily an industrial manufacturer, has decided to borrow heavily to bet on broadcasting, which is the smallest but most profitable of its operations.
Michael H. Jordan, the chairman and chief executive of Westinghouse, said the deal would create a "premier top-notch outstanding company" with 15 television stations and 39 radio stations that would give it direct access to more than a third of the nation's households.


Madlock Faces Arrest Warrant
BILL MADLOCK, a four-time National League batting champion, faces a bench warrant for his arrest after failing to show up in a Las Vegas, Nev., court on charges that he wrote $6,500 in bad checks.
The no-bail warrant was issued when Madlock did not go to Las Vegas Justice Court on Friday on the felony charges.
His lawyer, MARC RISMAN, said Madlock was scrambling "to fund a restitution program" to pay off his debts.
Risman, though, said he had not heard from his client, who was arrested and then released on $10,000 bail in New York last month after promising to honor his Las Vegas court date.


Caremark International Inc.(CK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Philip Morris Denies Charge By Lawmaker
Philip Morris USA today accused Representative Henry Waxman of "misleading the American people" in saying on the House floor on Monday that the company manipulated nicotine levels in its cigarettes.
In his remarks on Monday, Mr.
Waxman, a California Democrat, said company documents relating to varying ratios of tar and nicotine in certain Philip Morris brands suggested that the company sought to maintain the level of nicotine that smokers could get as levels of tar were falling.


2 Takeovers Help Shift Focus in House Deregulation Debate
As the House of Representatives prepares to take up a sweeping bill to deregulate the communications industry, the back-to-back takeovers of ABC and CBS are stoking fears in some parts of Washington that the media companies will consolidate into a few giant monoliths, offering fewer choices to viewers, listeners and readers.
Lawmakers and lobbyists said yesterday that they did not expect the deals to derail the legislation, which the House is expected to begin debating tomorrow.
The legislation has bipartisan support and comes after the Senate passed a similar bill by a wide margin in June.


Ad Official to Head The Theater League
In a move that reflected both a growing generational shift in leadership on Broadway and concern among producers about how to attract new audiences, the League of American Theaters and Producers yesterday named a 40-year-old Manhattan advertising executive to head the organization.
Jed Bernstein, an executive vice president of Wells Rich Greene who boasts that he attended the theater 153 times last year, will take over next month as executive director of the league, the leading trade group for the commercial theater.
Among other things, the league negotiates contracts with theatrical trade unions, promotes the theater and administers the Tony Awards with the American Theater Wing.


Hurricane Crosses Wary Florida Coast
Hurricane Erin moved onto the Florida coast early this morning near Vero Beach with heavy rain and winds, after its approach caused thousands of storm-wary residents along the coast to scramble.
Officials expect the hurricane to be downgraded to a tropical storm later this morning as it headed northwest toward Orlando.
It should move across the state today and pass through Pensacola by Thursday morning on its way toward Alabama.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  Bear Stearns Cos., New York, is underwriting its own issue of $200 million of notes due in 2000.
The notes are priced at 99.365 to yield 6.901 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated A2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $125 million of notes due in 2010 through Dean Witter Reynolds Inc.
Callable in one year, the issue is priced at par to yield 8 percent.


Deutsche Bank Picks Chief for a U.S. Unit
Deutsche Bank North America, the North American arm of the giant Deutsche Bank A.G., said yesterday that it had appointed Carter McClelland to head its United States investment banking subsidiary: Deutsche Bank Morgan Grenfell/C.
J.
Lawrence Inc.
The hiring of Mr.
McClelland, a 22-year employee of the Morgan Stanley Group, was yet another sign of the German banking giant's determination to build a powerful global investment banking operation.
Mr.
McClelland, who is 49, was Morgan Stanley's chief administrative officer when he retired in January.


A Man's Just a Man, but a Good Cigar Is a Smoke
Cigar dinners are all the rage.
And women like Whoopi Goldberg have occasionally attended them, stogie in hand.
On Aug. 16, a five-course cigar dinner exclusively for women will be held at 7:30 P.M. at the Monkey Bar, 60 East 54th Street.
Wine will be poured and cigars will be lighted throughout, and some of the evening will be taken up with discussions of women's issues.
The cost is $95; reservations can be made by calling (212) 838-2600.


Homeless Ex-Convict Held In Upper East Side Slaying
A homeless ex-convict was arrested yesterday in the fatal stabbing of a reclusive Upper East Side woman, the police said, after detectives discovered that a digital wristwatch found in the victim's apartment had the suspect's bank account number programmed into it.
The 49-year-old victim, Sherry Hollis Gini, was killed a week ago Sunday morning as she screamed for help inside her studio apartment at 1729 First Avenue, just two blocks west of Gracie Mansion.
The police said her attacker pushed into the apartment, tried to rape her and then stabbed her repeatedly.


Congressional Memo; G.O.P. Medicare Effort Avoids Deadly Detail
If the Great Health Care Struggle of 1993-94 proved anything, many analysts say, it was this: Sweeping changes in the way Americans get their medical care are inherently confusing and scary, hard to explain and easy to distort.
The big ideas behind a major proposal -- like the Clintons' promise of "health care that's always there" -- may be resoundingly popular.
But the details -- like regional health alliances and the employer mandate -- can be deadly.


Study Cites Adult Males for Most Teen-Age Births
At least half of the babies born to teen-age girls are fathered by adults, according to a new national study by the Alan Guttmacher Institute.
The study, which many researchers said is the most comprehensive of its kind, implies that a startling number of teen-age girls are having sex with men who are breaking state laws on statutory rape.


Mondesi, Dodgers Outslug Rockies
Dodgers 9, Rockies 6
Raul Mondesi hit two home runs and drove in a career-high six runs to power the Los Angeles Dodgers past the Colorado Rockies, 9-6, last night in Denver.
The Dodgers, unbeaten in four games at Coors Field this season, reduced Colorado's lead in the National League West to two and a half games.


Clinton Seeking Clemency for 40 Nigerians
President Clinton has sent a letter to Nigeria's military ruler, Gen.
Sani Abacha, to urge him to grant clemency to 40 people convicted in secret trials of being coup plotters, including several who are believed to have been sentenced to death, White House officials said on Monday.
In the July 18 letter, Mr.
Clinton urged the Nigerian Government to allow fair and open appeals and said relations between the United States and Nigeria would be hurt if executions go forward.
The White House said that among those believed to have been sentenced to death is the former head of state, Gen.
Olusegun Obasanjo, who in 1979 became Nigeria's only military ruler to turn over power to a civilian Government.
Human rights groups in Nigeria have denounced the trials, contending that General Abacha had invented the story of the coup plot.


Adams Resources &amp; Energy Inc.(AE,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Little Prints


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the financial and legal advisers in the negotiations for the proposed acquisition of Capital Cities/ABC by the Walt Disney Company reversed the identities of the two companies' law firms.
Lawyers at Dewey Ballantine represented Walt Disney; Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore represented Capital Cities.


Interim Services Inc.(INTM,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Labor Group Chooses Aide To Kirkland
Thomas R. Donahue became the interim president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. today, but whether he can keep the job depends on how rapidly and radically he can bring change to the shrinking federation before the election of a permanent president in October.
Recognizing this, Mr.
Donahue promised in a speech to immediately begin pouring millions of dollars into helping unions enroll new members.
And he promised to begin training 500 people active in the labor movement to spearhead local and regional election campaigns for candidates favored by the federation.
He was so emphatic on these points that his opponent for the presidency, John J. Sweeney, accused Mr.
Donahue of lifting the Sweeney platform.


The Packwood Papers: Not Enough
Senate Republicans who do not flinch from pursuing Whitewater have shown little appetite for a searching public review of allegations of sexual and official misconduct against Senator Bob Packwood, the Oregon Republican who heads the Finance Committee.
The three G.O.P. members of the Senate Ethics Committee have said no to public hearings, stonewalling an open inquiry.
Senator Mitch McConnell, the chairman, is moving as a kind of consolation prize to release all the documents from the committee's 32-month investigation.
But this does not satisfy Barbara Boxer, a California Democrat, any more than it should satisfy the public.
She plans to ask the full Senate to vote on whether to hold hearings.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  THE KNIGHTS OF A HOT SUMMER
Leonard Henry and George Adams clamber among the gaping maws of air vents and the humming obelisks of cooling towers.
They brave the baking terrain of black-tarred rooftops.
Mr.
Henry and Mr.
Adams are the knights of the New York summer: air-conditioner repairmen.  [ Page B3. ]


International Briefs; Itochu Deal in China
A leading Japanese trading company, the Itochu Corporation, said yesterday that it had bought 20 percent of China's third-largest truck maker, becoming the first Japanese company to own a stake in a Chinese vehicle maker.
Itochu said it had paid 1.7 billion yen, or $19.3 million, for the stake in the Beijing Light Automobile Company and would participate in its management.
The money will be used to expand production capacity.
Itochu already supplies Beijing Light with vehicles and components made by Isuzu Motors. (Reuters)


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
All Roads Lead to Madness, A Year-Old Band Decides  Geraldine Fibbers Brownies
"I'm stopping everything, making fun of myself, drinking lipstick, tipping bookshelves, ripping up words that I thought were important," Carla Bozulich of the Geraldine Fibbers screamed hoarsely on Monday night.
When the song ended, she announced, "We've got one more happy one, then we're going to get into something really depressing."


Brooklyn Conservatory Names New President
David Rivel, the vice president for marketing and communications at Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, has been appointed president of the Brooklyn Conservatory of Music, a community music school in Park Slope with a branch in Flushing, Queens.
The conservatory, which was founded in 1897, serves adults and children, presents low-cost performances, and works with schools and community groups.


Players Banned in Fan Attack
Two players from the Class AA Arkansas Travelers were suspended indefinitely after attacking a pair of heckling Wichita Wranglers fans in the stands.


Blurred Definitions of Art and Consent
"Art for Teachers of Children" was shown as part of this year's New Directors/New Films Series.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 21.
The film opens today at the Film Forum, 209 Houston Street, South Village.
"Art," "teachers" and "children" are all loaded words, and Jennifer Montgomery's coolly ruminative film about adolescent sexuality explores their meaning.
"Art for Teachers of Children" is Ms.
Montgomery's autobiographical, sexually frank account of a high school student who has an affair with a married teacher.
The film examines the dynamics of seduction, exploitation and power as it brings this relationship to light.


Continental Can Co.(CAN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Golden Poultry Co.(CHIK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jul 1


Greenfield Industries (GFII,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Monday's Speed Demon Is Tuesday's Law Abider
Kevin Carrol was plodding along the highway at 55 miles per hour in his Jeep this morning when he came upon a road sign that shook him up just a bit.
"It said 65 miles per hour!" said Mr.
Carrol, marveling at his discovery on Interstate 84.
"As soon as I saw it, I just hit the gas, boom, and passed a bunch of cars."


Digital Equipment Posts Profit
Ending years of multibillion-dollar losses, the Digital Equipment Corporation yesterday posted its third consecutive profitable quarter and its first annual profit since 1990.
But its fourth-quarter results disappointed some financial analysts who had expected higher revenue growth from the company.


Expeditors International of Washington Inc.(EXPD,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Questions Are Raised On Mantle Transplant
The finding that Mickey Mantle's liver cancer has spread to his lungs bodes ill for the former baseball star and raises questions about the wisdom of transplants for such patients, liver cancer specialists said yesterday.
Transplantation for patients with liver cancer is not a proven approach, these specialists said, because in such a high percentage of patients the disease has already spread by the time it is discovered.
Some experts wondered whether Mantle's surgeons, in their haste to treat his failing cirrhotic liver, had searched thoroughly enough for evidence that his cancer had metastasized before performing a liver transplant.
The most common sites for liver cancer to spread to are the surrounding lymph nodes and tissues and the lungs.


The New York Stock Exchange reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


This Role Isn't Suited for Just Any Giant
Football likes its players easily defined.
If a player weighs 300 pounds and can move his feet quickly, chances are he will play on the offensive line.
Tall, fast and graceful guys play wide receiver.
Anyone who can throw a ball 80 yards plays quarterback.
Define the player, define the role.
But what to do with Jessie Armstead?
It is something that has perplexed Giants coaches since the team drafted him in the eighth round in 1993.
When he first came into the league, Armstead, who stands just a shade over 6 feet, was about 220 pounds.
He is a linebacker, but usually linebackers are much bigger.


ON THE STREET WITH: John Hockenberry; Life in an Everyday War Zone
JOHN HOCKENBERRY has gone where few would dare.
As a foreign correspondent he has traveled by donkey amid what he calls the "slow stunned bleed" of Kurdish refugees after the Persian Gulf war and covered the intifada in Israel and the famine in Somalia.
Between assignments, he likes to kayak in the tough currents of the East River.
But he has his limits.
He will take an escalator only if he has no other choice.
"If you take an escalator just to show off, you will die," said Mr.
Hockenberry, who became paraplegic in a car accident 20 years ago, when he was 19.


House, Like Senate, Votes To Halt Bosnia Embargo
In a move that sets the stage for a Presidential veto, the House gave final passage today to a bill ordering President Clinton to halt American participation in the United Nations arms embargo against Bosnia.
The bill, passed 298 to 128, was identical to a measure approved by the Senate last week.
And like the Senate's 69-29 vote, the House tally produced more than the two-thirds margin needed to override President Clinton's threatened veto.


The F.T.C. accuses car dealers of conspiring to restrain trade.
WHEN a newspaper runs an article that angers a big advertiser, it is common for the aggrieved advertiser to threaten to pull his ads in order to get friendlier treatment.
Rarely does the advertiser have to make good on the threat, publishers being aware that advertising dollars are scarce.
But last year in San Jose, Calif., a tiff over an article in The San Jose Mercury News headlined, "A Car Buyer's Guide to Sanity," in which consumers might learn how to negotiate lower prices, quickly escalated into war.


Now China Has Its Soaps and Celebrity Authors
CHINA POP How Soap Operas, Tabloids and Best Sellers Are Transforming a Culture  By Jianying Zha  210 pages.
The New Press. $20.
For quite a while in recent history, writing about China for Western readers was the unwanted near-monopoly of Americans and Europeans.
It was an odd situation brought about by Government controls.
But this is changing.
Chinese writers have begun to speak about their own country in their own voices, providing a sense of intimacy -- that inside-the-family quality -- that it is difficult for Westerners to achieve.


Markel Corp.(MAKL,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Bear Stearns Cos. (BSC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


INSIDE
U.S. and China at Odds
Secretary of State Christopher and his Chinese counterpart met in Brunei, but made no progress on major divisive issues.
Page A3.
Giuliani Backs Pathmark
After months of bitter debate, Mayor Giuliani gave final approval to a plan to build a Pathmark supermarket in East Harlem.
Page B1.
Airport Monorail Approved
Federal officials approved a plan for a Kennedy Airport monorail, which would be completed in 2002.
Page B1.
Breast Cancer and Migrants
When a woman moves to another country, her risk of breast cancer tends to change, too.
Page A17.


Wine Talk
THE wine urges me on," Homer sang, "the bewitching wine, which sets even a wise man to singing" and "brings forth words which were better unspoken."
Even in the eighth century before Christ, wine commentary was held in less than high regard.


Christopher and Chinese Official Fail to Settle Differences
Secretary of State Warren Christopher and his Chinese counterpart met here tonight in an effort to repair the biggest breach in relations since China's violent suppression of the democracy movement six years ago.
Despite an exchange that both sides agreed to characterize as "frank and useful," they made no progress on the two major issues dividing Washington and Beijing.


Sunshine and Solace


Arts Endowment Grant Changed My Life
To the Editor:
I'd like to use myself as an example of how beneficial a National Endowment for the Arts fellowship can be to an artist (writer, painter, composer, choreographer) and why there shouldn't be any cuts in the Endowment's budget.
I got my first National Endowment fellowship for fiction writing in 1974.
My average annual income till then was about $2,700, and the fellowship was for $5,000.


Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream Inc.(DRYR,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


COMPANY BRIEFS
ATLAS COPCO A.B., Stockholm, a manufacturer of compressors, mining and construction equipment, has received approval from U.S. antitrust authorities to complete the acquisition of Milwaukee Electric Tool Corp., Brookfield, Wis., a subsidiary of Esstar Corp., for $548 million.
CHEMED CORP., Cincinnati, has terminated its discussions to acquire the remaining 41 percent of stock it does not already own of Roto-Rooter Inc., Cincinnati, another sewer, drain and pipe cleaning services concern.


Grand Opening in Texas: The First Edison School
An Apple computer for every child to take home.
An E-mail system and a computer "chat room" allowing schoolchildren, their parents and their teachers to communicate at any time of day.
A school day that is an hour and a half longer than the national average, and a school year that is 30 days longer.
Special classes in everything from dance to personal finance to character and ethics.
Spanish for everyone.
These were just a few of the things offered when pupils arrived at George Washington Elementary School today for the first day of classes.
George Washington is the first school in the nation to open in partnership with the Edison Project, an ambitious venture whose mission is to provide a superior education at prevailing public-school costs and make money for its investors at the same time.


Argosy Gaming Co.(ARGY,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Two Sides Clash Over Videotapes Showing Simpson, as Sportscaster, Wearing Gloves
Prosecutors at O. J. Simpson's murder trial said today that they planned to introduce videotapes showing Mr.
Simpson wearing what they say are the same kind of gloves worn by the person who killed Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman.
The defense promptly said it would "vigorously oppose" the use of such tapes.
Deputy District Attorney Marcia Clark said the tapes, taken while Mr.
Simpson reported on football games as a television sportscaster, were relevant and admissible, despite a defense effort on Monday to pre-empt their use.
She said the tapes could "refute the conspiracy theme and the planting theme that the defense has carried in this case."


Countdown for Strawberry
Darryl Strawberry could be with the Yankees as soon as this afternoon, if not in the next couple of days.
A person familiar with the Strawberry saga said yesterday that the outfielder would either join the Yankees for today's game against the Milwaukee Brewers or be called up from Class AAA Columbus shortly thereafter.
The Yankees made no announcement on the subject, but a contract has apparently been worked out.
Arthur Richman, a team vice president who has accompanied Strawberry through his journeys in the minor leagues for the last seven weeks, was back at Yankee Stadium last night.
Strawberry went 2 for 4 with a home run and two runs batted last night.


Workers Burned in Yacht Fire
Two workers remained in serious condition yesterday from burns they received in a fire in the hull of a yacht under construction, the A.P. reported.
John E. Leek 3d, president of Ocean Yachts, where the fire took place on Monday, said investigators believed that a vacuum cleaner used to suck water from the 44-foot boat ignited an acetone solvent the workers were using.
Two other employees were also injured.


Molester Held in 1974 Murder
More than 20 years after the body of 4-year-old Brenda Probasco was found, a convicted child molester who was about to be released from prison has been indicted in her murder.


Bonilla's Smile Stretches All the Way to Baltimore
Bobby Bonilla did not write the song "New York, New York." But the All-Star and former Met could pen an interesting addendum to his hometown's signature song: "If I can make it there, I'll make it anywhere" -- if I have what it takes to survive.
Bonilla, a Mets expatriate for less than a week, can look back and say he did, indeed, survive.
For when Bonilla left New York for Baltimore by way of a trade Friday night, he was far from being the broken and bitter man many expected him to be following his rough entry into the New York limelight in 1992.


Excerpts From Manuscript Linked to Suspect in 17-Year Series of Bombings
Following are excerpts from a manuscript sent to The New York Times in June by the suspect in the Unabom case, a 17-year string of bombings.
The manuscript, which has been authenticated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, is titled "Industrial Society and Its Future" and is attributed on its title page to a group called "FC."
The industrial revolution and its consequences have been a disaster for the human race.
They have greatly increased the life expectancy of those of us who live in "advanced" countries, but they have destabilized society, have made life unfulfilling, have subjected human beings to indignities, have led to widespread psychological suffering (in the Third World to physical suffering as well) and have inflicted severe damage on the natural world.
The continued development of technology will worsen the situation.
It will certainly subject human beings to greater indignities and inflict greater damage on the natural world, it will probably lead to greater social disruption and psychological suffering, and it may lead to increased physical suffering even in "advanced" countries.


IN PERFORMANCE: JAZZ
Humor and Endless Energy Make the Most of Merengue  Olga Tanon S.O.B.'s
Merengue, the music of the Dominican Republic, is built for a party.
It's all motor, chugging along without much retrospection or grace.
Olga Tanon, a Puerto Rican performer who sings merengues, appeared at S.O.B.'s on Monday night, and in front of a packed house she made the music and her show an advertisement for aerobics.


Moore Is Offering the Jets Crowd Control
It wasn't easy to be noticed when Ronald Moore was a little kid and his big brothers were football heroes.
Now he's trying to get someone's attention on the Jets, who are hoping a running back can break out of their crowded backfield.
The Jets are talking about bringing smash-mouth, run-oriented football to the American Football Conference, but so far there is no No. 1 running back to do the smashing.
At least, one hasn't been anointed by Coach Rich Kotite, who admitted he has a running-back-by-committee situation right now.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
A One-Woman Show Of World War II Tunes  'We'll Meet Again' 45th Street Theater
There was surely more to World War II than singing.
But if you were a child then, the war was all voices on radio, in news broadcasts, of course, but, in memory, mostly voices singing.
In those days, many of the first songs you ever learned came from the radio.
And Vicki Stuart, who was a child in England during the war, reminds us in her one-woman show "We'll Meet Again," what singable, memorable songs they remain.


The Heroes Of the Heat, Bothered By the Hot
Leonard Henry and George Adams clamber among the gaping maws of air vents and the humming obelisks of cooling towers.
They brave the baking terrain of black-tarred rooftops.
They spend hours prone beneath clacking old machines, sweat slithering back into their hairlines.
They strip filters of the filth borne by city air, dirt so thick it forms a three-inch carpet that could make any unit go blooey.
Mr.
Henry and Mr.
Adams are the Freon-wielding knights of the New York summer: air-conditioner repairmen.


New Waste-Dump Standard Is Recommended in Report
Scientists assigned to tell the Environmental Protection Agency how to write safety standards for a Federal nuclear waste dump issued their report yesterday, and laid the groundwork for the agency to permit a level of pollution in the desert 100 miles northwest of Las Vegas that would make the area unsuitable for intense farming, even hundreds of thousands of years from now.
But the conclusion about the Nevada site drew a sharp dissent from one of the report's authors and from environmentalists.
The study, ordered by Congress, was released by the National Academy of Sciences.


Charter Medical (CMD,A) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


At the Nation's Table; Dewey Beach, Del.
A Bloody Mary Of One's Own
At the Starboard Restaurant in Dewey Beach, Del., people have as much fun making Bloody Mary's as they do drinking them.


Cadmus Communication (CDMS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Moving to Different Country Alters Risk of Breast Cancer
It may be something in her diet, or the air and water of her new home, or the vigilance of her doctor, or stress or exhilaration or none of the above.
Whatever the cause, when a woman moves to a new country, her risk of dying from breast cancer will either rise or fall to match that of women native to her adopted land, researchers have found.
The new study, an examination of changes in the patterns of breast cancer deaths among a broad array of immigrant groups in Australia and Canada, suggests that environmental factors continue to influence a woman's chances of contracting breast cancer throughout adulthood and that the effect can occur over relatively short spans of time.


The Billion-Dollar Lemon
Back in June the House of Representatives voted to order two more B-2 Stealth bombers, at more than $1 billion apiece, besides the 20 already in production or completed.
The Pentagon said it did not need them.
Since then the General Accounting Office has issued a draft report saying the B-2 is not nearly as stealthy as advertised and has radar that cannot distinguish a rain cloud from a mountainside.
John Kasich, the House Budget Committee chairman, and Ron Dellums, Democrat of California, are again co-sponsoring an amendment to revoke the $493 million the House approved as a down payment on the two additional B-2's.
The vote on their approval was 219 to 203, with 73 Democrats joining 146 Republicans.
That was before the G.A.O. report.
Perhaps some of those big spenders would like to think again.


Unyielding Reno Ends Hearings Defending Her Waco Decisions
Attorney General Janet Reno ended the Waco hearings today with a daylong defense of her decisions more than two years ago, telling two skeptical Republican-led Congressional committees that blame for the deaths of about 80 members of the religious sect rested solely with their leader, David Koresh.
In seven hours of testimony, Ms.
Reno said little that she had not already said since April 19, 1993, when F.B.I. agents sprayed tear gas into the Branch Davidian compound.
In a slow, steady voice that grew firmer as the day went on, she said that she alone had ordered the Federal Bureau of Investigation to proceed with the raid, that President Clinton had not been involved in the decision and that after many hours of agonized soul-searching over the outcome, she remained certain that she had made the right judgment given the information available.


CHRONICLE
GEOFFREY HOLDER, the velvet voice of the "Never had it, never will" commercials for Seven-Up, was honored at the National Black Theater Festival in Winston-Salem, N.C., on Monday for a lifetime of achievement.
He has more than advertisements to his credit, of course: he is also an actor, a choreographer, a director and a designer, and he has won two Tony awards.
Lifetime achievement awards were also presented to Mr.
Holder's wife, CARMEN de LAVALLADE, the dancer and choreographer, and LESLIE UGGAMS, the singer, The Associated Press reported.


5 Suspected In Bias Prank Thank CORE
The five Greenwich High School seniors accused of planting a racist message in their yearbook were praised by officials of the Congress of Racial Equality today for completing a three-week program intended to expose them to people unlike themselves.
But on the advice of their lawyers, the students had nothing to say except a brief thank you to the civil rights group.
The Greenwich police and the State Attorney General's Office have yet to decide whether to charge the young men under Connecticut's bias laws, so their lawyers allowed them to appear at a CORE news conference on the condition that they would make only a formal statement of thanks to the organization.


Misguided Attack on Family Planning
Title X of the Public Service Act of 1970, the Federal program that delivers birth-control services to poor women, seems headed for extinction in the House of Representatives.
This is a useful, relatively low-cost program aimed at reducing unwanted pregnancies.
It would be foolish to kill it.
Nevertheless, the House Appropriations Committee voted last month to fold the program's funding into a maternal and child health block grant to the states.
The money would be used to help pregnant women, mothers and babies.
It would not help women trying not to have babies.


Seasonal Flavors To Top Polenta
THE corn and tomatoes are superb this year, and there are many flavorful ways to use them.
The other night, after thinking I had all the ingredients for this dish, I discovered that there was no polenta.
But there was fine-ground cornmeal and the results were equal to those of the quick-cooking polenta I usually use.
So keep that in mind if polenta is not on your grocer's shelf.


CHRONICLE
The woman who is believed to be New York City's longest-serving municipal employee retired yesterday.
Edith I. Spivack, 85, who put in 61 years on the job, worked her way up to become one of the top lawyers at the Corporation Counsel's office, which represents the city in all legal matters.
One of her first assignments from Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia was to go with other female employees to a burlesque house to determine if the show was lewd and should be closed.
They determined that it should.


Latest Kodak Search Is Narrowed to Two
The Eastman Kodak Company has named two New York-based finalists to compete for a new worldwide corporate-brand advertising campaign, which will be separate from the company's product ads.
Though the billings were not disclosed, trade publications estimated them at $30 million to $50 million.
Charles S. Smith, a spokesman for Kodak in Rochester, confirmed reports of the review this week in Advertising Age and Adweek.
He identified the finalists as BBDO Worldwide in New York, a unit of the Omnicom Group, and Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide in New York, a unit of the WPP Group, which already handles Kodak's digital and applied-imaging account.
Mr.
Smith would not identify the agencies that were eliminated.
He added that a decision was expected soon but declined to provide a date.


A.B. Hawes, 88, Washington Lawyer
Alexander Boyd Hawes, a lawyer who worked in various Federal agencies and had a private practice in Washington for many years, died yesterday at his summer home in Little Compton, R.I.
He was 88 and lived in Washington.
Mr.
Hawes served in the Administration of President Franklin D. Roosevelt, starting with the Federal Trade Commission in 1933.
He eventually joined the National Labor Relations Board, but resigned in 1940 when Roosevelt replaced the chairman in a move that Mr.
Hawes thought unfair.


Yankees Wear Their Rally Caps To Beat Brewers
Andy Pettitte couldn't find the plate.
Mariano Rivera couldn't adjust to the bullpen.
And the Yankees couldn't make three leads stand last night against Milwaukee.
But things like that don't matter much when just about everything else is going your way.


A Bad Day At Black Rock
The Westinghouse Electric news conference announcing its deal to acquire CBS did not play well at CBS's New York headquarters, known as Black Rock.
Several employees there expressed concern about how the announcement was handled and what it left unsaid.
In discussing his vision of the merged company, Michael Jordan, the Westinghouse chairman, failed to explain the following:


Murdoch Testifies to House Ethics Committee


Inquiry in Killing by the Police
The Hudson County Prosecutor's office is investigating the fatal shooting of a convicted burglar who led the police on a chase after the owners of a Harrison warehouse reported seeing him on their property.
Stephen Bradley, of Kearny, died Monday from a bullet wound that pierced an artery in his hip, an autopsy concluded.


Ohio Agency Wins A Slice of Domino's
Domino's Pizza Inc., in Ann Arbor, Mich., named Hameroff/Milenthal/ Spence in Columbus, Ohio, and its HMS/McFarland &amp; Drier unit in Miami, to handle its Southeast regional account, which had been at Bright House in Atlanta, formerly the Joey Reiman Agency, until that shop resigned it in June.
The billings were estimated at $8.5 million.


Schourek Gets Revenge Against Mets and Green
The last time the Cincinnati Reds left-hander Pete Schourek took the mound against the his former team, the Mets, he came away a 3-0 loser.
Mets Manager Dallas Green could not wait for someone to offer a post-game question about his former pitcher.
"He pitched just good enough to lose," Green offered, without prompting, on May 5.
Tonight, Schourek got his revenge, throwing seven sterling innings to lead the Reds to a 4-3 victory that ended the Mets' three-game winning streak.


Enough Frivolity, Official Says
Have you heard the one about the prison minister who was reading the inmate's letters to God and incorporating the material into his sermons?
Actually, it is not a joke but a lawsuit -- and it is typical of 150 meritless complaints filed each year by inmates, State Attorney General Deborah T. Poritz said yesterday.
Ms.
Poritz released her top 10 list of frivolous lawsuits, which she characterized as "making a mockery of our criminal justice system."


Food Notes
All-Natural Half-and-Half
Ronnybrook Farm Dairy in Ancramdale, N.Y., has just added half-and-half to its line of products.
The company's half-and-half, made of the usual combination of milk and cream with 10 percent butterfat, is not ultra-pasteurized and does not contain additives.
Most other brands contain additives like disodium phosphate, sodium citrate and guar gum, which are listed on containers. (These and other additives are also in many brands of heavy cream.)
Ronnybrook's half-and-half also has a richer fresh cream flavor.
But at about $2.50 a pint, plus $1 deposit on the bottle, it is more than twice as expensive as other brands.
It is available at the Union Square Greenmarket and Agata &amp; Valentina, 1505 First Avenue (79th Street).


Man Recalls Sudden Drop on Coney Island Ride That Hurt 13
A Manhattan man said the Coney Island thrill ride that spun out of control on Saturday, injuring 13 people, also malfunctioned one month earlier while he was aboard.
Tony Trout, a 30-year-old computer programmer, said the ride, the Hell Hole, which spins so fast that the centrifugal force pushes people against the wall, suddenly slowed on June 25, causing him to drop eight feet.


Waco on Line: A Backward Look
A selection of The Times's reporting of the principal events at Waco, along with recent articles from the Congressional hearings, is available on line from @times, The Times's service on America Online.
Software and information: (800) 548-5201.


Aristide Appreciated Carter's Aid in Haiti
To the Editor:
Tom F. Driver, in his letter on former President Carter's role in Haiti ("Carter's Done Little for Aristide's Haiti," July 28), perpetuates four erroneous myths and creates a new one.


International Technology Corp.(ITX,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Elscint Ltd.(ELT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: THE BUSINESS -- Broadcast Networks Come Back Strong; An Old Medium Holds New Luster for Buyers
Only a short time removed from persistent predictions of their imminent demise, the broadcast networks have become the hottest properties in the media marketplace.
Many analysts predicted that yesterday's $5.4 billion deal by the Westinghouse Electric Corporation for CBS Inc. was only a prelude to a bidding war for that network.
And coming just a day after the Walt Disney Company agreed to take over Capital Cities/ABC for $19 billion, the Westinghouse move was widely interpreted as part of a sudden hunger for network acquisition.


Excerpts From President's News Conference at White House
Following are excerpts from the question-and-answer portion of President Clinton's news conference at the White House today, as recorded by Reuters and the Federal Information Systems Corporation, a private transcription service: Opening Statement
Looking over the last few days, it is clear that this Congress is on the wrong track.
I began the year hoping to make bipartisan progress on balancing the budget, on reducing paperwork, reforming regulations and welfare.
And therefore, I was very pleased last week when a bipartisan majority voted to reject the extreme anti-environment provisions adopted in the House committee.
That was the right thing to do.
But then the lobbyists for the polluters went to work.
They got the leadership of the House of Representatives to call the bill back up, and last night in a remarkable exercise of special interest power, the House voted to gut environmental and public health protections.
It was a stealth attack on our environment in the guise of a budget bill.
The bill would effectively end Federal enforcement of the Clean Water Act and the Clean Air Act, a bill that my Republican predecessor said was his proudest legislative achievement.
It allows poisons in our drinking water, raw sewage on our beaches, oil refineries to pollute, and limits a community's right to know what chemicals are toxic which are released in their neighborhoods.
It would be bad for our children, our health and our environment.
This is Washington's special interest politics at its most effective and at its worst.
Even before these 17 special interest provisions were added, the bill had already dramatically undercut environmental protection by cutting environmental enforcement in half.
You don't need to damage the environment to balance the budget.
Our budget demonstrates that, and the budget the American people get out of this session of Congress ought to demonstrate that.
In the past few days, a battalion of lobbyists has swarmed Capitol Hill, exerting enormous pressure to save these loopholes.
I said I would use the power of my office to help people, not polluters.
I believe we can protect the environment and grow the economy.
So on this so-called environmental bill, my message to the American people should be very, very clear.
Don't worry.
We'll make common sense reforms, but the minute this polluter's protection act hits my desk, I will veto it.
One of the most interesting things that has received not too much notice in the last few days is that while Congress has been taking care of the special interests, it's also taking care of itself.
It is way behind schedule on virtually every budget bill in the hope, apparently, of enforcing a choice at the end of this fiscal year, between shutting the Government down and adopting extreme budget cuts, which will be bad for our country, bad for our economy, and bad for our future.
Apparently they don't even plan on letting the American people see their planned Medicare cuts until the last possible minute.
But one bill, wouldn't you know it, is right on schedule.
The bill that funds the Congress, its staff and its operations.
I don't think Congress should take care of its own business before it takes care of the people's business.
If the Congressional leadership follows through on its plan to send me its own funding bill before it finishes work on the rest of the budget, I will be compelled to veto it.
I want to work with Congress to pass a balanced budget to protect the health and security of the American people.
A balanced budget that strengthens our economy and raises the incomes of our people and the future prospects of our children. . . .
Q.
Mr.
President, your policies and your judgment calls appear to be under siege on Capitol Hill; Waco, Whitewater, Bosnia, social programs, and so forth.
How debilitating has this been on you personally, on your administration, on the country?
And obviously you're whistling in the dark if you think you're going to have common ground.
A.
I disagree.
It's not been debilitating, it's been invigorating.
And I wouldn't be so surprised.
There are two significant things that I would say, big issues that have become clear in the last few days.
One is, you can see who's in control in this Congress.
Who's in control of the people that compel this unusual revote on the environmental issues.
You see the story on the N.R.A. today.
No gun control will be voted out of committee or on the floor of the House.
I'm sure glad we got the Brady bill and the assault weapons ban first.
And I still think we ought to have a ban on the cop-killer bullets.
You see, we're investigating -- this Congress -- is investigating the A.A.R.P. and letting the N.R.A. run one of its own investigations.
So you see who's in control.
That's the first thing you see.
The second thing you see is more hopeful.
There were, after all, 50 Republicans who broke ranks in the House and said that they would put the environment ahead of party.
Senator Dole, yesterday, said that in Vermont at the Governor's Conference that he wanted to pass a welfare reform bill free of the extremist provisions which the members of his caucus, some of them, had demanded that he put on a welfare reform bill.
And so we may be moving toward finding common ground in welfare reform.
So you see two things: you see who's in control, and it's not good.
You see some people feeling uncomfortable about it and we may be able to make some progress. . . .
Q.
Speaking of special interest, do you feel that the Speaker is dragging his feet on the bipartisan campaign finance reform commission, and what else are you willing to do to make sure that that happens?
A.
Dragging his feet is an apt but inadequate description of what has happened.
I mean, we shook hands on that in New Hampshire.
I thought it was a fairly simple deal.
The man said that the gentleman asked this question.
He said, why don't you guys do a base closing commission?
We said O.K.
Five days later I wrote a letter to the Speaker, I didn't get an answer.
Five weeks later, I wrote, I said again, O.K., here are two people that are the counter people that I would put on this commission and I would like for them to get with someone you designate and we'll set it up. . . .
Q.
Mr.
President, we know that you have just met with the leadership to try and make your, your veto of the Bosnia arms embargo lifting stick.
But in the event that it doesn't and not knowing as we speak what the size of the margin is going to be, what is the next step?
What else would you look to do?
A.
Whatever the vote is, we still might sustain a veto.
But I was encouraged by a few people who told me that they had decided on reflection that it was not the thing to do now.
The Rapid Reaction Force, after all, is showing some strength there.
And I would remind you that the only thing that has ever worked in the last two and a half years is when the Bosnian Serbs thought the United Nations would permit NATO and the Americans who are working with NATO, to use air power to stop the aggression so that there would have to be a negotiated settlement.
And in the last several days, the last couple weeks in Gorazde, you know we've gotten five convoys through, there has been no assault on it.
And I think that this new strategy will work if we can hammer out a negotiated settlement and there is a new effort there. . . .
Q.
Can you tell us, first of all, why you want to veto the telecommunications bill?
I understand that you're concerned about concentration of media power.
And in regard to that, can you comment on the merger yesterday between ABC and Walt Disney and the proposed merger, it may happen today, between CBS and Westinghouse, and whether you see this concentration of power happen?
A.
Well, I think first of all, you have to take on these mergers under our law, and as a matter of economics, you have to take them case-by-case and analyze them.
And all I know about the proposed mergers is what I read this morning when I woke up.
So I can't comment on that.
I do think it would be an error to set up a situation in the United States where one person could own half the television stations in the country or half of any of the media outlets and we don't have a Fairness Doctrine anymore and we don't have----.
Particularly if we took the Federal Government out of, all the Federal agencies out of any kind of maintenance of competition, or maintenance of competitive environment, taking the Justice Department out of it, for example.
I would remind you that we have the most successful telecommunications operations in the world, partly because we have had the proper balance between a highly competitive environment and an openness to new forces and new technologies and new entries in it from all around the world.
I want very badly to sign the telecommunications bill.
We tried to pass one, this Administration did during the last session of Congress. . . .


Our Prisons and China's
To the Editor:
Harry Wu is being detained by the Beijing Government partly because of his criticism of the use of prison labor in China for the manufacture of goods such as children's toys for export to the West.
Today I read in "Alabama to Make Prisoners Break Rocks" (news article, July 29) that Alabama state prison inmates in chain gangs will be made to break rocks in the searing sun for 10 hours a day, and that there is no use for the crushed rock, other than to increase the punishment for prisoners.
Is our criticism of human rights violations in Chinese prisons hypocritical?
MICHAEL RUTTENBERG  Berkeley, Calif., July 29, 1995


Rethinking the Handling of Mild Concussions
PEOPLE who suffer mild concussions are usually told that their symptoms -- dizziness, headache and difficulty concentrating -- will fade away in a couple of days.
They should simply go home, put up their feet and resume work Monday morning.
But that advice is often misleading, neurologists say, and leads to a great deal of frustration among the significant percentage of people who have lingering problems.
Moreover, it can play a role in making some people believe that they are permanently disabled.


Israel Moves Toward Taking Hamas Figure From U.S. Custody
The Israeli Government took the first legal steps today to bring the man identified as the leader of the Hamas movement from the United States to Israel for trial.
But what might have been a milestone a few years ago in Israel's battle with Palestinian terrorism was now accompanied by open anxiety over the political cost of prosecuting the man, Mousa Mohamed Abu Marzook, and the uncertainty over whether he would be imprisoned in the end.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Jul 28
Jul 21
Jul 29
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.7
7.8
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.0
3.3
Gasoline stocks
207.4
207.8
210.8
Distillate stocks
120.6
120.0
129.3
Crude imports, daily
7.5
6.7
8.2
Product imports, daily
1.7
1.7
1.8
Crude stocks
313.7
310.4
327.6
Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.6
Refinery utilization (%)
93.8
94.1
94.1
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Boston Chicken Inc.(BOST,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 9


IN PERFORMANCE: JAZZ
Captivated by the Power Of Dance Rhythms  Soul Coughing Summerstage
Soul Coughing, a group that takes bits of rap, rock and funk and throws them together, showed up at Summerstage in Central Park on Saturday afternoon to play for an audience that had come to hear rap.
Popular music crowds rarely have patience for music outside their particular taste, but oddly, the rap audience didn't leave, drawn into the group's good-natured dance music.


Mets Erase Last Traces Of Harazin's Grand Plan
Al Harazin was sitting in the stands at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles that evening in 1992 when he heard his name echo over the public-address system.
The invisible voice was asking the Mets' general manager to report to the team's clubhouse.
"When you're paged, all sorts of things go through your mind," Harazin said yesterday.
"Something happened to your daughter or to your wife. I couldn't imagine what it could be. I raced down to the clubhouse and found Saberhagen with his hand in a bucket. He had just been pulled from the game. I was assured it was nothing serious, that it was just irritated. It didn't turn out that way."


Burlington Industries (BUR,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 1


ALLIES EXTENDING SHIELD TO PROTECT ALL BOSNIA HAVENS
The NATO allies today extended the protection of Western air power to all the so-called safe areas in Bosnia, including Sarajevo, warning that attacks on the enclaves would meet a "firm and rapid" bombing campaign.
The decision to broaden the Western threat against rebel Serbs' aggression reflected a growing sense among the allies that the recent show of Western resolve may be succeeding.


Mayor Gives Final Approval For East Harlem Supermarket
After months of bitter debate over a proposal to build a Pathmark supermarket in East Harlem, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced yesterday that he had given final approval to the project, clearing away the last obstacle to building the store.
The $13 million supermarket has been planned since 1991 for a desolate lot on 125th Street, but construction has been held up because of opposition from Hispanic merchants in the neighborhood.
Construction could start next spring, Mr.
Giuliani said.


Man Accused of Threatening Becker and Manager Arrested
A man accused of threatening BORIS BECKER and the tennis star's manager has been arrested, the police said yesterday in Munich.
Becker took the threats seriously and kept his wife and young son out of Germany for months last year as more than 20 calls making threats and demanding money went to the Munich office of his manager, AXEL MAYER-WOELDEN.


House G.O.P.'s Split to Delay Bank Bills
After an exchange of sharply worded notes that settled nothing, House Republican leaders have agreed to postpone action on any banking legislation until at least late September or October.
Representative Gerald B. H. Solomon of upstate New York, the powerful chairman of the House Rules Committee, said in an interview today that because of a dispute among Republicans over insurance, banking legislation "is not on the agenda" before the House's scheduled adjournment on Friday for an August recess.
Bankers and their allies had tried over the last week to arrange a vote in the next several days.


Simon Property Group Inc.(SPG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Dixie Yarns Inc.(DXYN,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Don't Blame Loft Tenants for Landlords Who Won't Obey Law
To the Editor:
A July 24 news article paints a realistic picture of the plight facing artists and other loft tenants in Brooklyn and Lower Manhattan.


Corrections
An article on July 16 about NATO policy toward Bosnia referred incorrectly to a mortar attack that killed 68 people in a Sarajevo marketplace in February 1994.
A United Nations investigation could not conclude which faction fired the mortar shell; Serbian responsibility has not been definitively established.


Big Deals, With Journalism Thrown In
As the news about the mergers that are reshaping the television news industry continues to tumble out, public affairs journalism seems to have been swept away by America's new mania for corporate bigness.
Few of the early accounts of Disney's deal with Capital Cities/ABC and the sale of CBS to Westinghouse Electric have made more than passing references to the implications for the future of independent news gathering.


The House Becomes a Playground
In what has become the rule rather than the exception, members of the House of Representatives spent 15 hours in debate today, scheduled a series of votes around midnight and then plodded wearily into more debate.
Since Speaker Newt Gingrich assumed power in January, the floor of the House has been the front line in his Republican revolution.
But saddled with a breakneck schedule, a herculean workload and a string of nights like this one, when many members merge familial duties with their electoral ones, the battlefront this summer has come closer to resembling a playground.


Serv-Tech Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


WorldCorp Inc.(WOA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Southland Corp.(SLCM,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


MascoTech Inc.(MSX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Liberty Financial Cos. (L,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CBS Employees Unsettled by Westinghouse Deal
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation's announcement on Tuesday of its agreement to buy CBS Inc. left many questions unanswered -- and many of the networks' employees unsettled.
Yesterday, there were still few details and nothing to calm the people at CBS.
Westinghouse has not detailed who will manage CBS, what its vision and strategy is, or even what the network will be called after the planned $5.4 billion buyout is completed.
Indeed, some analysts and people inside CBS wondered yesterday whether Westinghouse was more interested in acquiring CBS's television and radio stations than in revitalizing the languishing network.


Around the Killing Zone Of the War in the Pacific
"Victory in the Pacific" is an upbeat title for a grim tour of the killing grounds where many thousands of Americans, their allies and the Japanese enemy lost their lives in World War II.
The nominal guides are Dan Rather and Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf, CBS News comrades in arms from European battlefields, but the most vivid accounts come from those who were there.
Beginning with Pearl Harbor, where 2,400 Americans died, and the retreats from Manila, Singapore and other Allied outposts, the program brings back the dire days of 1941 and 1942, when the Japanese were masters of the Pacific.
General Schwarzkopf says that in those early weeks the battle-hardened Japanese soldier "was probably the better fighting man."


Wynn's International Inc.(WN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


H. H. Peckham, 84; Was an Authority On Rare Americana
Howard Henry Peckham, a historian of colonial and revolutionary America and an authority on rare Americana, died on July 6 at the Carolina Village retirement center in Hendersonville, N.C.
He was 84 and had retired to Hendersonville in 1977.
His death was reported this week by the University of Michigan, where he was the second director of the Clements Library, an important center for the documentation and study of the country's early history.


Law Enforcement Sting Fit Right Into the Neighborhood, Almost
The couple who moved into the small brick colonial at 60 Alden Court in December seemed nice enough, but they sure had their share of household crises, neighbors recalled.
Almost daily, it seemed, repairmen were at the home to fix the furnace, clean the chimney or revive an appliance.
Fourteen different repairmen, in fact, worked on the washing machine.


Foamex International Inc.(FMXI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Californians Can Put Civil Rights Back on Track; To Open Doors
To the Editor:
Glenn C. Loury (Op-Ed, July 26), who claims that the moral high ground on affirmative action is to ignore race and gender in recruiting job candidates and government contractors, suffers from an ivory tower understanding of the real world.


Tyco Intl. Ltd.(TYC,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Foley, Back in Uniform, Aims to Play the Game
When things are going badly, when it's the end-of-a-season nose dive, the fans want the young quarterback -- especially one who has never been bad -- mostly because he has never played.
Nothing has gone badly for the Jets yet in this second week of summer camp.
But Coach Rich Kotite today gave Glenn Foley the biggest opportunity he has had since joining the Jets as their final draft pick a year ago.
He will play the entire second half against the Buccaneers Saturday night, when the Jets open their preseason in Tampa.


A Nissan Shift To Porter/Novelli
Nissan North America in Torrance, Calif., a unit of the Nissan Motor Company, has named Porter/ Novelli in Los Angeles to handle public relations for its Nissan and Infiniti lines, with billings estimated at more than $1 million.
For the last 20 years the account was at Chiat/Day Communications in Venice, Calif., the public relations division of Chiat/ Day that was formerly known as Bob Thomas &amp; Associates.


Northwest Natural Gas Co.(NWNG,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


First Colony (FCL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


In Such a Heat Wave, Familiarity Breeds Records
Yesterday, New York City used a record amount of electricity.
Here is electricity use in megawatts on other record days and the high temperature.
Article, page B6.


Corrections
An obituary on Monday about Les Elgart, trumpet player and leader of a big band, misstated the band's plans.
Joerene Elgart, his wife, who is its longtime manager, said the band would indeed continue to perform.


CAE Inc. reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


U.S. Bonds Up on Outlook For More Japanese Buyers
Treasury prices surged yesterday in a rally fueled by the prospect of more Japanese investors entering the market to compete for Government securities.
Earlier, the Japanese Government surprised financial markets by announcing measures to ease controls on Japanese financial institutions to encourage overseas investments.
The plan heartened traders in New York, who bet that it could mean increased Japanese investment in the Treasury market.


For a 28-Year-Old, a Big Title on Wall St.
Bear, Stearns &amp; Company has hired away Jason N. Ader, a 28-year-old gaming industry analyst, from Smith Barney Inc., using a managing director's title and a sweet compensation package as bait.
The hiring was notable because of Mr.
Ader's age.
While the average age at most Wall Street firms is in the low 30's, there are few 28-year-old managing directors, particularly among research analysts.
Mr.
Ader, whose telephone message at Smith Barney said he would be at work at Bear, Stearns after today, could not be reached for comment yesterday.
Smith Barney is a unit of the Travelers Group.


Stephen Roth, 79, A Rights Official Of Jewish Congress
Stephen Roth, a London-based human rights official for the World Jewish Congress, died last Thursday in Royal Free Hospital in London.
A London resident, he was 79.
The cause of death was a heart attack, a spokesman for the American Jewish Congress, Stephen Steiner, said Tuesday.


Pacific Enterprises (PET,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Fire Rages at Brooklyn Navy Yard


Californians Can Put Civil Rights Back on Track
To the Editor:
In "Affirmative Action and the Voter" (Op-Ed, July 31), Louis Harris uses the usual obfuscatory Newspeak, which substitutes "unqualified" for "less qualified," implies that the new preferences are not preferences at all and suggests that it is possible to give an advantage to one person without disadvantaging another.
That is patently impossible and the big lie at the heart of what today is called "affirmative action."


'Brothers McMullen' And Opening Doors
It was only six months ago that Edward Burns was working as a messenger for a television show in New York City, living in what he calls a grungy apartment on Bank Street in the West Village and becoming increasingly nervous about his prospects as a writer and director in the movie industry.
"I was writing screenplays for six years," said the 27-year-old film maker.
"I just wasn't getting my foot in the door."


Beame's Goal: Setting History Straight
WHEN it was almost over and the guests were on the sorbet, Abraham D. Beame stood up to accept his gift.
Two of his old public relations aides handed him a lifesaver, the aquatic kind.
Written on its white face was: "Abe Beame, a NYC Lifesaver."
Everyone applauded, and Mr.
Beame, 89 years old now, smiled and posed dutifully for pictures.
Then he stepped to the podium.
"I want to thank you," said New York City's 104th Mayor, in his familiarly uninflected tones.
"But the city was never in the position of the Titanic."


St. John's Names Manetta
St.
John's has named EDWARD J. MANETTA Jr. to replace JACK KAISER as director of athletics effective Oct. 1.
Kaiser announced his retirement last June.
Manetta, a St.
John's graduate, was a senior vice president at Edelman Public Relations Worldwide in Chicago, an international marketing firm.
Manetta also served five years as director of athletics at DePaul University.


Phyllis Brooks, 80, Actress and Hostess
Phyllis Brooks, a popular film and stage actress in the 1930's and 40's, died on Tuesday at her home in Cape Neddick, Me.
She was 80.
Miss Brooks, a native of Boise, Idaho, started her career as an artist's model in New York, posing for the magazine illustrator James Montgomery Flagg and others.
Hollywood discovered her in 1934 as the "Ipana toothpaste girl," and she appeared in Sidney Toler's Charlie Chan series and the Shirley Temple films "Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm" and "Little Miss Broadway." Unhappy with her roles, she tried her luck on Broadway, and succeeded with the George S. Kaufman-Edna Ferber play "Stage Door" (1936) and the hit Ethel Merman musical "Panama Hattie" (1940).


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  CHINA ACCUSES U.S.
OF SPYING  China accused two United States Air Force officers of spying and ordered them expelled, an incident that could hardly have come at a worse time for Washington's deteriorating relations with Beijing.
A1  SOUTH AFRICA FIRMS SEEK BLACKS  Many South African companies are competing furiously to recruit the country's limited number of skilled blacks.
Young professional blacks are being wooed with salaries that are 20 to 50 percent higher than their white counterparts.
A1  OUTLOOK GROWS WORSE IN CROATIA  The mood of diplomats and U.N. officials trying to avert a wider war between Croatia and rebel Serbs ranges from "not optimistic" to "very pessimistic." Whether their fears become reality may be known within the next few days.
A12  TRACING ASSETS LOST IN WAR  Giving hope to Jews seeking to recover wealth belonging to victims of the Holocaust, Swiss bankers say they plan a search of all dormant accounts, lock boxes and holdings from the World War II era.
A3  EX-C.I.A.
AGENT AND MEXICO KILLING  A central figure in the assassination last year of the leading presidential candidate of Mexico's governing party had previously been a paid C.I.A. informer, American intelligence officials say.
A7  Colombia's Defense Minister quit in a widening drug scandal.
A6  Israeli settlers continued their protests on the West Bank.
A9  The head of the East German secret police was freed from jail.
A13  Bandar Seri Begawan Journal: Living the good life in Brunei.
A4  National A16-23, B8-10  PACKWOOD HEARINGS REJECTED  The Senate rejected Democrats' effort to order public hearings into misconduct accusations against Senator Bob Packwood.
A1  SOY'S BENEFITS HERALDED  Researchers reported that soy protein significantly lowers cholesterol levels in people with moderately high to high cholesterol.
A1  WHITE HOUSE ACCUSED ON SUICIDE  A former Deputy Attorney General told the Senate Whitewater panel that the White House had compromised the integrity of the investigation of Vincent Foster's death.
A1  WACO HEARINGS BACKFIRE  News Analysis: Democrats prevented Republicans from gaining much traction in their efforts to use the Waco hearings to embarrass the Clinton Administration.
B9  STORM LARGELY SPARES FLORIDA  Hurricane Erin crossed Florida and delivered a far less severe blow than feared.
But after being downgraded to a tropical storm, Erin regained strength over the Gulf of Mexico.
A16  MCVEIGH SISTER TESTIFIES  The sister of Timothy J. McVeigh testified before the Federal grand jury investigating the Oklahoma City bombing.
A16  SEEKING A LESSON IN BASE CLOSING  A small Air Force base in Ohio is enmeshed in President Clinton's 1996 campaign hopes in California, where it is touted as a promising way of turning Government enterprise into private enterprise.
A16  POLICE LAB IS CALLED FLAWED  A defense witness in the Simpson trial tified that the Los Angeles Police Department's lab had a "chronic" contamination problem.
A18  LAWMAKERS' FAMILIES SUFFER  The House's breakneck schedule, a herculean workload and a string of nights has forced many members to merge familial duties with their legislative ones.
B8  TOBACCO ADS NEAR SCHOOLS  A study found significantly more tobacco advertisements in stores near California schools than in stores farther away.
B10  The airline Markair was grounded over maintenance problems.
A17  Ex-foes helped L. Douglas Wilder retire campaign debts.
A21  The depletion of ozone over Antarctica has steadily worsened.
A23  Metro Digest B1  BATTLE OVER TRANSIT PASSES  With the city no longer paying for transit passes for almost 500,000 students, Mayor Giuliani and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority are locked in a standoff that M.T.A. officials say will force them to kill the program.
A1  SEX-HARASSMENT DEAL  Del Laboratories, a Long Island cosmetics company, has agreed to settle sexual harassment claims brought by 15 women employees against its chief executive.
A1  Business Digest D1  Home Section C1-10  House Proud: the confessions of an 'Aqua Frau.' C1  At home with Burt Rutan.
C1  Parent &amp; Child: Natural birth vs. on-time delivery.
C1  Sports B12-17  Baseball: Yanks' home winning streak ends.
B13  Mets fall to Reds.
B15  Obituaries B11  Arts/Entertainment C11-18  Artists' colony in northern Manhattan.
C11  Edward Burns, of "The Brothers McMullen." C11  Wrecking ball nears the old Fillmore East.
C11  Music: The Pop Life C12  Books: "Sleepers." C16  Television: Touring killing zones of the war in the Pacific.
C16  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials  Mr.
Chirac's nuclear blunder.
Judgments on Waco.
Pathmark: the right move.
Letters  Maureen Dowd: Mickey Mouse news.
Bill Kovach: Big deals, with journalism thrown in.
Mollie Dickenson: A bipartisan fiasco.
Bridge C16  Chronicle B18  Crossword C12


Bridge
There was an upset in the Spingold Knockout Team Championship here Tuesday at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.
Bill Root of Boca Raton, Fla., Richard Pavlicek of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and Michael Polowan of Manhattan, who won the Vanderbilt Knockout in Phoenix four months ago, were teamed here with Jerry Goldfein of Lincolnwood, Ill., who won the Grand National Team title here Saturday.
They lost in the Spingold by 19 imps to Steve Price of Napa, Calif., Martin de Bruin of Northfield, N.J., Bob Etter of Sacramento, Calif., Jim Hayashi of San Jose, Calif., and Robert Morris of Houston.
Thirty-two teams survive from an original 87.


Knee Surgery Shelves Dykstra
Philadelphia Phillies outfielder LENNY DYKSTRA will miss the rest of the season after undergoing arthroscopic surgery on his right knee yesterday to relieve arthritis under his kneecap.


CHRONICLE
Something about Andy Warhol still draws people together more than eight years after his death.
Some 250 of his friends and colleagues are expected to assemble at the Gershwin Hotel on East 27th Street on Sunday to celebrate what would have been his 67th birthday.
The party is the idea of URS JAKOB, the hotel's proprietor and the owner of a Warhol-signed soup can (literally a can, not a painting).
One can does not a party make, so Mr.
Jakob broadened the theme to embrace Warhol's 1960's prediction that in the future everyone would have 15 minutes of fame.
And he invited many people meeting that description.


Balkan Update
Who they are, where they live, and what they've been doing: a scorecard of the players in the Balkans.
Page A12.


Korean Survivors of Van Crash Help to Bury Their Dead
After the mourners had drifted in twos and threes from the cemetery, a small group of friends lingered behind yesterday to say their own goodbyes to Elizabeth Cha and Ha Joon Chung, the two Korean Sunday school teachers who died in a van accident as they returned home from a weekend outing.
Four young men kneeled alongside the adjoining graves at St.
Charles Cemetery in Farmingdale, L.I. and prayed, their heads bowed.
Two women standing nearby embraced each other, squeezing tighter as their friends sprinkled fistfuls of soil on top of one coffin.


The 'Ace' Of the Staff Takes a Beating
Now that Bret Saberhagen is pitching for the Colorado Rockies, nominations are being accepted to be the ace of the Mets' pitching staff.
Some think it could be Bobby Jones.
But in his outing against the Reds tonight, Jones pitched more like a fourth or fifth starter than a stopper.
The Reds tagged him for six runs in five and one-third innings and cruised to a 6-2 victory, handing the Mets their eighth loss in 11 games.


Campaign Misguided, Not Illegal
County and local officials say the police union was misguided in mounting a campaign asking town employees to contribute part of their paycheck to the family of a suspended officer, Ronald M. Johnstone, who was convicted of Federal brutality charges on July 10.
But Edward DeFazio, the first assistant prosecutor for Hudson County, said yesterday that there appeared to be no official misconduct or impropriety.


Senate Rejects Attempt to Force Hearings on Packwood Charges
By a narrow margin, the Senate today spurned a call for public hearings about the accusations against Senator Bob Packwood after a partisan debate that was clearly painful for a number of senators.
The 52-to-48 vote against open hearings generally followed party lines, with only one Democrat, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, siding with Mr.
Packwood, an Oregon Republican who is chairman of the Senate Finance Committee.
Three Republicans broke party ranks in opposing Mr.
Packwood.


Lawyer Turns Himself In
A lawyer who disappeared last May after being accused of stealing more than $500,000 from his clients turned himself in to Canadian authorities and was flown back to New Jersey yesterday.
The acting Bergen County Prosecutor, Charles R. Buckley, said Ronald M. Salzer, who practiced in Hackensack, stole the money from the trust accounts of some two dozen clients.


Old Republic Intl.  Corp.(ORI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A. James Donahue, Investment Banker, 54
A.
James Donahue, an investment banker for Merrill Lynch, died on July 23 while canoeing on Middle Saranac Lake in Harrietstown, N.Y.
He was 54.
The cause was a heart attack, according to Merrill Lynch.


CHRONICLE
ROGER CLINTON, the President's half brother, addressed a seminar in Washington on the subject of dysfunctional families and opened by saying that he did not want to talk about dysfunctional families.
"I'm not here with a right or wrong way, or a good or bad way," The Associated Press quoted him as saying on Tuesday at the Learning Annex, where he promoted his new book, "Growing Up Clinton" (Summit Publishing Group).


Seaboard Corp.(SEB,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 17


Police Officers Investigated After a Gunshot Incident
It was a routine police radio call in Brooklyn, a report of a gunshot victim in an apartment on Ocean Parkway.
When police officers arrived, they not only found a woman wounded in the stomach by gunfire, but something out of the ordinary: an off-duty police officer from their precinct.
Yesterday, police officials said that the shooting on the evening of July 2 was never reported, even though the responding officers took the woman to the hospital.
Investigators said the two officers had instead covered up the shooting in an apparent attempt to protect their colleague, and yesterday all three were suspended from the force.


With Joe Isuzu out of the picture, a 'Spielberg moment' helps an auto maker stay offbeat.
IF Steven Spielberg made commercials, the ads might look like a strikingly imaginative campaign by Goodby, Silverstein &amp; Partners for American Isuzu Motors.
Hints of Mr.
Spielberg's "Close Encounters of the Third Kind," "Jurassic Park" and even "Raiders of the Lost Ark" can be found in the new commercials for the small trucks known as sport utility vehicles.
And a spot depicting a toy store on steroids has what the agency calls "a Spielberg moment."


Value Health Inc.(VH,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Pathmark: The Right Move
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has now approved the construction of a Pathmark supermarket on a desolate city-owned lot in East Harlem.
His decision removes the last obstacle to a store the neighborhood needs.
It also means that Mr.
Giuliani has chosen to set aside narrow political considerations that might have killed the project.
It was the right choice, not least because it sends a reassuring message to other corporations that might want to do business in New York City.
The process has not been easy.
Surveys suggest that a majority of the area's residents, both black and Hispanic, want the 53,000-square-foot supermarket and the 200 jobs it is expected to generate.
But for months the project has been caught up in an emotional and sometimes nasty turf war that pitted East Harlem's small-market owners, most of them Hispanic, against the black-dominated nonprofit development consortium behind the deal.


Sysco Corp.(SYY,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 1


U.S. Long Distance Corp.(USLD,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Tokyo Acts in Unusually Direct Manner
The Japanese Government took the financial markets by storm today, introducing a package of measures meant to bolster the dollar and backing up its words with cash.
The Government's actions -- announcing the measures, which were aimed at increasing Japanese investment abroad; intervening in the currency market during the Japanese trading day, and then intervening again when trading began in the United States -- were part of a cooperative effort with the United States, and the dollar rallied.


Gloria Chadwick, 63, Official In U.S. and International Skiing
Gloria Chadwick, an international ski racing administrator who was especially dedicated to furthering women's cross-country competition, died on Sunday at her home in Lake Placid, N.Y.
She was 63.
Her brother, Norman Chadwick of Mount Vernon, Wash., said she died of cancer.


Saving the Artistry of a Visionary
FOLK environments are fragile things.
At the Anderson Johnson Faith Mission in Newport News, Va., part of the building is salvageable, and part is not.
In 1923, when Mr.
Johnson was 8, he had a vision from God, who told him to go out and preach, said Deborah McLeod, curator of the Peninsula Fine Arts Center, a nonprofit community arts center in Newport News.
In the two-story building where Mr.
Johnson lived from the 1970's until last year, he painted the walls with angels and people (left), inspired by his visions.
On Sundays, he held services in the mission, in the Ivy Avenue area of the city's southeast section.
In 1993, the city government decided to build three recreation centers, including one where the mission stands, and paid Mr.
Johnson $50,000 for the house and an adjacent one that he also owned.
In September, Mr.
Johnson moved out -- and Ms.
McLeod organized an effort to save the murals.


Roadmaster Industries(RDM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Book War: Shops vs. Superstores; As Chains Grow, Struggling Small Stores Stress Expertise
Like a captain going down with the ship, Encarnita Quinlan stood among the half-empty shelves of Endicott Booksellers and gazed bravely at the bargain hunters picking over the remains of her store, which is closing after 14 years in business on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
A sympathetic customer approached and asked, "Heartbroken?" Ms.
Quinlan threw an arm across her chest, struggled for the right word, and settled for "yes."
There is quite a bit of heartbreak among New York City's independent booksellers these days.
With the arrival of Barnes &amp; Noble superstores, places like Endicott's are finding themselves up against the wall, unable to offer the discounts or carry the number of titles found at Barnes &amp; Noble stores, or to serve caffe lattes and flavored iced teas in spiffy mezzanine cafes.


Sceptre Resources (SRL,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Judgments on Waco
Ten days of hearings into the disastrous Federal encounters with the Branch Davidian cult near Waco, Tex., have confirmed what seemed clear from the start.
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms executed an arrest-and-search plan in a grossly stupid manner that cost the lives of four agents.
Then the F.B.I. took over and, after a 51-day siege, staged an imprudent and needless raid with tanks and tear gas.
The final fact is that Attorney General Janet Reno still has no explanation that would excuse her rush to a needless confrontation.
The hearings had some value in establishing that the Attorney General possessed no information that would make her performance look wiser.
The hearings will also put down some of the conspiracy theories fanned by gun lobbyists and right-wing politicians in the two years since the debacle.


Citgo Petroleum Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS;
The ITT Corporation and Dow Jones &amp; Company have agreed to pay New York City $207 million to acquire the city-owned television station WNYC-TV, Channel 31, people involved in the negotiations said yesterday.
The companies plan to transform the station into a 24-hour sports, financial news and entertainment service, they said.
The goal is to make what is now a public television station into a superstation, like WTBS in Atlanta and WGN in Chicago, that can be beamed by satellite to cable systems around the country.


Yankee Energy System Inc.(YES,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Corrections
An editorial last Saturday, "Megan's Law, Rewritten," about the New Jersey Supreme Court's decision upholding that law, incorrectly identified the dissenting justice.
He is Gary S. Stein.
It also misstated the place where the murder of 7-year-old Megan Kanka occurred; it was in Hamilton Township, not Hamilton County.


AT HOME WITH: Burt Rutan; Slipping the Bonds Of Earth and Sky
AMERICA'S most innovative and idiosyncratic designer of airplanes, rocket ships and assorted other fast-moving objects is explaining why he lives in a three-story hexagonal pyramid.
"Less wetted area," Burt Rutan declares.


Lilco Demands Suffolk County Pay a Refund of $83 Million
The Long Island Lighting Company today demanded that Suffolk County immediately repay $83 million for overassessing the defunct Shoreham nuclear power plant.
In a court order served on County Executive Robert J. Gaffney, county legislators and other top officials, the county was directed to pay or face legal sanctions.


Echo Bay Mines Ltd.(ECO,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Nell Carter In a Variety Of Moods
Some singers have voices that proverbially shatter glass.
Nell Carter's singing is more like a laser beam that can break down doors, crack safes and even lift the roofs off houses.
Ms.
Carter's voice actually has two prongs.
Her signature sound is a piercing, sassy, naughty-girl wail that recalls the exuberant side of Dinah Washington, but several notches higher in pitch and volume.
Not as familiar but equally potent is a lower register that suggests a blues shouter wise in the ways of dramatic Broadway belting.
It is this less frequently used voice that can evoke tragedy as well as merriment.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Placed Graeme Lloyd, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Sid Roberson, pitcher, from New Orleans of the American Association.


Bail Out Becky First, And So Is Class Kris
Races on the grass for 3-year-old fillies are hard to find, but Saratoga staged two of them today as separate divisions of the Nijana Stakes and came up with two winners who got there by different routes: Class Kris, who had raced only once on grass and finished fourth when she did, and Bail Out Becky, who had run in the money seven times in eight trips on the turf.
Bail Out Becky ran a full second slower in the second division as Shane Sellers rode her to a three-quarter length victory.
The winner, trained by Bill Mott for Sarah K. and Kenneth L. Ramsey, ran the mile and a sixteenth in 1:414/5 , paid $6.30 for $2 as the favorite and outran the second choice, Fashion Star, who had three lengths on Grand Charmer.


Paxar Corp.(PXR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


United Insurance Cos.(UIC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Accounts
*
Home Express, Hayward, Calif., to Goldberg Moser O'Neill, San Francisco, as the first agency to handle its broadcast advertising account.
The billings were estimated at $8 million.
Hubbel &amp; Associates, San Francisco, continues to handle Home Express's newspaper advertising account, with billings estimated at $17 million. *
Schott Brothers Inc., Perth Amboy, N.J., to In-Sync Communications, New York, to handle advertising for the maker of leather outerwear and accessories.
The billings for the account, which was previously inactive, were not disclosed.


STANDOFF IMPERILS FREE M.T.A. PASSES FOR CITY STUDENTS
With the city no longer paying for transit passes for almost 500,000 students, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority are locked in a tense financial standoff that M.T.A. officials say will force them to kill the program.
While Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines and others say they hope political pressure will force either City Hall, the transportation agency or the state to come up with money to issue passes for the coming school year, both the Mayor and M.T.A. executives insist that they cannot afford to do so.


Fleming Cos. (FLM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 15


MCI Reports Rise in Profits And Plan for 7% Staff Cut
The MCI Communications Corporation, while announcing a 21 percent rise in earnings, said yesterday that it would restructure the company, dismissing 2,500 to 3,000 employees, or about 7 percent of the work force, by the end of the year and write off obsolete assets.
Executives of MCI said the restructuring plan would result in a pretax charge of $600 million to $800 million against the company's third-quarter earnings.


Florida Rock Industries (FRK,A) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Californians Can Put Civil Rights Back on Track; Where Dr. King Stood
To the Editor:
Glenn C. Loury (Op-Ed, July 26) perpetuates the common misconception that affirmative action programs violate the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s goal of eliminating discrimination based on race.
In fact, Dr.
King was a strong supporter of affirmative action.


RESULTS PLUS
SWIMMING  Namesnik Wins 400 Medley
Eric Namesnik swam the fastest 400-meter individual medley in the world this year to win in 4 minutes 15.57 seconds last night at the Phillips 66 national championships in Pasadena, Calif.


Loews Corp.(LTR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sola Intl.(SOL,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Native Americans Feel Betrayed Again
To the Editor:
No, freedom is not free. It is not and will never be.


Executive Changes
COOPER INDUSTRIES, Houston, named H. John Riley Jr., its president, to the additional position of chief executive.
SEAGRAM CO. , Montreal, the beverage and entertainment company, named Robert W. Matschullat vice chairman and chief financial officer effective Oct. 1.
Mr.
Matschullat, who will also become a member of Seagram's board, had been at Morgan Stanley, where he was formerly head of worldwide investment banking.
He was also one of six members of the firm's board.


Standard ProductsCo.(SPD,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Knuckleballs and Howe's Meatball Foil the Yanks
Steve Howe has complained lately about distractions and a lack of focus.
But it was location -- or the lack of it -- that cost him yesterday.
Howe gave up a two-run homer to Milwaukee left fielder Dave Nilsson to break a 2-2 eighth-inning tie on a hot afternoon at Yankee Stadium.
And the Brewers rode the seven-plus-inning, five-hit pitching of the knuckleballer Steve Sparks (7-5) to a 5-2 victory, ending the Yankees' season-high home winning streak at seven games.


Murray H. Finley, Labor Leader For Textile Workers, Dies at 73
Murray H. Finley, the labor leader who led the final, innovative campaign that forced the J. P. Stevens Company to accept union contracts in 1980, died on Monday at the University of Michigan Hospital in Ann Arbor.
Mr.
Finley, who was 73, had moved to Ann Arbor after his retirement as president of the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers Union in 1986.


Bomb Suspect Is Invited to Write a Column
Bob Guccione, the publisher of Penthouse, has offered the space in his magazine for a monthly column by the serial killer in the Unabom case.
In a letter, being published today in a full-page advertisement on page D26 of The New York Times, Mr.
Guccione also reminded the bomber that Penthouse was willing to print his lengthy manifesto.
Courting the bomber like an editor trying to lure a coveted writer, Mr.
Guccione wrote of the magazine's journalistic awards and said the offer of at least one unedited page a month would allow the bomber to "continue to proffer your revolutionary philosophy, answer critics and generally interact with the public."


COMPANY BRIEFS
DELPHI PACKARD ELECTRIC SYSTEMS, a unit of General Motors Corp., said that it has entered the South African market by acquiring a 50.1 percent stake in Auto Cable Industries Ltd., South Africa, a wiring harness manufacturer, from Unihold Ltd. and Femco Technology Holdings Ltd., both of South Africa.
Terms of the transaction were not disclosed.
OHIO CASUALTY CORP., Hamilton, Ohio, a holding company, announced that it was pulling out of the life insurance business and would sell its Ohio Life unit for $48.2 million to Americo Life Inc., Kansas City, Mo.


Beazer Homes USA Inc.(BZH,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Gingrich Beards the Lions At Capital Town Meeting
Speaker Newt Gingrich dropped into unfamiliar surroundings tonight as he listened for more than an hour to residents of Washington asking, imploring and begging him to help the city out of its swamp of problems.
Billed as a a discussion education issues in town-meeting style, as part of the House Republicans' attempt to find solutions to decades of urban ills, it quickly became something much more.


Selective Insurance Group (SIGI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


HEALTH BENEFITS FROM SOY PROTEIN
Prepare for the onslaught: soy cookies, soy bread, soy muffins, soy milkshakes, soy pretzels, soy soups and a new, surely improved version of that old unfavorite, the soy burger.
Researchers report today in The New England Journal of Medicine that soy protein significantly lowers cholesterol levels in people with moderately high to high cholesterol.
In fact, the addition of soy protein to either a low-fat or even the ordinary American diet appears to be among the most potent cholesterol-lowering dietary factors yet discovered.
Because elevated cholesterol levels sharply increase the risk of heart attacks and stroke, soy protein may prove a safe, relatively painless and in some cases even tasty weapon in the battle against cardiovascular disease, America's No. 1 killer.


Donahue Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Other People's Houses
To the Editor:
Maureen Dowd's July 30 column, on her anxiety about decorating her new home in the style and to the applause of Martha Stewart, reminded me of a passage in Leo Tolstoy's novel "The Death of Ivan Ilyich."


Santa Cruz Operation (SCOC,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


A Bipartisan Disaster
Although the House hearings on the raid on the Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Tex., started in part as a Republican attempt to embarrass the Clinton Administration, the drama of the emotional testimony from officials and cult members muted the partisanship.
It should have, because the hearings reminded us that the original raid, on Feb. 28, 1993, was planned under the Bush Administration and executed by a bureaucracy that was under Republican supervision for 20 of the previous 24 years.
Waco was a bipartisan disaster.


Calendar: Exhibitions, Tours and Day Trips
A Style Recalled  Jewish Museum, 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92d Street; (212) 423-3230.
"A New England Wooden Synagogue: Building Temple Israel, Greenfield, MA," an exhibition of photographs, models and drawings, starts Sunday and continues through Jan. 14.
The exhibition traces the design process for the structure, which was designed by the architect M. Louis Goodman and evokes the style of the old wooden synagogues of Eastern Europe.
Open Sunday through Thursday, 11 A.M. to 5:45 P.M. (Tuesday until 8 P.M.).
Admission: $7; students and those 65 and older, $5; members, no charge.


Alliant Techsystems Inc.(ATK,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 2


Tax on Designers Is to Be Reduced
ON Dec. 1, it will become just a little bit cheaper to hire an interior designer in New York City.
Last Thursday, Gov.
George E. Pataki signed a bill that repeals the city's 4 percent sales tax on interior decorating and designing services, which has been in effect since 1989.
The state's 4.25 percent sales tax on the same services will remain.


Scientist Quits After Inquiry Into Expenses
A Cornell University professor who is considered an authority on black holes in space is resigning amid questions about his use of Government research money.
The professor, Stuart Shapiro, will resign at the end of the month, reportedly over about $5,000 he acquired in travel reimbursements that were billed to the National Science Foundation.


Swiss Raise Hopes of Tracing Lost War Deposits
Near his home in Backo Petrovo Selo, a small town in Yugoslavia, Simon Kasticher, a Jewish textile merchant, buried a chest of gold coins and gems in the early 1940's.
Anticipating the worst from the German occupation, he also managed to open several numbered bank accounts in Switzerland and transfer much of his wealth there.
In March 1944, Nazi officers came to his hometown and beat him in front of his family, demanding to know where he had hidden the gold and gems.
As his 18-year-old son, Jovan, pleaded with him and his stepmother to tell, the Nazis were led to the chest.
Simon Kasticher was taken away, never to be seen again.
But apparently the Germans never found out about his Swiss bank accounts.


Stock Prices Wane Despite an Early Surge
Despite an early morning surge that pushed stocks sharply higher, many widely followed issues wound up lower yesterday, dragging the major indexes down.
At the opening bell, traders reacted wildly to an announcement by the Japanese Government that it would encourage foreign investment as part of an effort to weaken the yen and strengthen the dollar.
In anticipation of greater Japanese investment in United States stocks, buyers placed orders in huge numbers and the leading averages soared.


CR Kay Suzie People's Choice
Hundreds of fans have been stopping by all week, just wanting to touch her or wish her luck before her nationally televised performance at the Meadowlands on Saturday.
Like most celebrities, getting close to her hasn't been easy.
She is protected around the clock by three armed bodyguards and a guard dog.


MobileMedia Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Scotsman Industries(SCT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Meridian Sports Inc.(MSPO,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


TheraTx Inc.(THTX,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sports of The Times; Pair of Aces Has Become A Hot Hand
IT is premature, and much too muggy, to call this the pennant race just yet.
First things first.
Jack McDowell and David Cone need to get on a roll, begin their own friendly run to October within the Yankees' starting rotation.
Their arms race will determine how the Yankees do in the divisional race.
"From my Mets' days, we sort of thrived on what we did as a staff," Cone said.
"In the short term, we can push each other. Good pitching is contagious."


Mr. Chirac's Nuclear Blunder
France's new President, Jacques Chirac, seems determined to squander the good will that greeted his arrival in office.
Heedless of the damage he is inflicting on French interests and the world's hopes for reining in nuclear weapons, he persists in his plan to resume underground nuclear tests in the South Pacific next month.
Paris says the tests are needed to insure the reliability of France's nuclear weapons stockpile before a comprehensive test-ban treaty is negotiated next year.
That is a specious argument.
Reliability can be adequately assured by computer simulations.
More fundamentally, breaching the de facto test ban now observed by all nuclear powers except China undermines French nuclear security.


4 Pairs of Legs and a Smile
Southern New Jersey's other famous beauty pageant may not have a swimsuit controversy but it does boast a familiar tune.
This year, "There she is, Miss Crustacean" was again the serenade on Crab Night in Ocean City, with top honors going to an elaborately detailed cardboard box containing 20 crabs dressed as shoppers and strollers parading on a boardwalk, The Associated Press reported.


Giuliani Bows to Reality Of Ethnicity on Pathmark
For years, even long before becoming Mayor of New York, Rudolph W. Giuliani has adamantly denounced the use of racial or ethnic considerations in setting city policies.
But one day after Mr.
Giuliani announced his support for a new Pathmark store in East Harlem, he explained that his decision to set aside a 49 percent stake in the project for a Hispanic developer was the only way to make the project equitable and to pacify Hispanic residents of Harlem.


Landlord Is Jailed Over Violations
A landlord who New York City housing officials call a notorious housing code scofflaw began serving a 15-day jail sentence yesterday for repeatedly ignoring court orders to repair more than 300 violations in a building that he owns in Harlem.
Moishe Bodner, the owner or part owner of dozens of troubled properties in Harlem and Brooklyn, surrendered on Tuesday to the City Sheriff's office.
Mr.
Bodner was also fined $288,430 for failure to correct the violations in the building at 530 West 144th Street in Manhattan.


Air Regulations Streamlined
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, who has often drawn criticism for being too business-friendly, signed a bill into law yesterday that environmentalists say will help improve New Jersey's air.
The measure streamlines the permit process for operating a plant and allows lower-polluting businesses to amass emissions credits that they can then sell to higher-polluting companies.


State Mutual Conversion Set
The Massachusetts Department of Insurance said yesterday that it had approved the conversion of the State Mutual Life Assurance Company in Worcester, Mass., to a stockholder company owned by shareholders from a mutual company, owned by policyholders.


Did Shooter Kill Wrong Dog?
The former township mayor who admitted he fatally shot a neighbor's puppy because he couldn't stand its constant barking may have silenced the wrong dog, the New Jersey State Police said.
"There were two puppies, and apparently the dog that was causing the commotion was not the one that was ultimately shot," a State Police spokesman, John Hagerty, said yesterday.


Ex-C.I.A. Man Was at Killing In Mexico
A central figure in the assassination last year of Luis Donaldo Colosio, the leading presidential candidate of Mexico's governing party, had previously been a paid informer for the Central Intelligence Agency, American intelligence officials say.
The man in question is Fernando de la Sota, a longtime security officer for the Mexican Government.
Mr. de la Sota directed a private security force for the Colosio campaign and was present when Mr.
Colosio was shot while leaving a rally in Tijuana on March 23, 1994.


Trism Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


John T. Ryan, 83, Mine Safety Leader
John T. Ryan Jr., the retired chairman and chief executive of the Mine Safety Appliances Company, died on Monday at the Johns Hopkins Medical Center in Baltimore.
Mr.
Ryan, a resident of Pittsburgh, was 83.
Mr.
Ryan, whose father founded the company in 1914 with George H. Dieke, joined Mine Safety Appliances in 1936 as a sales engineer.
He served as the general manager and as executive vice president before becoming president in 1953 and chairman in 1963.


Brascan Ltd.(BRS.A,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Two Homers Off Clemens Doom Red Sox
Tigers 5, Red Sox 0
Travis Fryman hit two homers and Sean Bergman pitched a four-hit shutout to enable the host Detroit Tigers to end a five-game losing streak last night with a 5-0 victory over Roger Clemens and the Boston Red Sox.


In Rare Move, Saudi King Shuffles His Cabinet
King Fahd announced a rare reshuffling of his Cabinet today that left members of Saudi Arabia's royal family in charge of key posts but dropped several long-serving technocrats from the Government, including the Ministers of Oil, Finance and Information.
The move followed a royal decree last week replacing 157 of 250 senior officials in public administration, education and religious affairs at various universities and religious institutes throughout the kingdom.


Ply Gem Industries(PGI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Mexico Fires Its Coach
MIGUEL MEJIA BARON, his team stung twice by the United States this summer, was fired yesterday as Mexico's national soccer coach.
Baron had a contract that ran through the 1998 World Cup.
Mexico was thrashed, 4-0, by the United States in the recent U.S.
Cup.
The Americans beat the Mexicans again on July 17 in the America Cup quarterfinals on penalty kicks after a scoreless tie in regulation. (AP)


Artists Colonize Northern Tip of Manhattan
Like settlers discovering a new land, growing numbers of opera singers, instrumentalists, composers, dancers, actors, painters, photographers and writers are creating a vibrant arts enclave on the skinny northern neck of Manhattan, in Washington Heights and Inwood.
Wendy Hoffman of the Metropolitan Opera has put down roots there, along with Teresa Eldh of "Phantom of the Opera"; Steven Fredericks, a freelance bass-baritone; Lisa Hansen, a flutist, and Mark Johnson, a drummer for the jazz saxophonist Stanley Turrentine.


A.L. Pharma (ALO,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


American Publishing Co.(AMPC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Enticing the Goddess of Wealth
SOME people make art that they hope lasts for centuries.
The women of India make art that is ephemeral -- prayers painted in rice powder on courtyards, walls and doors.
"Painted Prayers: Women's Art in Village India" is an exhibition of 61 color photographs of women's devotional art by Stephen P. Huyler, many of them published last year in a book of the same name (Rizzoli).
The show is in Washington at the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery, 1050 Independence Avenue SW, through April 7.


Principal Is Reinstated By Cortines After Inquiry
The principal of Washington Irving High School in Manhattan, who was suspended in late June for allowing students to graduate without passing required courses, was reinstated yesterday by Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines after a strenuous lobbying campaign by students, parents, local business people and, ultimately, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
In announcing his reinstatement of the principal, Robert B. Durkin, Mr.
Cortines said he had "indicated to Mr. Durkin my profound concerns about the professional judgment he exercised" in certifying 17 students for graduation despite their failure of required courses.


Sanfilippo (John B.) &amp; Son Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 29


Escaped Killer Surrenders 20 Hours Later
A murderer who escaped from a detention cell at Brooklyn Family Court Tuesday afternoon turned himself in yesterday morning in Bedford-Stuyvesant, the police said.
The prisoner, Gregory Webb, 28, who was serving 15 years to life for killing a bystander during a gunfight four years ago, walked out of the Family Court building in downtown Brooklyn about 2:20 P.M.
Tuesday, said Officer Debra Kearns, a police spokeswoman.
Shortly after 10 A.M. yesterday, Officer Kearns said, Mr.
Webb walked into the 79th Precinct station house and "indicated that he would like to speak to a detective."


Washington Water Power (WWP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Banister Foundation (BAN,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Camelot Sideshow: Decor Tug-of-War
A DISPUTE over fabric and furniture in the White House seems laughably quaint today, but back in the early 1960's, it was the stuff of newspaper headlines, political consternation and damage control.
Now, that long-ago esthetic crisis has been revived in an exhibition whose ambition exceeds its resources but whose heart and scholarship cannot be faulted.
"A Frenchman in Camelot: The Decoration of the Kennedy White House by Stephane Boudin," which opened yesterday and runs through Dec. 1 at Boscobel, the historic house in Garrison, N.Y., finally gives credit where credit is due.


In Such a Heat Wave, Familiarity Breeds Records
Yesterday was not just another swelteringly hot, unbearably muggy and glaringly hazy day wedged between disconcertingly similar days -- it was two for the record books.
First, there were all the kilowatts being generated to keep air-conditioners humming.
Consumers in New York City and in northern New Jersey set records for power use.


Toromont Industries reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Wainoco Oil Corp.(WOL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Susquehanna Bancshares Inc.(SUSQ,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


U.S. Filter Corp.(USF,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Cobra Industries (COI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Contamination Rife in Police Laboratory, Simpson Witness Says
The laboratory of the Los Angeles Police Department has a substantial and chronic contamination problem, worse than any he had ever seen, one of O. J. Simpson's expert witnesses testified today at Mr.
Simpson's murder trial.
Had it ever been accredited, the witness said, the laboratory would have been shut down.
John Gerdes, a molecular biologist from Denver, testified that proficiency tests performed by the Los Angeles Police Department in 1993 and 1994, which he inspected for the defense, demonstrated a consistent pattern of contamination, which he defined as "human DNA found where it shouldn't be." In some months, he said, the contamination rate approached 100 percent.


Trimac Ltd. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


An Orchestrated Parker, From Slide Hampton and Friends
The trombonist and arranger Slide Hampton has produced an ambitious body of music for his engagement at the Village Vanguard, where he is to appear through Sunday.
He and several band members and friends have orchestrated the music of Charlie Parker, and in his first set on Tuesday night, Mr.
Hampton and his 13-piece orchestra played much of it.
Orchestration doesn't quite cover what Mr.
Hampton and his band members have done: they have completely reimagined the music.
In some pieces melodies barely surfaced under the weight of the orchestration.
Sometimes brief flurries of a Parker solo showed up, arranged, in the case of "Parker's Mood," with canonical sections.
For the trombonist Robin Eubanks's revision of "Scrapple From the Apple," an ostinato appeared occasionally, giving way to a swing section.
"Now's the Time" had an ill-advised funk part, but mostly the arrangers' imaginations did well with the material.


Sports of The Times; New American Coach Earned His Chance
DID you ever think you would see the day when there would be a soccer controversy in the United States?
There has been a testy little rebellion going through the mail, posted or electronic, just like those quarterback controversies in that sport known as American football.
"You knucklehead." That's how all the letters began.
American sports fans -- those great experts of international soccer -- were taunting the lords of soccer to get it right.


Prodigy Drops Plan to Move Headquarters to Manhattan
The Prodigy Services Company, one of the nation's leading on-line computer services, has sharply scaled back its plan to move half its staff from White Plains to New York City, its president and chief executive, Edward A. Bennett, said today.
In June, Prodigy said it planned to relocate its corporate headquarters and about half its 550 employees to lower Manhattan to draw on the talent of the area's emerging subculture of graphic artists, writers, software designers and other multimedia experts.


Physicians Press for a Voice
The Medical Society of New Jersey unveiled a bill yesterday that is designed to give physicians a greater voice in the operations of managed care health insurance plans.
The Patient Protection Act would create an appeals mechanism so that patients could challenge a denied claim, and physicians who intervene on behalf of their patients could no longer be arbitrarily dropped from a health maintenance organization.


Bandar Seri Begawan Journal; Easy Life in the Shadow of the $35 Billion Man
It is not every day that Warren Christopher and the foreign ministers of China, Japan and much of the rest of Asia descend for days on one of the world's tiniest nations, a place the size of Delaware, cut out of the rain forests on the northern coast of Borneo.
But on the steamy streets of the Sultanate of Brunei Darussalam, by good fortune one of the richest nations in Asia, the critical foreign policy question is not whether China should be contained.
It is how long it will take Mercedes-Benz to ship its new E-series cars to this distant place on the South China Sea, where almost everyone owns a new car, and many own a very nice one.


Ferro Corp.(FOE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


F.A.A. Grounds Small Carrier, Citing Maintenance Problems
The Federal Aviation Administration has grounded Markair, a cut-rate airline serving New York, Atlanta, Chicago, Dallas, Los Angeles and eight other cities, because of maintenance problems.
But the company, which has been operating in bankruptcy since April, said it had solved its problems.
The chairman, Neil Bergt, said in a statement his company had had some problems, found by F.A.A inspectors, but had remedied them and thought it had satisfied the agency.


Transportacion Maritima Mexicana S.A. de C.V.  (TMM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Plains Resources Inc.(PLX,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Common Doesn't Mean O.K.
To The Home Section:
In an age of rampant teen-age pregnancy and one-parent families, an article that espouses the joys of experimental relationships, premarital sex and live-together arrangements seems irresponsible ("No Marriage, No Apologies," July 6).


Ex-Chief of East German Secret Police Is Released From Jail
To the consternation and indignation of those who suffered under the tyranny of the former East Germany, Erich Mielke, the one-time head of the Stasi secret police, walked free on Tuesday night after serving four years in jail.
With his release from Moabit Prison in Berlin, the German authorities have essentially buried the official memory of four decades of dictatorship that sat uncomfortably with the reunited nation.
Earlier this year, the Constitutional Court in Karlsruhe ruled that East Germany's erstwhile spymasters, among them Markus Wolf, should not be held criminally accountable for their actions.


Days Are Numbered For the Castle Of Rock
To some, the abandoned, decrepit brick building on the corner of Second Avenue and Sixth Street in the East Village is an eyesore, a monstrous home to rats and rot.
But to others, it is the castle in which their rock-and-roll dreams came to life.
At the Fillmore East, active during one of rock's most fertile periods, from 1968 to 1971, performances by the Who, Led Zeppelin, the Allman Brothers, Janis Joplin, the Doors, Jimi Hendrix and others gave birth to scores of the musical epiphanies and decadent tales that became the stuff of legend.
On Monday, the Hudson Companies, which owns the property, received permits allowing it to demolish the building.
This is bad news for Bob Herman, a lone crusader who quit his job in the video business two years ago to devote himself to preserving the Fillmore East.
In his search for financing, Mr.
Herman, a 39-year-old veteran of the concert industry, has approached entertainment executives like David Geffen, sent proposals to MTV and even placed classified ads for wealthy backers.
He has three weeks left, said Alan Bell, a partner in Hudson Companies, before wrecking starts.


Ferguson, 45, Signs C.F.L. Deal
The former National Football League quarterback JOE FERGUSON, 45, has signed with the San Antonio Texans of the Canadian Football League.
Ferguson, the oldest player in the league, practiced with the Texans yesterday and might play Saturday against Memphis.


China Accuses Two U.S. Officers Of Spying and Will Expel Them
In an incident that could hardly come at a worse time for Washington's relations with Beijing, China accused two United States Air Force officers of spying today and said it would expel them within 24 hours.
A New China News Agency report said the two men were detained by soldiers on Saturday after they "sneaked into a number of restricted military zones in China's southeast coastal areas and illegally acquired military intelligence by photographing and videotaping." It did not say exactly where the Americans were taken into custody or where they had been held for the last five days.


The Confessions of an 'Aqua Frau'
CALL it a severe case of water lust.
I bought country property in an area of upstate New York famous for its sparkling lakes and ponds.
But my place, alas, had no water on it.
What it did have was a cistern, known in the real estate trade as "an existing structure."
The 130-year-old cistern, boarded over for more than a century, was 15 feet by 23 feet, respectable dimensions for a pool.
It had been designed in the 1800's to hold rainwater, and it was still doing that.
An ingenious system of underground conduits conveyed rainwater from the gutters into the cistern.
So why couldn't this stone reservoir be adapted to my own natural swimming pool?


Bruins Trade for Stevens
KEVIN STEVENS, a high-scoring left wing for Pittsburgh, returned to the city where he grew up and played college hockey, going to the Boston Bruins in a four-player trade.
In exchange for Stevens and center SHAWN McEACHERN, the Penguins will get center BRYAN SMOLINSKI and right wing GLEN MURRAY.
Stevens, who said he initiated the trade talks, said another year was added to his four-year contract and the Bruins had agreed to pay him about $3 million annually.


Dreams Of Empire
FOR an autumn makeover, Richard Harary, the owner of Richard's Interior Design, at 1390 Lexington Avenue (92d Street) in Manhattan, has jewel-toned fabrics from the International Home Furnishings Market in High Point, N.C.


Republic Engineered Steels Inc.(REPS,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Accustaff Inc.(ASTF,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Carr-Gottstein Foods (CGF,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


ECI Telecom Ltd.(ECILF,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: CBS, the Talk Show; Rumors Swirl on Possible New Offers, Even if They Defy Investment Logic
For the first time this week, no billion-dollar deal to take over a broadcast network was announced yesterday, so Wall Street began to round up the usual suspects that it hoped would start a bidding war for CBS.
But however strong the blood lust on the Street, there was no indication that any of the most obvious potential suitors -- Seagram, Viacom, Turner Broadcasting System or Time Warner -- might try to break up the plan of the Westinghouse Electric Corporation to acquire CBS.


Pathologist Says 2 Men Killed by Police Were Shot While Lying on the Floor
A pathologist hired by the families of two men who were shot and killed by the police in January concluded that the men were lying on the floor when detectives shot them in the back and sides, according to a letter released yesterday by the families' lawyer.
The two, Anthony Rosario, 18, and Hilton Vega, 21, who were robbery suspects, were killed on Jan. 12 when they were struck by 22 bullets fired by two detectives they encountered in a Bronx apartment.
A third man, Freddie Bonilla, 18, who was with the two men when they were killed, was shot once in the left leg and was later charged with illegal weapons possession.


HealthWise of America Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


METRO DIGEST
STUDENT TRANSIT PASSES ARE IMPERILED
With the city no longer paying for transit passes for almost 500,000 students, Mayor Giuliani and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority are locked in a tense financial standoff that M.T.A. officials say will force them to kill the program.  [ Page A1. ] RECORD SETTLEMENT IN HARASSMENT SUIT
Del Laboratories, a Long Island cosmetics company, has agreed to settle sexual harassment claims against its chief executive, Government officials said, who called the monetary settlement the largest the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has ever obtained.  [ A1. ] NEW YORK CITY  FRIENDS GATHER TO SAY GOODBYE
After the mourners had drifted from the cemetery, a small group of friends lingered behind to say their own goodbyes to the two Korean Sunday school teachers who died in a van accident.  [ B3. ] MAYOR'S PATH TO PATHMARK APPROVAL
One day after Mayor Giuliani announced his support for a new Pathmark store in East Harlem, he explained that his decision to set aside a 49 percent stake in the project for a Hispanic developer was the only way to make the project equitable.  [ B3. ] EXPERT SAYS MEN WERE SHOT ON FLOOR
Fearing widespread protests from drivers, the Pataki administration abandoned the state's plan to require most cars statewide to undergo strict auto-emissions inspections at centralized testing centers.  [ B6. ] A (HOT) DAY FOR THE RECORD BOOKS
Yesterday was not just another swelteringly hot, unbearably muggy and glaringly hazy day -- it was two for the record books.  [ B6. ] LILCO DEMANDS $83 MILLION REFUND


Market Place; In Another TV Battle, Affiliates Have the Stage
Amid the attention focused on the proposed takeovers of two television networks this week, almost no notice has been paid to a small takeover fight for Outlet Communications Inc.
But that battle helps illustrate where a lot of the real power in broadcasting lies these days: with the owners of individual stations that can deliver viewers.
It was that ability that caused Michael H. Jordan, the chairman of the Westinghouse Electric Corporation, to wax so enthusiastically in discussing his deal to acquire CBS Inc.
Between the two companies, they do reach most major markets with powerful stations.


Buffets Inc.(BOCB,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 13


Eljer Industries (ELJ,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Nova Corp.(NVA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


G-I Holdings Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Graf's Father Charged With Tax Evasion
Steffi Graf, the world's No. 1 women's tennis player, besieged by paparazzi in her native Germany and aching from back problems, faces what may be her toughest opponent this year: her father's arrest yesterday on charges of tax evasion.
Peter Graf, who manages his daughter's finances, allegedly did not file a tax return on four years' income of $25 million.
When he did, according to prosecutors in Mannheim, he paid only one-fifth of that income in taxes -- well below the 50 percent rate in that bracket.


Wilder Debt Makes Allies of Campaign Foes in Virginia
In an unlikely reunion, President Clinton and Senator Charles S. Robb of Virginia held a $1,000-a-ticket buffet tonight to retire a debt that L. Douglas Wilder, a former Virginia Governor, ran up while running against them.
Several of the 150 guests openly debated the motives of their hosts, who had long jockeyed for power but who tonight checked their grudges at the door.


Cascades Papperboard International Co. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Tyson Foods Inc.(TYSNA,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 1


New York City Nears Deal for TV Station
ITT and Dow Jones have agreed to pay New York City $207 million to acquire WNYC-TV/Channel 31, the city-owned television station, people involved in the negotiations say.
The companies want to transform the UHF public station into a superstation -- like WTBS in Atlanta and WGN in Chicago -- offering sports, financial news and entertainment.


Do Parents Know Best?
To The Home Section:
In "Deciding if It's Time for Kindergarten or Time to Wait a Year" (July 20), the author quotes experts who deplore the tendency of some parents to wait a year before enrolling their children in kindergarten.
They declare it a shame that parents should assume such control over their children's school careers.
And yet, before the mid-19th century it was parents, not schools, who determined when children should enter school and how long they should stay.


Pennzoil Co.(PZL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Sylvia Weinberger, who founded Mrs.
Weinberg's Chopped Liver, misstated the given name of one of her sons.
He is Fred Weinberger, not Richard.


Whole Foods Market Inc.(WFMI,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 2


Southam Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
MCI to Dismiss 2,500, Even as Earnings Rise
MCI, even while announcing a 21 percent rise in earnings, said it would restructure the company, dismiss about 7 percent of its work force -- 2,500 to 3,000 employees -- by year-end and write off obsolete assets.
It expects to take a $600 million to $800 million write-off.


A 'Frontier' Land of Ancient Rivalry
The mood of diplomats and United Nations officials here trying to avert a wider war between Croatia and rebel Serbs ranges from "not optimistic" to "very pessimistic." Should their fears become reality -- which may be known within the next few days -- the conflagration over a crescent of territory called Krajina will not be a new one.
On the contrary, it will be a resumption of a brutal war that was begun in 1991 and was largely over before the siege of Sarajevo and the horrors and ethnic cleansing in neighboring Bosnia began in 1992.
And the history of struggles for the land stretches back centuries.


Times Mirror Names New President for Magazines
Following the shutdown of New York Newsday and a drastic cost-cutting program that was put into effect last month, the Times Mirror Company appointed a new president yesterday at its magazine division "to increase substantially the magazines' profits and revenues."
Efrem Zimbalist 3d, Times Mirror vice president for strategic development, was named president and chief executive of Times Mirror Magazines by Mark H. Willes, the company's new chief executive.
He replaces Francis P. Pandolfi, who will become chairman of the group and report to Mr.
Zimbalist.


Stant Corp.(STNT,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


White House Hurt Inquiry On Suicide, Ex-Official Says
A former Deputy Attorney General told Congress today that the White House had compromised the integrity of the investigation into the death of Vincent W. Foster Jr., the deputy White House counsel who killed himself in 1993.
Philip B. Heymann, who was the No. 2 official at the Justice Department when Mr.
Foster died, testified that he had told Bernard W. Nussbaum, then White House counsel, that Mr.
Nussbaum was "misusing" the Justice Department by making it seem as if the department was conducting an independent inquiry.
In fact, he said, the inquiry was being controlled by the White House.


Data General Corp.(DGN,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 1


Ben &amp; Jerry's Homemade Inc.(BJICA,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Xtra Corp.(XTR,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Microsoft and Digital in a Deal That Expands Partnership
The Microsoft Corporation and the Digital Equipment Corporation announced an agreement today aimed at helping both companies capture a bigger share of the fast-growing corporate market for computers and software.
As part of the pact, Microsoft said it would contribute up to $100 million in a Digital training program to insure that Digital's engineers can develop and service products based on Microsoft's Windows NT technology.
Windows NT is Microsoft's operating-system software for linking computers into so-called client-server networks.


Corrections
An article yesterday about mayoral approval of a plan to build a Pathmark supermarket in East Harlem misstated the terms of the deal.
The city's Economic Development Corporation and a private investment group will build the supermarket, rent it to Pathmark and use the profits from this arrangement -- estimated at $50,000 a year for the first 10 years -- for community development projects.
The $50,000 does not represent Pathmark's total annual rent, which will actually be about $1 million.


Weekly Papers Surge
To the Editor:
Re "The Press: Bought and Sold and Gray All Over" (Week in Review, July 31): True, large daily newspapers gobbled up by giant conglomerates are often mediocre.
But the days of the feisty newspaper owned locally and serving its community are not gone.
Weekly and twice-weekly community papers are alive and thriving, owned by publishers and editors who live in the community.
Weekly newspaper circulation has gone from 49 million in 1985 to almost 79 million in 1995.
VICKI SIMONS  Hillsdale, N.Y., Aug. 1, 1995 The writer is editor of the twice-weekly Independent.


Sherritt Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


The Pop Life
Changing One's Priorities
One of the most interesting rap releases of the year, "E. 1999 Eternal," the first full album by the Cleveland quartet Bone Thugs-n-Harmony, is a free-flowing fusion of sweet soul singing and hard gangsta rapping.
Released last week, the album is important for another reason.
Its executive producer was Eazy-E (Eric Wright), the rapper who died of AIDS in March.
It is the first release on his record label, Ruthless, since his death.
Layzie Bone, a member of Bone Thugs-N-Harmony, said by telephone from his home in Cleveland that Eazy-E was the first of the band's friends to die of AIDS.
"That was the first time that we ever ran across anything like that," Layzie Bone said.
"The way he died just set us straight on a lot of things and got our gang tighter together. It makes you think about whether some things are really worth it, and what we've really got in the world."


Rangers Sign Presley
The Rangers picked up help for their penalty-killing unit yesterday when they signed an unrestricted free agent, WAYNE PRESLEY, a feisty, 30-year-old right wing.
Presley, a 10-year veteran, signed a two-year contract for $1.5 million.
Presley has played for the Chicago Blackhawks, San Jose Sharks and Buffalo Sabres in a 10-year career.
Last season, his five short-handed goals ranked second in the N.H.L. and his six short-handed points ranked first.


Alliance Forest reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


No Headline
"This has the potential of making a huge impact on American public health." DR.
JAMES W. ANDERSON of the University of Kentucky, talking about soy protein.  [ A22:1. ]


Bernard Lustig, Biochemist, 92
Bernard Lustig, a retired biochemist and former director of research for Clairol, the Manhattan-based maker of cosmetics and toiletries, died on Sunday in Stamford Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 92 and had lived in Stamford since 1942.
Born in Kolomea, Austria, now Kolomyya, Ukraine, he received a doctorate in chemistry at the University of Vienna.
He worked at Rudolph Hospital in Vienna until 1938, when he joined the chemistry laboratory of West London Hospital in Britain.


INSIDE
Dollar Soars Past 90 Yen
The dollar soared to its highest level in nearly five months, 90.96 yen, after the United States and Japan sold yen heavily, and Tokyo encouraged investment abroad.
Page D1.
Retirement Money Missing
Teachers who trusted a financial adviser, Wayne T. Drinkwine of Mutual Financial Services in Ronkonkoma, L.I., lost money.
His lawyer cites "personal demons." Page D1.
New Trade Center Suspect
The F.B.I. arrested a Palestinian man in Jordan who officials said played a major role in the bombing of the World Trade Center in 1993, then fled the country.
Page B1.


Liberties; Mickey Mouse News
When I was little, the world was Disney.
I spent hours in front of the TV set with Annette, wearing my mouse ears and clutching a red leatherette purse stuffed with Milky Ways.
I also helped my brother, who had a serious case of Zorro-envy, scratch Z's with a screwdriver on every mahogany surface in the house.


Roberds Inc.(RBDS,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sierra Health Services Inc.(SIE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Starter Corp.(STA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


In Waco Hearings, Parties Undergo a Role Reversal
As the House prepared for high-visibility committee hearings on the 1993 standoff at the Branch Davidian compound in Texas, the Democrats complained that the Republican majority had stacked the witness list to portray the Clinton Administration in the worst possible light.
The Republicans placated the Democrats by telling them they could choose one witness for the hearing's early days.
They chose Kiri Jewell.


Study Finds Schools Attract Tobacco Ads
There are significantly more tobacco advertisements in stores near California schools than in stores farther away, according to a new study of more than 5,700 stores in that state.
The study, released today by the California Department of Health Services, also found that there is a significantly greater number of tobacco ads near the candy counters in stores near schools, and that they are more often set below three feet in those stores, where children can see them better.


Foodmaker Inc. (FM,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 9


Defense Chief In Colombia Resigns
Defense Minister Fernando Botero resigned today after judicial authorities linked him to contributions by drug traffickers to the election campaign of President Ernesto Samper.
Mr.
Botero becomes the highest ranking official to resign in the scandal, which has dogged Mr.
Samper since his election in June 1994.


Company to Pay Record Amount In L.I. Sexual Harassment Case
Del Laboratories Inc., a Long Island cosmetics and pharmaceutical maker, has agreed to settle a Government complaint of sexual harassment on behalf of 15 female employees against its chief executive, according to Federal officials who called it the largest monetary settlement that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has ever obtained.
The women, mostly members of the top officer's secretarial pool, complained that the chief executive, Dan K. Wassong, indulged in lewd and abusive behavior for years.
The settlement is notable not only for its size but also because so many women joined in a complaint against the most powerful figure in a publicly held company.


TLC Beatrice Intl. Holdings Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Guarding Against Computer Crashes
MOST computer owners know that surge suppressors are a necessary piece of equipment, providing a buffer between the vagaries and irregularities of electric current and the delicate insides of their computers.
The goal of a suppressor is to guard against sudden surges or quick drops in electrical power, which can give a hard disk the wobbles and cause the computer to lock up and crash.
But in many homes, the solution is neither convenient nor graceful.
The suppressor -- a box or strip offering multiple outlets, with safety circuitry inside -- often sits on the floor under the desk or snugged beneath a forest of cables behind the computer system.
Flipping the suppressor on can involve hunching under the desk or groping behind the monitor to reach the "on" switch.


Nebiolo, Unopposed, Re-elected by I.A.A.F.
Primo Nebiolo of Italy ran unopposed today among supplicants and was re-elected as the president of the International Amateur Athletic Federation, track and field's governing body.
The Swedish news media did not have a vote, for which Nebiolo can be thankful.
He is not a hero here, but rather the local villain, after insulting a television reporter on the eve of the sport's world championships.
"Let Primo Nebiolo Go Home," urged a front-page headline in Tuesday's Goteborgs-Postens newspaper, dismissing him just as he had come to this charming port city to be anointed for a fourth term.


CNA Financial Corp.(CNA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Unreported Shooting
Police officials said yesterday that two officers never reported a gunshot wound to a woman on July 2 in an apparent attempt to protect an off-duty officer from their precinct in Brooklyn, who seems to have been living with the woman who was wounded in the stomach.
Article, page B3.


Gadgets That Went the Way of the Wall
To the Editor:
Re " 'A Wall in the Mind': Rising Resentment in the East Divides Germany" (Business Day, July 27):


Tiny Base May Give Clues to Saving Jobs
Newark Air Force base here is so small that it does not even have a runway, but President Clinton's top advisers are counting on it to solve a big political problem.
The little base amid the cornfields of central Ohio repairs guidance and navigation systems for nuclear missiles and fighter jets.
But now it is enmeshed in Mr.
Clinton's 1996 campaign hopes in California, where it is touted as a promising, though largely unproven, way of turning Government enterprise into private enterprise.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.88
5.55
4.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.40
5.41
4.30
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.36
5.38
4.68
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.43
6.46
7.07
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.86
6.90
7.38
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.73
7.77
8.17
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.17
6.19
6.31
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Pacificorp (PPW,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Ogden Corp.(OG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Pataki Drops Plan to Force Strict Auto-Emission Tests
Fearing widespread protests from drivers, the Pataki administration today abandoned the state's plan to require most cars statewide to undergo strict auto-emission inspections at centralized testing centers.
Instead, under a proposal delivered to the Environmental Protection Agency today, the administration proposed to reduce air pollution from automobiles without making major changes to the state's system of checking tailpipe pollution.


Alabama Gets Probation and Other Penalties In Football
The National Collegiate Athletic Association, citing "a distressing failure of institutional control," placed the University of Alabama's vaunted football program on probation yesterday for three years.
It also banned Alabama from a bowl game after the coming season, took away 25 or so scholarships over three years and forfeited the school's first 11 games in 1993.
Although the N.C.A.A. is allowing Alabama's games to be seen on television, university officials were upset by the sanctions and said they would appeal.
While there is almost no chance to overturn the probation or bowl ban, they apparently hope to lose fewer scholarships.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the National Governors' Conference reversed the identifications of the new and departing chairmen of the National Governors' Association in some editions.
Gov.
Tommy G. Thompson of Wisconsin, the new chairman, was at the left in the photograph, shaking hands with his predecessor, Gov.
Howard Dean of Vermont, who was at the right.


Pacificare Health Systems Inc.(PHSYB,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


F.B.I. Seizes Palestinian In Bombing
The Federal Bureau of Investigation arrested a man in Jordan yesterday who officials said played a major role in the bombing of the World Trade Center in 1993.
The suspect, whose name was not released, was put on a plane to New York last night and was expected to be arraigned in Federal court today, Federal law enforcement officials said.


Power Control Technologies Inc.(ATP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Older Drivers and Accidents
To The Home Section:
Having just hit 72, I was interested in "Reducing the Risks for Older Drivers" (July 13).
I applaud the steps being taken or studied to get senior drivers off the road once they are no longer capable to drive for any reason.
Crying "ageism" as a basis not to use such measures does not make any sense to me.


Forecasting Gauge and House Sales Show Gains
More evidence that the economy is perking up emerged today as the Government's main forecasting index posted its first gain of 1995 and sales of new houses were at the briskest pace since late 1993.
"The signs of rebound are there," said Darwin L. Beck, an economist at CS First Boston.
"Lower interest rates help to sell houses," he added, and bode well for sales of cars and other big-ticket items in coming months.


Sparks Shows His Strength in Weakness
The conversation is about football.
Phillippi Sparks is talking about overcoming a frustrating pattern of getting hurt and becoming one of the top cornerbacks in pro football.
Suddenly, Sparks changes the subject.
The questioner is somewhat startled.
It is rare for a professional athlete to admit weakness, but this is what Sparks does.
Sparks is a born again Christian.
It was no secret last season that he would preach religion to players and others but did not walk the walk.
Sparks says he spent too much time in bars, and some of his off-the-field activities caused a strain on his marriage.
He talks openly, calmly.


Confluence of Wild Kingdoms
WHEN the Walt Disney Company finishes spending $34 million to restore the New Amsterdam Theater, at 214 West 42d Street, it will have an exquisite Art Nouveau theater, with silver-leafed vaulted ceilings, gilded doors and glazed-pottery railings in the muted greens and terra cottas of the era.
The theater will be restored not only to its original design, but also to its original purpose -- live entertainment.
The New Amsterdam was where the Ziegfeld Follies played, Eddie Cantor sang and Will Rogers did rope tricks.
The theater, which seats 1,800, was designed in 1903 by Henry B. Herts and Hugh Tallant, also the architects of the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
Disney plans to reopen the theater in the spring of 1997.
The New Amsterdam seems predestined for Disney: the dominant design motif is an enchanted forest.
There are bas-relief rabbits, monkeys, pelicans and peacocks adorning the proscenium, walls and staircases.
The green carpeting, with scattered leaves and flowers, is being rewoven.
"Rabbits for Disney!" said Hugh Hardy, a partner in Hardy Holzman Pfeiffer Associates, the Manhattan architects in charge of the restoration.
"It couldn't be better for the nature king."


Storm Crosses Florida; Damage Is Minor
Hurricane Erin crossed Florida and plowed into the Gulf of Mexico on Wednesday, delivering a far less severe blow than feared, but sinking two ships and leaving more than a million people without power.
At least two people were reported killed and five people were missing at sea.


Metro-Richelieu reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 1


Sun Healthcare Group Inc.(SHG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


U.S. Rejects Offer of Leader Of Hamas Never to Return
United States officials rejected an offer yesterday from a political leader of the Hamas movement who has been detained in New York to return to the United Arab Emirates and never return to the United States.
At a hearing inside a Federal prison in Manhattan, immigration officals said they could not allow the Hamas leader, Mousa Mohamed Abu Marzook, to leave the country unless he admitted he had engaged in terrorist activities.


Myers (L.E.) Co.(MYR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Fila Holdings S.p.A.(FLH,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


In South Africa: New Jobs, Little Respect
After spending seven years with one company and feeling somewhat underappreciated, Wiseman Ntombela, 34, a black sales manager here, decided recently that he would try looking for a new job.
In less than a month, he was hired at nearly double his old salary.
With apartheid behind them, many South African companies are rushing to bring black faces into their companies, and they are competing furiously with each other for the country's limited number of skilled, experienced blacks.
The result is that young professional blacks are being wooed with salaries that are 20 to 50 percent higher than their white counterparts.
Often too, the jobs come with cellular phones, fancy cars and imposing titles.


Health Systems International Inc.(HQ,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Grand Jury in Oklahoma City Hears Bombing Suspect's Sister
The sister of the Oklahoma City bombing suspect Timothy J. McVeigh -- and perhaps his closest friend and confidante -- testified yesterday before the Federal grand jury investigating the blast, which demolished the Federal Building there and killed 167 people.
The woman, Jennifer McVeigh, appeared in the grand jury section of the Federal courthouse in Oklahoma City, within view of the bomb site, although most of the sessions are held in the tight security of nearby Tinker Air Force Base.
Later, Federal law-enforcement officers escorted Ms.
McVeigh through the airport for her flight home to Buffalo, enabling her to avoid reporters.


J. J. McClafferty, 89, Priest in Social Work
Msgr.
John Joseph McClafferty, a Roman Catholic priest long associated with his church's national social and charitable work, died on Monday at the Carmel Richmond Nursing Home in Old Town, S.I.
He was 89 and lived at the home and was its chaplain since 1981, after becoming pastor emeritus at St.
Francis de Sales Church on East 96th Street in Manhattan.
A certified social worker, Monsignor McClafferty was close to Francis Cardinal Spellman.
In the 1930's and 40's, he was executive secretary of the Legion of Decency, which reviewed and rated films for Catholics.
He also served as senior chaplain for the Fifth Regiment of the New York National Guard; he had the rank of lieutenant colonel.


Briggs &amp; Stratton Corp.(BGG,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Driven Toward the Bright Lights
Stock car racing, which is being acclaimed as the new growth sport of the 1990's, faces a problem similar to that of a backwoods guitar picker who suddenly gets discovered by Nashville: how to remain true to those who loved you in obscurity while cashing in on the big time.
Nascar's Winston Cup series, which was featured on the cover of two major national magazines last month, is enjoying record attendance and television ratings as it approaches its new showpiece event, the $4.5 million Brickyard 400 this Saturday in Indianapolis.


Dollar Surges as U.S. and Japan Act Jointly in Markets
The dollar soared to its highest level against the yen in nearly five months today after the United States and Japan sold about $1 billion of yen and the Japanese Government moved to make it easier for institutions there to invest their yen abroad.
With international markets flooded with yen, the dollar rose 3.3 percent against the Japanese currency, standing at 90.96 yen in late New York trading, up from 88.04 yen on Tuesday.


Union to Change Stand If Agreement Isn't Met
On the surface, the leadership of the embattled National Basketball Association union appeared to take a conciliatory step toward its dissident players yesterday.
The dissidents, however, did not react graciously to the union's move.
The dissidents, on the contrary, severely criticized Simon Gourdine, the union's executive director, saying he is trying to negotiate a deal that would be unacceptable to the players when he should not be negotiating at all.


Commonwealth Energy System (CES,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Meredith Corp.(MDP,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Warnaco Group Inc.(WAC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 8


The Checks That Got Away
They put aside their retirement money every other week in lots of $25, $100 and as much as $650 from their modest teachers' salaries, never giving a second thought to whether their investments were in safe hands.
As it turned out, though, the more trust they put in their financial adviser, Wayne T. Drinkwine of Mutual Financial Services Inc. in Ronkonkoma, L.I., the more the teachers lost, with one teacher alone claiming in May to have been cheated out of $300,000.
For as their trust in him and in his company grew, so did their willingness to follow the most perilous of instructions: to cash in their mutual funds and other investments, and then write checks out directly to Mr.
Drinkwine for "securities" that simply did not exist.


Putting the Rumors to Rest, Tyson Works Out in Public
He is not in atrophy.
Mike Tyson arrived in a tank top today, exposed his tattooed biceps and then put indentations in a lead-heavy boxing bag.
In his first public workout since he became a former inmate, Tyson put three notions to rest: that he is scrawny, that he is furious and that he is training himself.


Enserch Corp.(ENS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Living Together Is Not New
To The Home Section:
In her story "No Marriage, No Apologies" (July 6), the author writes about couples who live together without being married and says, "What would have been considered scandalous 25 years ago has now become an acceptable living arrangement."


Cloud Lifts from School District
The state Board of Education voted unanimously yesterday taking the Union City school district off a list of schools in line for a state takeover, removing a cloud that had hung over the school system since 1985.


Anglers Lost Money in Russian Dispute
To the Editor:
Re "The Fishing Camp That Got Away: A Russian Tale" (news article, July 20), on the closing of an American-owned fishing camp by Russian authorities in a dispute over fishing rights to the Varzina River:


Department 56 Inc.(DFS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Gov. Wilson's Veto Deals Setback to Orange County
Orange County's recovery plan took another blow yesterday as Gov.
Pete Wilson of California vetoed a bill that would have provided the county with new revenues to help pay its huge debts.
The measure, which had passed both chambers of the California Legislature last week, would have allowed the county to shift $70 million a year in funds earmarked for transportion to cover its bankruptcy-related debts, which now total $1.9 billion.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Alexander Boyd Hawes, a Washington lawyer who worked in President Franklin D. Roosevelt's Administration, misstated the day of his death.
It was Monday, not Tuesday.
The obituary also misstated the hometown of a son, Alexander B. Hawes Jr.
It is Dover, Mass., not England.


Masco Corp.(MAS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Economic Scene; Despite some problems, the news from Mexico is mostly good.
REMEMBER the peso crisis in Mexico?
No news, in this case, is largely good news.
The much criticized "bailout" has allowed the Government to avoid default on its debts and even begin attracting foreign capital.
"The White House should get high points" for preventing panic and helping to minimize the pain that followed the devaluation, concludes Jeffrey Sachs, director of Harvard's Institute for International Development.
But there is still plenty to worry about.
For while Mexico's deep recession, engineered to permit exports to regain their competitiveness in world markets, has reshaped the economy faster than expected, Mexico's capacity to achieve Asian-style growth remains very much in doubt.
"Financial stability," suggests Rudi Dornbusch, an economist at M.I.T., "has been given the upper hand over a sustainable development strategy."


Wilpon Talks About Motives
The Mets' co-owner Fred Wilpon said today that concerns over Bret Saberhagen's durability and his inconsistent performances during his tenure with the Mets were the main reasons the right-hander was traded to the Colorado Rockies on Monday night for two minor league pitchers.
"He had not been productive in an overall sense," Wilpon said of Saberhagen, who was 29-21 in three and a half seasons with the Mets.


Natural Birth vs. On-Time Delivery
On a Saturday later this month, I will walk into the hospital at 7 A.M. and, it all goes according to plan, have a baby by 10 A.M.
I know this because I've scheduled a Caesarean delivery.
This decision is by no means popular.
In the eyes of doctors, hospitals, insurance companies and even other mothers, I'm considered part of a national problem.


Cloudy Borders for Fact and Fiction
SLEEPERS  By Lorenzo Carcaterra  404 pages. Ballantine Books. $23.
As many readers are aware by now, Lorenzo Carcaterra presents his new book, "Sleepers," as a true story.
Only its names and dates are altered, he writes in his prologue, "to protect the identities of those involved."


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Comerica Inc., Detroit, is selling $150 million of subordinated notes due in 2007 through Lehman Brothers Inc.
The notes are priced at 99.721 to yield 7.285 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated A3 by Moody's Investors Service, A- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and A by Duff &amp; helps. *
Portola Packaging Inc., San Jose, Calif., filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell $100 million of senior notes.
Chase Securities Inc. will be the lead underwriter.


Colombia's Chief Is Said to Have Sought Donations From Cartel
President Ernesto Samper's former campaign treasurer testified that at Mr.
Samper's instruction, he had received almost $6 million for the President's campaign from Cali drug cartel leaders, a Bogota newspaper reported today.
El Tiempo, the country's leading newspaper, said the report was based on transcripts of testimony by the campaign official, Santiago Medina, made last week to prosecutors investigating reports that Mr.
Samper's 1994 campaign was partly financed by drug traffickers.


India State Government Scraps $3 Billion Enron Project
A regional government in India has decided to scrap a $3 billion power plant being built by the Enron Corporation, in a move that threatens to derail the growth of foreign investment in that country.
The cancellation of the power contract was announced yesterday by the nationalist Hindu leaders of the state government of Maharashtra.
They are opposed to the policies of the national Government, whose four-year-old commitment to economic change and a more open environment to foreign investors is being tested by the attack on the power project.


A Contract Is Awarded To Improve Navigation
The Federal Aviation Administration yesterday awarded a contract to greatly improve a navigation system that would let civilians, from airline pilots to motorists, use Pentagon satellites to pinpoint their locations anywhere in the United States to within 7 meters, or about 21 feet.
The navigation network, called the Global Positioning System, is already accurate in civilian use to within 100 meters, or about 300 feet.
The military has equipment that is able to use the system to far greater accuracy, and its precise abilities are classified.


Boeing to Open Office in Big India Market
The Boeing Company announced today that it was opening an office in India, saying that it wanted a share in a rapidly expanding aviation market that will need an estimated $18 billion in new aircraft over the next 20 years.
Boeing named Dinesh Keskar president of its Indian operation.
His appointment came as Air-India, the state-run international carrier, was considering Boeing's 777 aircraft, in competition with the Airbus A340 and the MD-11, made by Airbus Industrie, for its long-range aircraft.


Buddha's Birthplace
To the Editor:
Further to your July 31 article on the Buddha's tooth: Lumbini, the birthplace of Prince Siddhartha Gautama, the Buddha, in what is now the Kingdom of Nepal, is an international Buddhist site to which we welcome pilgrims.
NARENDRA B. SHAH  Representative of Nepal to the U.N.
New York, July 31, 1995


Senate Advances a 'Star Wars' Revival Plan
After a debate that evoked memories of the cold war years, the Senate moved ahead today with plans to revive a version of President Reagan's "Star Wars" program, beating back attempts by Democrats to eliminate money and authorization for a land-based national defense against long-range missiles.
The Clinton Administration and Senate Democrats say the plan would violate the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, a cornerstone of American arms control policy, and rekindle cold war tensions with Russia.


Fire at the Brooklyn Navy Yard


Wall Street Chief Takes A Star Turn
Alan C. Greenberg, the colorful chairman of the Bear Stearns Companies, is moonlighting as an actor these days, perhaps hoping to pick up a little pocket money since the firm cut his compensation in half last year -- to about $7 million.
Mr.
Greenberg, known as Ace, was in Central Park yesterday shooting a scene for "Milk and Money," a romantic comedy currently in production in New York City.
The film stars Robert Petkoff as a young man who drops out of medical school to find himself.


Genevieve Tobin, Actress, Dies at 93
Genevieve Tobin, an actress who worked in theater and films, died on Monday at Las Encinas Hospital in Pasadena, Calif.
She was 93.
Ms.
Tobin's first major theatrical role was in the 1920 show "Little Old New York." Her last film appearance was in "Queen of Crime" in 1941.
All told, she acted in about a dozen stage productions and some 30 films.


France Describes U.S. 'Anglo-Saxons' as Nuclear Test Foes
French politicians love to fight "Anglo-Saxon" attempts to dominate Europe, and the Government sees itself as leading that battle again, now that the United States has criticized the planned resumption of French underground nuclear testing in the South Pacific.
It hardly seems to matter that Japan is protesting far more vigorously or that Germany, France's closest ally, has expressed concern, and that seven other European Governments oppose the tests, Austria, Denmark, Finland, Luxembourg, Ireland, the Netherlands and Sweden.
The French nuclear deterrent serves the cause of true European independence, French officials say, and everybody knows where opposition to that comes from.


For Children
An impressive number of exhibitions for children are on display this summer.
In addition to the three below, the New York Hall of Science, in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, offers "Busytown," a science exhibition based on the work of the author and illustrator Richard Scarry and featuring Lowly Worm, a familiar Scarry character.
It continues through Sept. 10, for children 3 to 10.
Information: (718) 699-0005.
Time Warner Media Center  Children's Museum of Manhattan 212 West 83d Street (212) 721-1223 Recommended ages: 6 and up
Parents may think about changing their careers after operating the cameras and seeing themselves on screen during a visit to this newly redesigned production studio.
There's so much glamorous high-tech equipment that even professionals in the business may feel envious.
Meanwhile, children can also get a strong taste of what goes on behind the scenes of a television show, both technically and creatively, without having to worry a bit about the future competition.


No Headline
"After midnight, vampire-like, the communications bill rises each evening to be debated until dawn, when again we return to the regular order on the floor. These issues are too important to be debated when America is sound asleep." -- REP.
JOHN BRYANT, Democrat of Texas.  [ A1:6. ]


Restaurants
If you close one eye to the nearby television station as you approach L'Absinthe, it is easy to believe that you are in Paris.
The specialties of the house are scrawled in white script on the outside walls and the doors are folded back to allow the tables to spill onto the sidewalk.
Inside, the etched glass, mirrors, polished brass and ancient clocks give the restaurant the familiar warmth of a typical bistro.
But there is a difference: the prices are lower than those at most modern Paris bistros.
And the food is better.
This is not as impressive as it sounds; the sad truth is that the great Paris bistro is an endangered species.
Finding one requires research, advice and careful planning, and even then the results are often deeply disappointing.
In that respect, L'Absinthe is very French; while the food is better than that of the average bistro along the banks of the Seine, the restaurant serves up its own set of disappointments.


INSIDE
Averting War in Croatia
Concessions by rebel Serbs raised hopes that war with the Croatian Government may be avoided, the U.S. envoy to Zagreb said.
Page A3. 'Star Wars' Plan Is Revived
The Senate moved ahead with plans to revive a version of President Reagan's "Star Wars" program, beating back Democrat opposition.
Page A3.
Focus on Hillary Clinton
The Senate Whitewater panel sought new clues about Hillary Rodham Clinton's role in the handling Vincent W. Foster Jr.'s files.
Page A22.
Exemption Under Attack
The Senate Judiciary Committee approved, by 9-8, a measure that would partly repeal baseball's 73-year-old antitrust exemption.
Page B7.


Yonkers Gets Federal Loan For Businesses
Yonkers today was awarded an $18 million Federal grant to help revive business in this once-thriving industrial city.
The grant, which is actually a loan guarantee, will allow the city to borrow money from the Department of Housing and Urban Development and then offer low-interest loans of up to $2 million dollars each to finance business projects.


Browning-Ferris Industries (BFI,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Elbit Ltd.(ELBTF,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Hooked: A Magnificent Obsession; Big Flat Brook
Here are some favorite regional fishing spots of eight New York Times anglers. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
Everyone who fly fishes for trout ought to have a home stream.
Big Flat Brook in the mountains of Sussex County, in New Jersey's northwestern corner, fills the bill for me.


Legislation Requiring Promotion Of Detectives Is Vetoed by Pataki
In a move that pleased Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani but angered a major police union, Gov.
George E. Pataki today vetoed legislation that would have forced the New York City Police Department to promote hundreds of detectives this year.
The legislation would have set quotas for promotions among the city's 4,600 detectives, requiring that 10 percent be first-grade, 20 percent second-grade and the rest third-grade.
First and second-grade detectives are paid more, though their duties are not necessarily different.


Exquisite Islamic Works Emblazoned With a Rose
The Hagop Kevorkian gallery lies far off the main caravan routes through the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
It's a discreetly marked cul de sac at the very back of that oasis of cool beauty that is the Islamic collection.
The small rotating exhibitions periodically installed here have a distinctive flavor.
They rarely include sculpture or painting, apart from book illumination.
Instead, the work conforms to what European-formed taste would classify as crafts: fabrics, dishes, carpets.
Yet there are no more breathtaking materials to be found anywhere in the museum.


Settlers' Evictions Put Israeli Army in Middle
After soldiers and police officers dragged away hundreds of Jewish settlers camped on a rocky hilltop here today, the settlers handed leaflets to the men and women in uniform.
"Dear soldier/policeman," the leaflets said, "we have nothing against you! We know your heart is with us."


U.S. Opens Broad Investigation of Hamas Political Leader Being Detained in New York
Government officials said today that the Federal authorities had opened a broad criminal investigation of a political leader of Hamas, the leading Palestinian resistance organization.
The leader, Mousa Mohamed Abu Marzook, who is being detained in New York, faces possible extradition to Israel on charges of terrorism.


At the Bar; The jury is still out on the effects of long, televised trials.
The cases of O. J. Simpson and Susan Smith have as much in common as Hollywood and Union, S.C.
Still, the trials that grew out of crimes similar only in their stark horror invite questions about how long it takes to try a defendant in America's courts and whether the length of a trial says anything about the quality of justice dispensed.
Susan Smith was convicted of murder in the drowning of her two young sons after a trial of less than two weeks, not much longer than it takes the defense in the Simpson case to cross-examine a few of witnesses about DNA evidence or bloody socks.


Blue-Chip Issues Post Modest Gains
Blue-chip stocks recovered from an early selloff yesterday to end with a modest gain after four consecutive declines.
In what was virtually a reversal of Wednesday's early-morning trading, the Dow Jones industrial average plummeted more than 40 points soon after the opening bell.
Analysts attributed the plunge to the Labor Department report that initial unemployment claims last week dropped by 51,000, to 372,000 -- the largest drop in more than a year.
This report was interpreted as a sign of increasing economic momentum, leading traders to conclude that the Federal Reserve is unlikely to push down interest rates -- and companies' borrowing costs -- anytime soon.


Julia Roberts as a Rebellious Wife
Nobody writes more sparkling movie roles for women these days than Callie Khouri, whose Thelma and Louise were so bright and snappish and alive.
Even "Something to Talk About," a more muddled screenplay by Ms.
Khouri, in which a sheltered Southern wife discovers her husband's infidelity, is full of the hearty, sexy femininity that is this screenwriter's hallmark.
It's rambling and unfocused, but still fresh enough to break the usual Hollywood mold.
"Something to Talk About" is also handsomely photographed by Sven Nykvist and invitingly directed by Lasse Hallstrom, who brought such amiable warmth to "What's Eating Gilbert Grape." But that film ended with the burning of a house, and "Thelma and Louise" sent its heroines off a cliff.
Both did a better job of creating characters than of solving their problems.
Nobody has the faintest idea of how to end "Something to Talk About" either.


Trainer Mourns, and Looks to Cope
Art Zeis, a horse trainer in Kentucky and Ohio for 23 years, won two races at Ellis Park last Sunday and felt on top of the world.
Then, at 4:15 the next morning, the telephone blasted him awake with the news that haunts all horsemen: Your barn is on fire and all your horses are dead.
"Just like that," Zeis said, "I went from that incredible high to the lowest of lows."


Hampton Gets Added to Growing List of Ailing Giants
Injuries, the hot summer and National Football League training camp are close friends.
And right now, Giants players are becoming bosom buddies with Ronnie Barnes.
Barnes is the Giants' head trainer, and he has been busy.
Today, for instance, running back Rodney Hampton pulled a quadriceps muscle.
And the backup guard Jason Winrow could miss this season with a possibly career-threatening back problem.


Suspect Is Said to Be Longtime Friend of Bombing Mastermind
At 1 A.M. on Feb. 9, 1993, Federal prosecutors say, Eyad Ismoil, a Palestinian immigrant working in a grocery store in Dallas, received an urgent phone call from a boyhood friend.
A few hours later, Mr.
Ismoil bought a plane ticket, and on Feb. 21, he flew to New York to join the friend, Ramzi Ahmed Yousef -- the man prosecutors call the mastermind of the World Trade Center bombing.
Five days later, prosecutors say, with Mr.
Yousef in the passenger seat, Mr.
Ismoil drove a van packed with explosives into the garage below the Trade Center.


Parma Will Test Sampson In His U.S. Coaching Debut
Steve Sampson will make his debut as the full-time United States coach just two days after his appointment when the Americans clash with Parma of Italy Friday night at Giants Stadium.
Sampson directed the United States to victory in U.S.
Cup '95 and to fourth place in the America Cup as interim coach.
The Americans and Parma will kick off at 7 o'clock, to be followed by Benfica of Portugal and Boca Juniors of Argentina in the second game of a doubleheader.
The winners will meet Sunday afternoon after the consolation game at 1 o'clock in the first Parmalat Cup in the United States.


The Spoken Word
"ERA OF CONSPICUOUS CONSUMPTION -- THE GILDED AGE LIFESTYLE," Roosevelt-Vanderbilt National Historic Site, Route 9, Hyde Park, N.Y.
One in a series of free lectures given by the National Park Rangers.
Tomorrow at 7 P.M.
Information: (914) 229-7770.


Mothers Losing Extra Coverage
Despite a new state law that requires insurance companies to pay for at least two days of hospital care after the birth of a child, many women are discovering that their insurance policy still only covers a single day, a spokeswoman for Governor Whitman said yesterday.
A loophole in the law allows insurance companies to avoid the state's requirements until policies are renewed or a new policy is written.
Drew Karpinski, the state's Insurance Commissioner, is negotiating with insurers to try to persuade them to act immediately.


Hooked: A Magnificent Obsession; Brodhead and Beaverkill
Here are some favorite regional fishing spots of eight New York Times anglers. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
Dreaming is the best part of fly fishing.
You don't have to catch anything, you just have to believe that the fish are there.
And when you occasionally hook one, you can dream about it for a hundred nights, especially if it gets away.


The Packwood Vote
Saving Bob Packwood from the consequences of his behavior is not easy work, even for a Republican Senate leadership that is willing to squander its majority power -- not to mention its reputation -- on so unworthy a task.
Only a day after the Senate voted down Barbara Boxer's worthy plan for public hearings, the Senate Ethics Committee announced a new development.
Two more allegations of sexual misconduct against the Oregon Senator have surfaced.
There has not for a long time been a shortage of such allegations, but the timing was inconvenient for Senator Mitch McConnell, chairman of the Ethics Committee and the man appointed by the Senate majority leader, Robert Dole, to minimize the embarrassment for Mr.
Packwood and the Republican Party.
Now the committee says it must use the August recess to investigate these two charges "so that the record is complete." A complete record is what is needed, of course, and the best way to get it is through the public hearings rejected on Wednesday, 52 to 48.
Rather than expose Mr.
Packwood's shame, the Senate decided to wrap itself in it.
There have been few seedier legislative performances in recent years, especially since Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan decided to give the Packwood claque its only Democratic vote.
With this vote, Mr.
Moynihan put his friendship with Mr.
Packwood ahead of his duty to his constituents and the vitality of the ethics process.


Regency Health Services Inc.(RHS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


N.B.A. Talks On Contract Broken Off
Following the labor script written by their baseball brethren and reinforced by their hockey cousins in the past year, negotiators for the National Basketball Association and its union broke off talks last night, raising the specter of games in court replacing games on the court.
Three months remain before the scheduled start of the N.B.A. season, but the players are locked out and league officials reiterated that they would remain locked out without a new labor agreement.
A legal battle loomed in place of the routinely serene and economically rewarding life of the N.B.A.


A Precinct Chief Is Ousted For Apparently Being Drunk
In the lobby of the 84th Precinct yesterday, Deputy Inspector William J. Dwyer's name was still spelled out in white plastic letters at the top of a list of officials.
But the swivel chair in his office was empty, and police officers at the precinct house, in downtown Brooklyn, said no one had arrived to take his place.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
AL -- Fined Chili Davis of the California Angels $5,000 for his altercation with a fan during a July 30 game.


Parker Hannifin Corp.(PH,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


CHRONICLE
It must be good manners to pass your job on to your daughter-in-law, or so it seems in the Post family.
Five years after Emily Post, the author of the book "Emily Post's Etiquette" and a syndicated newspaper column, died in 1960, she was succeeded by her daughter-in-law ELIZABETH POST.
Now Elizabeth Post is about to step down as the doyenne of propriety.
Who will step into her shoes?
None other than her daughter-in-law PEGGY POST, who makes her debut as the etiquette columnist of Good Housekeeping magazine in the September issue.
Mrs.
Post (don't call her Ms., though she says that's a perfectly fine title) has already started making appearances at bridal shows at department stores.


METRO DIGEST
M.T.A. CHIEF PROPOSES FARE INCREASES
The head of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority proposed a sweeping set of fare and toll increases that would raise the cost of a token from $1.25 to $1.50 on Nov. 1 and push up the costs of using commuter railroads, bridges and tunnels.  [ Page A1. ]


A Madcap Maestro Of Haute Couture
ISAAC MIZRAHI can make things out of tulle or nubuck, but his most fabulous creation is the one he has made of flesh and blood.
It is Mr.
Mizrahi's hilarious, happily Napoleonic personality that makes such a treat of "Unzipped," Douglas Keeve's crafty valentine to the fashion world in general and this irrepressible designer in particular.
And intimacy with his subject -- as both a fashion photographer and Mr.
Mizrahi's former lover -- only heightens Mr.
Keeve's acuity rather than compromising his perspective.
Of course in terms of objectivity, it helps that "Unzipped" has nothing to do with state secrets and everything to do with fake fur.


Wendy's Intl.(WEN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


A Killer's Only Confidant: The Man Who Caught Susan Smith
The case of a lifetime is closed for Howard Wells.
The reporters and the well-wishers have begun to drift away, leaving the Union County Sheriff at peace.
He will try to do a little fishing when the police radio is quiet, or just sit with his wife, Wanda, and talk of anything but the murderer Susan Smith.
It bothers him a little that he told a lie to catch her, but he can live with the way it all turned out.
Mrs.
Smith has been sentenced to life in prison.


A Feisty Pig With Aspirations Beyond the Sty
The title character of "Babe," an endearing children's movie from Australia, is a plucky little pig who rebels from his assigned role in barnyard society and insists on behaving like a sheepdog.
Adapted from Dick King-Smith's book "The Sheep-Pig," the movie maintains a refreshingly light touch in spinning a fable about individualism and conformity.
The one incongruous element is an overbearing "Rocky"-style soundtrack that treats Babe's canine aspirations as an Olympian quest for gold.
The movie's blending of real animals and computer-animated puppetry is seamless to the point that one hardly notices the shifts.
And the actors' voices imbuing farm animals and domestic pets with distinctive personalities are unusually well chosen and imaginative.
Particularly evocative are Hugo Weaving as Rex, a proud, short-tempered sheepdog with a hearing disability; Evelyn Krape as Old Ewe, the fussy but good-hearted grande dame of the farm's flock of sheep, and Danny Mann as Ferdinand, a cheeky duck who dreams of being a rooster.


RESULTS PLUS
SWIMMING  Bennett Upsets Evans Again
This time, Janet Evans climbed out of the pool with a smile.
She was beaten by Brooke Bennett for the second time in four days, but pushed her 15-year-old rival to the limit before getting nipped in the 400-meter freestyle last night in the Phillips 66 National Championships at Pasadena, Calif.


Orange County's Artful Dodger; The Creative Bankruptcy Tactics of Bruce Bennett
Hardly anyone ever looked at the fine print behind the most common form of municipal borrowing in California until Bruce Bennett came along.
Mr.
Bennett looked -- and decided that while these borrowings, called "certificates of participation," trade in California as bonds, they are not really bonds at all, but legally a form of lease.
As the lawyer steering the Orange County bankruptcy, he has argued that they should be declared leases, making it easier for any town or county to walk away from its obligations.


In Moscow Again, Clubs Cater to 'Members Only'
Members of Grand Dynamo, a fancy private club in Moscow, have their own way of escaping the daily rat race.
At night gamblers, with tumblers of Scotch and score cards in hand, place their bets ($10 minimum) on large trained rats that scurry through a neon-lit, glass-encased race course, prompted by a hand bell rung by a dwarf dressed as an 18th-century page.
"We've always had a lot of rats in Russia," Maksim Malkov, the manager, said with a smirk.
"But this is the first time they've been organized."


Art in Review
'The Omitted Eye' Photography by Leo Matiz, 1940-65  Colombian Center 140 East 57th Street Manhattan Through Sept. 30
In his long career, Leo Matiz, a Colombian photographer who is now 78, pursued many types of work, from journalistic assignments for Life and other magazines to studio portraits.
Many of the photographs in this engaging retrospective embody a kind of South American version of Socialist Realism, with heroic workers shot at odd angles and peasant women framed against the sky.


One Person's Rude Is Another's Friendly
To the Editor:
Robert V. Levine's "Rude? Yeah, You Are" (Op-Ed, July 29), on city manners, was disturbing to me not only because of its New York-bashing, but also because of its assumption that Mr.
Levine's data gatherers were actually measuring what they set out to measure.


House Spending-Bill Votes Reveal Faults in Party Unity
Exposing fault lines in what was once all but rock-solid unity among House Republicans, party moderates have broken ranks over the last 24 hours to vote with Democrats against conservatives' attacks on Medicaid-financed abortion, the Government's main family planning program and the Corporation for Public Broadcasting.
After a second day of debate and intermittent votes on amendments to a spending bill for Federal labor, health and education programs, the new alliance of some 50 Republicans and a core of moderate-to-liberal Democrats is far from ironclad and in any case has wound up on the losing side more than on the winning.


Hooked: A Magnificent Obsession; A Farm Pond
Here are some favorite regional fishing spots of eight New York Times anglers. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
Farm ponds, the original local watering holes, literally dot the rural countryside and can be the source of good ultralight-tackle fishing.
Most contain pan fish: bluegills, crappie, perch or, if they are deep and muddy, catfish.
Occasionally something bigger.
I discovered the pond near our country house in upstate New York about 20 years ago.
It was full of small perch very eager to take my lures.
I'd play them for a bit and let them go.


Frank Cyr, 95; Called Father Of School Bus
Frank W. Cyr, an authority on rural education who was called the Father of the Yellow School Bus for his work in establishing national standards for school buses, died on Tuesday at a nursing home in Stamford, N.Y.
He was 95 and had lived in Stamford, in the Catskills, since retiring in 1965 from Columbia University Teachers College as a professor of rural education.
Dr.
Cyr often led conferences on how to meet the special needs of the country school, and it was at one such national get-together in 1939 that he earned his sobriquet.


The Return of a Princess
Gresham's law usually rules the world of children's films, where the dross so easily drives out the gold.
So "A Little Princess," a dazzlingly beautiful screen adaptation of Frances Hodgson Burnett's well-loved novel, didn't stand a chance against that friendly ghost.
It all but vanished after a brief release, and ordinarily would have next surfaced at the video store.
But this film is gorgeous enough to deserve the right theatrical setting, and now Warner Brothers is giving it a second chance.
It reopens today in Manhattan at the Lincoln Square Theater, at Broadway and 68th Street.
Unlike other films based on high-minded children's novels, this one isn't precious or prim.
As directed so imaginatively by Alfonso Cuaron, a film maker about whom you can expect to hear much more, it revels in the rich visual possibilities presented by its far-reaching story.
From India to the battlefields of World War I to a girls' school that would be just right for Madeleine, "A Little Princess" shows off an amazingly supple visual style.
There's also a dash of magical realism, which keeps this film steadily surprising.
Grown-ups won't get bored.


Graf Remains Target Of Tax-Evasion Inquiry
The father of STEFFI GRAF was denied bail and held in a German prison hospital after being arrested for investigation of tax evasion in an inquiry that also targets his daughter, the world's top-ranked women's player, a prosecutor said yesterday.
Steffi Graf "is still under investigation, but the situation for her is unlike that of her father," the Mannheim prosecutor, PETER WECHSUNG, said.


Inside Art
Damien Hirst and the Dark Side
To say that Larry Gagosian's first show for the fall is dead meat is no exaggeration.
Earlier this week, the gallery announced that the Damien Hirst exhibition scheduled to open at Mr.
Gagosian's SoHo branch on Sept. 16 had been postponed until March 30.
"This delay," the statement read, "was requested by the gallery in order to comply with the guidelines relating to New York City health and environmental ordinances."


Baseball's Antitrust Exemption Suffers a Setback
Baseball's 73-year-old exemption from antitrust laws sustained at least a temporary jolt yesterday when the Senate Judiciary Committee, for the first time ever, sent to the full Senate a bill calling for partial repeal of the exemption.
The legislation, approved by a 9-8 vote, would repeal the antitrust exemption in labor matters, freeing the players to use the courts as players in other sports have done.
It would not affect the minor leagues, the amateur draft or franchise relocation.


Hooked: A Magnificent Obsession; The Mudhole
Here are some favorite regional fishing spots of eight New York Times anglers. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
It is out there. It really is out there.


Granite Construction Inc.(GCCO,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Why Art Society Shouldn't Have Endorsed West Side Project; Put Politics Aside
To the Editor:
Representative Jerrold L. Nadler's long feud with the developer Donald J. Trump will end up depriving tens of thousands of New Yorkers of one of the greatest new parks of this century (news article, July 26).
Mr.
Nadler's determination to preserve the huge overpowering bulk of the aged elevated Miller Highway for the next 50 years will place a permanent blight on a pristine waterfront meadow, throwing dark shadows aross the park.


Clinton Says Government Needs to Combat Smoking by Youths
President Clinton said today that he thought the Government had a responsibility to discourage smoking among young people.
But White House aides, faced by furious lobbying on both sides, said no decision had been made whether to allow the Food and Drug Administration to begin regulating tobacco.
Mr.
Clinton said he was trying to find the best way to diminish the "terrible problem" of smoking among young people.
"I think that smoking among youth should be diminished and the Government has responsibility there," he said.
"I'm looking at what our options are, and we'll have an announcement on it before too long."


Shopping to Music Is Nice, But Cool Air Is the Big Draw
Shopping malls and their air-conditioned open spaces are becoming refuges from the heat for many families, who are giving stores a midsummer boost in sales even after most everyone's need for a fan or air conditioner has been met.
"Rain is best for bringing people in, and not-too-heavy snow comes next, but right after that is extreme heat," Al Messer, manager of the Stamford Town Center, said happily at midday, noting that business was up substantially over last summer.


Bally Entertainment Corp.(BLY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


For Poor but Talented, A Shot at Opportunity; Helping Pupils Qualify for Top Exams
Before she was picked to attend a program that helps Hispanic and African-American children qualify for the city's specialized high schools, Haydee Villanueva had never even heard of Stuyvesant High School.
But all summer, Haydee and other academically talented children have been spending long days at Stuyvesant studying algebra, physics and literature -- and working toward a goal some of them had never considered.





INSIDE
State Dept. vs. Pentagon
Warren Christopher criticized the Pentagon for sending two attaches into China as he is trying to end a political chill with Beijing.
Page A4. 'Star Wars' Plan Is Revived
The Senate moved ahead with plans to revive a version of President Reagan's "Star Wars" program, beating back Democrat opposition.
Page A3.
Focus on Hillary Clinton
The Senate Whitewater panel sought new clues about Hillary Rodham Clinton's role in the handling Vincent W. Foster Jr.'s files.
Page A22.
Exemption Under Attack
The Senate Judiciary Committee approved, by 9-8, a measure that would partly repeal baseball's 73-year-old antitrust exemption.
Page B7.


International Briefs; Thai Venture for Ford
The Ford Motor Company and the Mazda Motor Corporation of Japan said yesterday that they planned to build a manufacturing plant in Thailand to produce pickup trucks.
The total investment in land and facilities would be about $500 million, Ford said.
The plant near Bangkok is to have an annual capacity of about 135,000 vehicles, with production scheduled to start in mid-1998. (AP)


Costello Sings of Romance and Betrayal
Rejection doesn't bother Elvis Costello.
At the Beacon Theater in Manhattan on Wednesday night, the first of five shows continuing tonight, Sunday and Monday, Mr.
Costello's set included songs written for other people.
What Johnny Cash and Sam Moore (of Sam and Dave) had shelved, Mr.
Costello sang himself, filling the songs with drama and conviction.
For two hours, Mr.
Costello sang about power struggles and troubled romances, petty betrayals and humiliations, paranoia and murder: human reality falling far short of ideals.
Mr.
Costello is no idiot savant rocker; he is smart and self-conscious, toying with genres and carefully constructing metaphors.
In his opening song, he described himself as "living with the curse of sophistication." But he is also a one-man torrent of ideas; his lyrics are packed with brilliant one-liners and couplets, his tunes are lucid and memorable.
He has inspiration to match his craftsmanship.


Ntarama Journal; At Church, Testament To Horror
Fifteen months ago, these 500 skulls had faces and were part of the pile of the freshly killed bodies on the church floor.
A year later, with most of the flesh and hair gone, they were detached and laid in rows on the ground.
The holes explain everything: round dents from hammers, thin slits from pangas, a spearpoint snapped off in an eye socket.


A Town Peopled Only With the Dysfunctional
SONGS IN ORDINARY TIME  By Mary McGarry Morris  740 pages. Viking. $24.95.


On My Mind; Save The Drug Czar
Four or five times a week I get letters saying yes, I agree that crime and drug abuse are twin enemies of American society, but what can one person do to make a difference?
Here is one thing that is urgent -- I mean today, as soon as you finish this column.
Pick up the phone, call both your senators in Washington.
Push beyond receptionists and then say you do not want the office of the drug policy coordinator -- known as the drug czar -- wiped out.


China Arrests Start a DisputeIn Washington
Secretary of State Warren Christopher, worried that his efforts to repair relations with Beijing could be threatened, has demanded an investigation into why the Pentagon sent two officers to watch military exercises from the Chinese coast, senior Administration officials said today.
Mr.
Christopher, who is traveling in Asia, complained in telephone calls to Washington that the operation put in peril a careful effort to reopen a dialogue with China and win the quick release of Harry Wu, an American citizen held by China on charges of stealing state secrets, officials said.


2 New Allegations Delay Release of Packwood Files
The Senate Ethics Committee today discovered two overlooked accusations of sexual misconduct against Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon and voted to investigate them and delay publication of the evidence against him.
The committee revealed no details of the two complaints, either what happened, when they happened, when the complaints were made or the circumstances under which they had been first overlooked and then discovered.


China Arrests Start DisputeIn Washington
Secretary of State Warren Christopher, worried that his efforts to repair relations with Beijing could be threatened, has demanded an investigation into why the Pentagon sent two officers to watch military exercises from the Chinese coast, senior Administration officials said today.
Mr.
Christopher, who is traveling in Asia, complained in telephone calls to Washington that the operation put in peril a careful effort to reopen a dialogue with China and win the quick release of Harry Wu, an American citizen held by China on charges of stealing state secrets, officials said.


CHRONICLE
Yesterday was the actor MARTIN SHEEN'S 55th birthday, and he did what he has done more than 50 times in the past: got arrested at a demonstration.
He was one of seven people arrested for failing to disperse after being ordered to do so by the police during a protest at the Pentagon over the dropping of atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki 50 years ago.
He marched with the 1995 Disarmament Coalition, an organization of more than 50 antiwar and religious groups.


M.T.A.'S CHAIRMAN SEEKS TO INCREASE TOLLS AND FARES
The head of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority proposed a sweeping set of fare and toll increases yesterday that would raise the cost of a token from $1.25 to $1.50 on Nov. 1 and push up the costs of using commuter railroads, bridges and tunnels.
The official, E. Virgil Conway, said the proposed increases, which require public hearings and approval of the M.T.A. board, were intended to avert deep service cuts and right the increasingly wobbly finances of the transit system.


McGraw-Hill Job Filled
McGraw-Hill Inc. has appointed Peter Jovanovich president of its Educational and Professional Publishing Group, one of its three major business segments.
Mr.
Jovanovich will be responsible for the recently formed Educational Publishing Group, the Professional Publishing Group and the Legal Information Group.


Arrested for Shooting
RILEY WASHINGTON, the Nebraska backup receiver and track star, has been charged with attempted murder in a late-night shooting at a Lincoln convenience store.


U.S. Opposes European Plan for Bosnia
After intense negotiations here with the European Union's special envoy to Bosnia, Clinton Administration officials said today that they remain opposed to key details of his plan to ease international sanctions against Serbia if the Serbian President will formally recognize Bosnia.
American officials said the plan put forward by the European negotiator, Carl Bildt, a former prime minister of Sweden, would be far too generous to Serbia, which some officials suspect of helping the Bosnian Serbs fight Bosnia's Muslim-dominated Government.


Janet Ward, 70, Actress, Is Dead
Janet Ward, an actress who appeared on the stage in "The Impossible Years," "Middle of the Night" and "The Egg," died on Wednesday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 70 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was complications from a heart attack, said Thayer Burch, a friend.


International Briefs; Pemex Upgrading Plant
Petroleos Mexicanos S.A., or Pemex, said yesterday that it planned to invest $1.1 billion in the next three years to upgrade its Cadereyta refinery in northern Mexico.
The project will result in added product capacity of 132,500 barrels a day of unleaded gasoline and diesel fuel.
Pemex, the Mexican state oil monopoly, also plans to build a unit to break down high-sulfur oils and products into lighter products, like gasoline.
Pemex will also invest in associated plants facilities.
Pemex said it expects the new facilities to save the company $618 million a year. (Dow Jones)


Breyer on Footnotes Needs a Footnote
To the Editor:
Justice Stephen G. Breyer, in crediting his nonuse of footnotes to advice from the late Justice Arthur Goldberg (Law page, July 28), perhaps overlooks another source.


Judges Use a New Weapon Against Driving Drunk
Some drunken drivers are facing a new obstacle: a dashboard computer that detects alcohol on the breath and prevents the car from starting when the driver's alcohol level is too high.
As more judges order the devices installed, and the devices become more sophisticated, some traditional law-enforcement functions are being turned over to private contractors and even microchips.
"It's a Big Brother type of thing," said Michael L. Walton, the Court Administrator in Hamilton County, Ohio, where judges have flexibility in ordering the devices use.


Art in Review
Michel Alexis 'Stolen Diaries'  Dahn Gallery 39 Wooster Street (near Grand Street) SoHo Through Aug. 12
Michel Alexis, a French painter living in New York, clearly has talent to spare; his problem is figuring out what to do with it.
Some of his paintings include realistic images -- a little Victorian girl, a pair of rococo chairs -- reproduced with photographic precision.
In other pictures recalling the work of Philip Taafe, rococo ornamentation has been transformed into an "abstract" pattern of curving, interlacing strips.
Still others present asymmetrical compositions of blurry, biomorphic shapes.
Dates and phrases printed in block letters flicker subliminally below and around the other forms.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in Manhattan that are to close soon:  Closing This Weekend
"DAMN YANKEES," Marquis Theater, 1535 Broadway, at 45th Street.
A revival of the 1955 musical, featuring Jerry Lewis.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15 to $70.
Information: (212) 307-4100.


Market Place; Hockey, basketball and movies give Comsat a livelier look.
IN the uncertain world of technology and communication, one constant has long been the sleepiness of the Comsat Corporation.
The big, Government-chartered satellite communications company could be counted on for modest growth and an unspectacular stock performance.
That may be changing.
Little by little, Comsat has built up a portfolio of entertainment assets, ranging from movies to professional sports.
The company owns the Denver Nuggets of the National Basketball Association and recently bought and moved to Denver the Quebec Nordiques hockey team; it also has a video-on-demand service for hotels and owns Beacon Communications, which has produced films like "The Commitments." Roughly one-fourth of the company's revenue comes from these businesses, and entertainment businesses are among the hottest performers on the stock market.


Republicans Begin Shifting Medicare Battle to the Home Front
Republican leaders began an intense effort today to sell their Medicare overhaul during Congress's forthcoming August recess, promising to "preserve, protect and improve" the program even as they extract $270 billion from it during the next seven years.
Democrats countered that the Republican proposals would be anything but painless.
They also asserted that the Republicans' grass-roots effort was actually an alliance of big insurance companies and other business groups more concerned with their own interests than those of Medicare beneficiaries.


Miami Awaits Ruling by the N.C.A.A.
Butch Davis, the new head coach at Miami, confirmed today that an internal investigation of the Hurricane football program has been completed and that the university expects to hear soon from the National Collegiate Athletic Association regarding possible sanctions.
The Hurricanes will begin practice Aug. 11 and their season opener will be played on Sept. 2 against U.C.L.A. in the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, Calif.


International Briefs; Earnings Rise at Zeneca
The Zeneca Group P.L.C. of Britain said yesterday that its first-half pretax profit rose 12 percent, to $:506 million, or about $809 million, fueled by rising sales of key drugs and agrochemicals.
In the period a year earlier, Zeneca, a leading maker of drugs that specializes in heart and cancer treatments, had pretax profit of $:451 million before exceptional charges.
Zeneca said its sales had increased 6 percent, to $:2.53 billion. (Bloomberg Business News)


Transactions
Baseball  American League
AL -- Fined Chili Davis of the California Angels $5,000 for his altercation with a fan during a July 30 game.


Playboy Enterprises Inc.(PLAA,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Pratt &amp; Lambert United Inc.(PLU,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Retail Gains Lack Sizzle In July Heat
Many of the nation's large retailers reported moderate sales gains in July yesterday, as a blistering heat wave helped them shed inventories of lightweight clothing and ring up strong sales of air-conditioners.
But industry analysts said the sales figures appeared to reflect a trend of only mild gains among merchants in recent months rather than an upswing in consumer spending.


Whitewater Panel Focuses on Mrs. Clinton
The Senate Whitewater panel today bore down on White House officials in search of new clues about Hillary Rodham Clinton's role in the handling of files in Vincent W. Foster Jr.'s office after his suicide two years ago.
Under Republican questioning, a White House lawyer testified that the White House counsel, Bernard W. Nussbaum, told him that Mrs.
Clinton had expressed concern about "unfettered access" to Mr.
Foster's office by investigators.
The lawyer, Stephen R. Neuwirth, said Mr.
Nussbaum said he had heard of that concern from Susan Thomases, one of Mrs.
Clinton's closest confidantes.


Turnpike Talks Come to a Halt
Contract talks between the union representing toll collectors and the New Jersey Turnpike Authority appear to be at a standstill, and no bargaining sessions are scheduled, The Associated Press reported yesterday.


A Deliveryman on the Run
As a city type who hides from the F.B.I. by masquerading as a Scout leader, camping out with a half-dozen children, Daniel Stern in "Bushwhacked" is in his "Home Alone" mode.
Like the robber he played in those hits, his Max Grabelski is a guy with one expression: wide-eyed, red-faced, frantic.
But what works for a comic foil becomes lame and tiresome when he is the center of a whole movie.
It's even worse when the movie is as predictable as "Bushwhacked," a children's action film that even children will find slow going.
A deliveryman wrongly accused of murder, Max wears a black leather (or more likely vinyl) jacket and a gold chain around his neck.
He can cram a whole cupcake into his mouth just seconds before lighting a cigarette.
He is nobody's idea of a role model.
But when he tries to climb to a clifftop area called Devil's Peak, where he can prove his innocence, he bumbles his way into taking five boys and a token girl into the wilderness with him.


Courage in Colombia
The resignation on Wednesday of Colombia's Defense Minister, Fernando Botero, is an encouraging sign.
Mr.
Botero is suspected of accepting campaign contributions for President Ernesto Samper from the Cali cocaine cartel.
That is a serious and damaging allegation.
But Colombia's politicians have a long history of being tainted with drug money.
It has taken courage and tenacity for the country's chief prosecutor to pursue the money trail to such a high level.
Mr.
Botero's unhappy situation is a telling illustration of the double life led by many Colombian politicians.
Indeed, he once drew praise for his own efforts to control the Cali cartel.
Mr.
Samper himself is implicated in the testimony that brought down Mr.
Botero, whose resignation may be an attempt to mollify critics of the President.


Kresser Stein Losing 2 Top Executives
Kresser Stein Robaire in Santa Monica, Calif., said yesterday that two of its three principals were leaving just nine months after the agency was established.
John Stein, 44, and Jean Robaire, 38, the co-executive creative directors, are leaving the newly merged agency, which they helped form in November when Kresser/Craig acquired Stein Robaire Helm in Los Angeles.


Man Hurt Fleeing Police; Crowd Protests
A young man was injured in a fall from the fourth floor of an apartment building in the Washington Heights section of Manhattan after a confrontation with a police officer last night, the police said.
An angry crowd of about 100, who had apparently heard that the officer pushed the man, then marched in the streets for an hour as about 40 police officers in riot gear gathered.
The police disputed the version of the incident that spread through the neighborhood after a woman said she saw the pushing take place.
The police said the officer did not push the man, Ariel Santos, 17, but that he fell from a window when he apparently tried to slide down some cables to an apartment directly underneath.


Arrested in Companion's Killing
A man who was reportedly upset that his common-law wife had left him for another woman was arrested yesterday on murder charges.
Clayjean Gaines, who had obtained a restraining order last month against her former live-in companion, Benjamin Morrison, was found stabbed to death in her apartment Tuesday night.
The couple had separated in March.
"The conflict was the result of her choice of an alternative life style," said an official close to the case, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.


A Master of Brazilian Songs
The best songwriters know that harmony isn't only a matter of technique, but of psychology.
It can suggest comfort or tension, uncertainty or hope; it can agitate or reassure or tickle.
Ivan Lins, a major Brazilian songwriter who is playing a rare club engagement through Sunday at the Blue Note (131 West Third Street, in Greenwich Village), is a master of harmony.
While musicians savor his chord sequences, other listeners hear his songs as openly heartfelt.
With his regular lyricist, Vitor Martins, Mr.
Lins writes thoughtful love songs and tender portraits of Brazil.
His songs have been picked up by many North American jazz and pop musicians; Quincy Jones won a Grammy award for a version of Mr.
Lins's "Velas" ("Sails").


Edward Whittemore, Writer, 62; Set Series of Novels in Jerusalem
Edward P. Whittemore, a writer best known for his exotic "Jerusalem Quartet," a series of novels set in that city from the late 19th century until well after World War II, died yesterday at a hospice in Riverdale, the Bronx.
He was 62 and most recently lived in Manhattan.
The cause was prostate cancer, said his literary agent, Thomas C. Wallace.


Pathmark's Neighbors Learn to Compete
Along Jamaica Avenue, the commercial heart of the working-class Woodhaven section of Queens, a string of small, mom-and-pop shops opens every morning, providing their owners with a steady, if not always bustling, business.
Just a few blocks away stands a Pathmark supermarket, a hulking 70,000-square-foot presence astride a small strip mall.
When the giant supermarket opened 10 years ago most of the other local merchants openly worried that they would be driven out of business.
How could they compete with this commercial giant?


Corrections
An article in the Currents column of The Home Section yesterday about Richard's Interior Design misstated the store's address in some editions.
It is 1390 Lexington Avenue (92d Street); the phone number is (212) 831-9000.


BILL TO DECONTROL PHONES AND CABLE TIES UP THE HOUSE
House Republican leaders delayed final action early this morning on legislation that would open the nation's telephone and cable companies to freewheeling competition.
The bill is still expected to pass the House of Representatives by a comfortable margin -- though it faces a threatened Presidential veto.
But a protracted debate and action on an unrelated appropriations bill ran past midnight, well beyond the time the House was scheduled to take up the telecommunications bill.


For Turner, Potential Help On a CBS Bid
John C. Malone, the chief executive of Tele-Communications Inc., threw his support yesterday behind Ted Turner's dream of gaining control of a broadcast television network.
At the annual meeting of Tele-Communications, Mr.
Malone said his company would do "everything we can to help" Mr.
Turner get a network.


U.S. Opposes European Plan for Bosnia
After intense negotiations here with the European Union's special envoy to Bosnia, Clinton Administration officials said today that they remain opposed to key details of his plan to ease international sanctions against Serbia if the Serbian President will formally recognize Bosnia.
American officials said the plan put forward by the European negotiator, Carl Bildt, a former prime minister of Sweden, would be far too generous to Serbia, which some officials suspect of helping the Bosnian Serbs fight Bosnia's Muslim-dominated Government.


Lifting Bosnia Embargo Will Only Hurt U.S.
To the Editor:
Frustration certainly explains the Senate and now the House of Representatives vote (news article, Aug. 2) to flout the United Nations Security Council arms embargo on the former Yugoslavia, a move you endorse (editorial, July 27).
But however satisfying emotionally, lifting the embargo poses serious dangers to American interests.


Saberhagen Rattles Through in His Debut
Rockies 9, Dodgers 4
Bret Saberhagen overcame nerves and 13 hits to win his Colorado debut, 9-4, yesterday, helping the Rockies beat the Los Angeles Dodgers for the first time in six games at Coors Field this season.


Thai Workers Are Set Free In California
Inside a squalid garment factory ringed with barbed wire and spiked fences, nearly 70 foreign workers from Thailand lived and worked, sometimes for years, in what Federal agents described today as involuntary servitude.
Before the workers were freed in a pre-dawn raid by immigration officials on Wednesday, they had lived a life in which they were locked up and guarded each night and threatened with harm or death if they tried to escape.
Federal officials said that the workers' children were often held hostage to insure that the parents would continue stitching together American brand-name clothes.
Sometimes, the officials said, the workers were little more than children themselves.


Art in Review
Kathy Butterly  Franklin Parrasch Gallery 588 Broadway (near Prince Street) SoHo Through Aug. 25
Kathy Butterly's small porcelain vases, which rarely stand more than seven inches high, are exquisite in every way: in color, detail and a casually flawless technique that encompasses a fair number of carefully controlled, usually witty flaws.


International Briefs; First-Half Profit Down 10% at UBS
Union Bank of Switzerland said yesterday that its first-half profit fell more than 10 percent, as a rise in trading income was offset by both lower interest and commission income and higher loan-risk provisions tied to a sluggish Swiss economy.
The bank's net profit in the first half fell to 832 million Swiss francs, or about $721 million, from 929 million francs in the period a year earlier.
Most analysts had been forecasting a profit rise.


International Briefs; Quarterly Profit Jumps At Royal Dutch/Shell
Higher oil prices and an improved performance in the chemicals business helped lift quarterly earnings by 90 percent at the Royal Dutch/ Shell Group of Companies.
The British-Dutch oil giant said yesterday that it had earned $:1.28 billion, or $2.05 billion, for the three months that ended on June 30, up from $:673 million in the corresponding period of 1994.
Royal Dutch/Shell's revenue was up 18 percent at $:24.22 billion, or $38.69 billion.


Employees Describe Sexual Harassment by Chief Executive
The chief executive of Del Laboratories suggested to Jonneigh Adrion that if she wanted to advance, she should give him oral sex, Ms.
Adrion said yesterday.
The executive, Dan K. Wassong, lobbed his cigars and the telephone at Christine Saitta, Ms.
Saitta recalled.
Mr.
Wassong would so abuse Robin Cohen that she would go home and cry every afternoon during the nine days she lasted in the job, Ms.
Cohen said.
"You'd be filing and all of a sudden he'd be behind you," Ms.
Saitta said.
"It was touching, it was comments, it was physical abuse."


Royal Dutch/Shell Group of Cos. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sports of The Times; Cone Isn't Only Winner In Big Deal
THE trade never goes away.
There was David Cone, beating Milwaukee, 5-4, last night in steamy Yankee Stadium, and the trivia question was surely on somebody's lips: Who was the other guy the first time David Cone changed teams?
It came up the other day.
When the talented and personable rent-a-pitcher joined the Yankees, he was reminiscing about the dying owner of the Kansas City Royals, Ewing Kauffman, wanting to rectify the worst trade in the history of the club.
Cone's reference was totally without malice.
He knows Ed Hearn has suffered enough.


Mets Pick Up Unique Loss
The Mets have lost 55 games this season.
Some have been nail-biters, some have been blowouts, but none have been any stranger than their 3-2 defeat to the Reds tonight at Riverfront Stadium.
The Reds scored their winning run in the sixth inning on a controversial play that took the umpires and managers 13 minutes to sort out.
It started with Ron Gant trying to steal home and ended with Manager Dallas Green believing the plate umpire Paul Runge had stolen the game.


Arena Won't Rock Papal Mass
R.E.M. fans who have been waiting to hear the rock band since its last tour, in 1989, will have to wait a bit longer.
R.E.M., which is best known for its 1991 hit, "Losing My Religion," has postponed its Oct. 5 concert at the Meadowlands Arena because Pope John Paul II is scheduled to say Mass the same evening at Giants Stadium next door, The Associated Press reported.


Art in Review
Charles Harbutt  Laurence Miller Gallery 138 Spring Street SoHo Through Aug. 11
Charles Harbutt's photographs have long teetered on the edge between reportage and something more.
Since the 1950's he has covered news events for many publications, and he was long a member (and twice president) of Magnum, the cooperative photo agency.
His best pictures, though, resonate with meanings beyond the immediate.


McDermott Intl.(MOR,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Serbs Said to Agree to Pact With Croatia
Croatian Government forces opened what appeared to be a major offensive against the headquarters of the rebel Serbs in Knin early today.
The attack came just hours after the United States Ambassador here said he had secured concessions from a rebel Serb leader that had raised hopes of averting a wider war in the Balkans.


Corporate Profits Are Robust, Despite Slowing Growth
Not so long ago, an abrupt slowdown in economic growth would have been reflected on the bottom line of corporate America.
Not in this business cycle, which, after five years of expansion, is behaving like few others.
The economy barely budged in the second quarter, growing at an annual rate of five-tenths of 1 percent, according to preliminary data released last week by the Commerce Department, compared with a 2.7 percent rate in the first three months of the year.


Where to Cast a Line and Await a Bite
Here is a sampling of county, state and Federal parks in the New York metropolitan region where fresh- and salt-water fishing is permitted.
State fishing licenses are required for fresh-water fishing and can be obtained at county clerk offices and many sporting-goods stores.
A New York State fishing license costs $14 ($35 for nonresidents); those under 16 do not need a license.
Some Westchester County parks are open only to residents; only those open to all are listed below.
New York State fishing licenses are required for fishing in most Westchester County parks.
Information: (518) 457-3521.
Free permits, issued by the New York City Department of Environmental Protection, are needed for fishing in any of the city's 21 reservoirs around the state; a state fishing license is also required.
Information: (914) 985-2275; (914) 657-2663; and (607) 363-7501.


Bond Proposal to Benefit Park
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman singled out Liberty State Park yesterday by choosing the 578-acre park as the setting for signing a measure asking voters to authorize a $340 million bond issue to preserve farmland and historic sites.
But the $10 million that the Green Acres bond issue would provide for the park is only a fraction of the $50 million that officials believe they need to develop more than 350 acres there, said Peter L. Ylvisaker, president of the Liberty State Park Development Corporation.


Edith Wharton's Home And Midlife Love Affair
It is probably best not to speculate on what Edith Wharton might say could she see a performance taking place this summer at the Mount, the austerely handsome country house she had built here in the early part of the century.
"The Fiery Rain," Dennis Krausnick's three-character mosaic about the author's midlife love affair with the journalist Morton Fullerton, finds a woman impersonating Wharton in the salon where she once held social court and, what's more, the actress is often clad in attire suitable only to the bedroom.


United Healthcare Corp.(UNH,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


U.S. Decides Not to Prosecute Clinton Health Plan Architect
Federal prosecutors have decided not to file criminal charges against Ira C. Magaziner, the architect of President Clinton's ill-fated health plan, who had been accused of giving misleading testimony to a Federal court, Government officials said tonight.
Judge Royce C. Lamberth of the Federal District Court here had asked the prosecutors to determine if Mr.
Magaziner committed perjury or criminal contempt of court in a sworn declaration describing the operation of the Federal task force that developed the President's health plan.


Jostens Inc.(JOS,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


So You Think It's Easy to Be a Judge?
So here's Tom Selleck, impersonating a judge, embroiled with a demonic prosecutor, a sleazy lawyer, a wacked-out druggie and some compromised colleagues.
Such is the gist of "Broken Trust," Sunday on TNT.
Based on William P. Wood's novel "Court of Honor," the two-hour movie has as many loopholes as a lawyer's nightmare but crackles along on the dialogue of Joan Didion and John Gregory Dunne as it tells of an upright judge becoming party to a sting operation that goes awry, not that it was noticeably wry to begin with.


Jets' Brock Is Putting His Complacent Attitude on Shelf
Not everyone tripled his salary in free agency.
Or even doubled it.
Some, like Matt Brock, halved it.
Brock, a defensive tackle and the Jets' newest starter now that Tony Casillas is out, is making $325,000 this year just two seasons after he made $600,000 in Green Bay.
And there will be no "Breakfast With Brock" radio show here Friday morning -- Brock lost that gig when he came to New York.


Hooked: A Magnificent Obsession; Farmington River
Here are some favorite regional fishing spots of eight New York Times anglers. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
I decided this summer to use my fishing rod as a way to explore the region, so it is not unusual to find myself occasionally drifting into the Orvis fishing store near Grand Central Terminal.


Hooked: A Magnificent Obsession; Osgood Pond
Here are some favorite regional fishing spots of eight New York Times anglers. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
There were huge pike down in the weeds of Osgood Pond near Paul Smiths, N.Y., in the Adirondacks above Saranac Lake.
We knew because some days we got them to bite on our lollygagging Flatfish lures or flashing spoons and spinners.
Mostly, though, we lost them -- the fish and the lures -- ending up with a rowboat full of weeds and nothing else.
The caretaker of our bungalow colony once caught a four-foot pike with teeth like a shark's and kept the head pickled in a glass jar.
He used to come back with his boat full of weeds, so I learned that if you want to catch a big fish, you have to be prepared for a boat full of weeds.
Calvin Coolidge went pike fishing there, too, in the 1920's, out of White Pine Camp on the far end of the lake.
On one trip in 1926 he had barely thrown his line in when he hooked a three-pound pike.


Why Art Society Shouldn't Have Endorsed West Side Project
To the Editor:
I cringe whenever the Municipal Art Society, on whose board of directors I have had the honor to serve for several decades, is mentioned among the backers of the Riverside South project on Manhattan's West Side (news article, July 26).


Estee Lauder seeks to defrost its image with a fresh new 'face.'
ELIZABETH HURLEY is the Woman Wronged in the Hugh Grant affair, but does that mean she will sell more lipstick and perfume for Estee Lauder?
Ms.
Hurley is the new model for Lauder, the "face" that executives spent two years seeking, and she is the centerpiece of a worldwide print and television campaign that begins today.


Sales Rise With Heat
Shopping malls and their air-conditioned open spaces are becoming refuges from the heat for many families, who are giving stores a midsummer boost in sales even after most everyone's need for a fan or air conditioner has been met.


AST Research Inc.(ASTA,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 1


Upsets at Bridge Tournament
The American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals continued here this afternoon with two top-ranked teams losing in the major championships.
In the Spingold Knockout Teams, two young stars were part of a foursome that upset the fourth-seeded squad headed by Ron Sukoneck of Annandale, Va., and including Russ Ekeblad of Providence, R.I., Michael Becker of Tenafly, N.J., Ron Rubin of North Miami, Robert Levin of Orlando, Fla., and Peter Weichsel of Encenitas, Calif.
They lost by 52 imps to 26-year-old Geoff Hampson of Fenton, Mich., and 20-year-old Eric Greco of Annandale, Va., who were teamed with Walter Schafer of Bloomingdale, Ill., and Tom Fox of Glenview, Ill.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.81
6.21
4.28
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.40
5.40
4.32
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.40
5.36
4.70
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.51
6.43
7.10
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.93
6.86
7.40
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.78
7.73
8.17
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.21
6.17
6.31
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Hampton Industries(HAI,A) reports earnings for 13wks to Jul 1


Chancellor to Acquire 17 Radio Stations
The wave of media mergers swept onward today as the Chancellor Broadcasting Company agreed to pay $395 million for the 17 radio stations of Shamrock Broadcasting Inc. in the largest radio deal ever.
Chancellor, which is controlled by the Dallas investment firm Hicks, Muse, Tate &amp; Furst Inc., would become the nation's third-largest independent radio operator with a total of 33 stations and estimated annual revenue of $185 million.
Shamrock, based in Burbank, Calif., is controlled by the family of Roy E. Disney.


Group Plans Shift in Effort For Homeless
The Grand Central Partnership said yesterday that it would overhaul its program for the homeless, putting its outreach section under the management of a social service agency.
It would also stop using field workers as quasi-security guards to clear the homeless from cash-machine lobbies, a practice that had raised charges of abuses.
That and other changes, partnership officials said, are to be made in response to a 69-page report released yesterday by a consultant who said he found serious problems with the program.


Arraignment in Bombing


The People and Places From a Peripatetic Life
Underappreciated, overlooked, neglected: any or all of these adjectives can be applied to the dynamic black-and-white photographs of Leon Levinstein, now at the Museum of Modern Art.
Despite achieving early success in the 1950's, when his photographs won prizes and were included in no fewer than seven group shows at the Modern, Levinstein largely slipped from the public eye in the decades before his death in 1988.
Why he and his work suffered this fate, and whether it was justified, are implicit questions posed by the current show, "Leon Levinstein: The Moment of Exposure," organized by Bob Shamis for the National Gallery of Canada.
The answers are neither simple nor direct, but involve Levinstein's style, the situation of photography during his career, and his own reclusive personality.


Coneheads Have Reason To Celebrate
The diehard fans wearing authentic, flesh-colored Coneheads howled from the upper deck along the third-base line while sitting behind a sheet emblazoned with, "Cone Corner." The fans with the cheaper, paper Coneheads screamed from the first-base upper deck.
The smattering of fans who took a fashion risk by donning the rare, fluorescent Coneheads were perched in the right center-field bleachers.
They all came to watch the chief Conehead and their new hero, David Cone, make his debut at Yankee Stadium.
Maybe these raucous fans should review their choice of head apparel before Cone's next start.
Does anyone own a bald head to mimic Ruben Sierra?
How about a brown wig to imitate Paul O'Neill?
Or a stocking to resemble Gerald Williams?
During a dramatic four-run eighth inning, these Yankees had superb at-bats that turned Cone's frustrating evening into a fantasy evening and a 5-4 victory over the Brewers.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption yesterday about the heat wave misidentified the Italian ice vendor shown.
He is Peter Benfaremo, not Ben Fa remo.


Pataki Signs Measure Giving Police a Free Ride on L.I.R.R.
With survivors of the Long Island Rail Road massacre looking over his shoulder, Gov.
George E. Pataki signed a law today allowing police officers to travel on the railroad without charge.
"It's a wonderful piece of legislation," said Carolyn McCarthy, who has become a spokeswoman for the victims since her husband was killed and her son critically wounded in the shootings here at the Merillon Avenue Station a year and a half ago.


Prescription By Giuliani
There is a carefully choreographed dance that New York City mayors do whenever a subway-fare increase looms, and yesterday the curtain went up on Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's version.
Though he paid homage to past masters, his response could not be mistaken for that of anyone else.
Like almost all of his recent predecessors, Mr.
Giuliani railed at the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which in many ways was established precisely to absorb political criticism accompanying a fare increase.
The Mayor appoints only 4 of the 17 members of the M.T.A. board, which yesterday began considering a proposed 25-cent increase in the fare.


Mets Fear Damaged Goods
Juan Acevedo, the pitcher the Mets coveted and finally received from the Colorado Rockies in the trade for Bret Saberhagen, will be examined by team doctors tomorrow because of soreness in his pitching elbow and shoulder.
For now the Mets think there is nothing seriously wrong with the hard-throwing right-hander, and they are guessing his discomfort is being caused by fatigue -- he has pitched almost nonstop since last season.
But what troubles the Mets is that they didn't know of Acevedo's condition before making the trade late Monday night.
The Mets had received assurances from the Rockies that Acevedo was healthy.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about plunging life expectancy in Russia referred imprecisely to a remark by Dr.
David Hoel, an American expert on the effects of radiation in populations.
When he said, "We could not seem to observe the genetic effects of what happened there," he was referring specifically to radiation's effects on Hiroshima, not to Russia.


In America; Buying Clothes Without Exploiting Children
Readers have been asking what they can do about American companies that sell clothing made by exploited workers, many of them children, in the maquiladora factories of Central America and the Caribbean.
A woman from Montauk, N.Y., wrote, "I simply cannot sit back and watch my two children frolic in their vacation surf knowing that other children suffer to enable my kids to have cute bathing suits."


More Software. Gee.
THE microcomputer software industry needs to take a vacation.
I'd suggest a vacation of at least 18 months.
Take a holiday and let consumers take a breath.
I'm writing this article with a Waterman fountain pen.
It is a fairly antiquated piece of equipment.
I like the way the words flow out of the tip.
I'll do a rewrite on my computer.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows:
"SMELLS LIKE VINYL," Roger Merians Gallery, 76 Greene Street, SoHo (through Aug. 17).
Organized by Sarah Seager and Thaddeus Strode, this summer extravaganza is made up of 200 or or so painted versions of favorite CD covers by almost as many artists.
The results are breezy, lo-cal fun, but the real interest lies in who listens to what.
John Baldessari likes Schubert; Tom Knechtel likes South Indian dance music, and Lawrence Weiner likes Lawrence Weiner.
Otherwise, the taste isn't highly evolved (Holland Cotter).


The Sister's Story: A special report.; For Figure in Oklahoma Inquiry, Ties of Blood and Something More
At Niagara County Community College, in the rolling farmlands of New York State near the Canadian border, Jennifer McVeigh was the kind of earnest, inquisitive student professors dream of having in their classrooms.
Engaging, loquacious and fun to pal around with, she seemed the very antithesis of her brother, Timothy J. McVeigh, the taciturn, solitary, gun-loving veteran of the Persian Gulf war, who is accused of playing a major role in the devastating bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City.


Legal Defense Fund in Battle Over Access to Old Files
A group of historians and journalists contends that the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund Inc., which won a series of landmark courtroom victories in civil rights over the last five decades, is dragging its feet in allowing researchers access to its historical records.
As the dispute has intensified in recent weeks, one journalist has asserted that the fund, best known for winning cases ending school desegregation and the death penalty, is seeking to restrict access for reporters whose articles it does not like.
The documents are held by the Library of Congress, but the fund is not giving permission for researchers to examine them, citing concerns of lawyer-client confidentiality.


2 Indicted in Killing of Officer
A murderer who had only recently been paroled and a motorcycle gang leader were indicted yesterday in the shooting death last May of a police officer on a Gloucester County highway, The Associated Press reported.
The slaying of Sgt.
Ippolito Gonzalez during a routine traffic stop caused outrage because Robert Simon had been paroled from a Pennsylvania prison against the wishes of the judge who presided over his 1982 murder trial.
And he had been allowed to live in Williamstown, a hangout for other members of the Warlocks motorcycle gang.


Anchor and Balm For Restless Souls
ONE of the best things about the "Art in the Anchorage" exhibitions organized each summer is the setting: the vaults of the Brooklyn Bridge anchorage, dark, mysterious and, these days, almost sinfully cool.
The anchorage's tall, narrow spaces make palpable the Industrial Revolution's promise of progress while reiterating the 19th-century's intermittent yearning for simpler times, preferably Gothic or Romanesque.
Its arches and enormous blocks of stone evoke a castle's keep, or the neglected corner of a vast cathedral.
But the anchorage also reveals the little-seen infrastructure of a legendary New York symbol.
It is one of the hidden hearts of the metropolis, a place to meditate, at a slight remove, on New York's din and perpetual motion, indicated most immediately by the faint hum of traffic far overhead.


SCI Systems Inc.(SCIS,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
A.E.P.
INDUSTRIES, Moonachie, N.J., a maker of polyethylene film products, is offering to buy back about 1 million, or roughly 17 percent, of its outstanding shares.
The company will offer holders $22.75 in cash for each share tendered.
BERGEN BRUNSWIG CORP., Orange, Calif., a supplier of pharmaceuticals and health care products, said that it had completed its acquisition of Colonial Healthcare Supply Co., Lake Zurich, Ill., a distributor of medical and surgical products.
Terms were not announced.


Croatian Army Begins Attack on Rebel Serbs
Croatian Government forces opened what appeared to be a major offensive against the headquarters of the rebel Serbs in Knin early today.
The attack came just hours after the United States Ambassador here said he had secured concessions from a rebel Serb leader that had raised hopes of averting a wider war in the Balkans.


Ethics Code for Essex Officials
"Essex County has a long and sad history of corruption," said County Executive James W. Treffinger in announcing yesterday that he had established a code of ethics for county officials and employees.
The code, which takes effect immediately, prohibits county officials from taking gifts or favors from people they do business with, soliciting contributions during work hours or on county property or using county cars for personal business.


Comic Side of Sex in Age of AIDS
Paul Rudnick's great comic gift is for irreverent, mordant, flighty humor.
No one is better at noticing the fashion accessory and quirk of taste that reveals character, in the play "Jeffrey," the screenplay "Addams Family Values" and especially when he lurks behind the name Libby Gelman-Waxner, everybody's favorite film critic, in Premiere magazine.
This sly comic quality emerges when Sterling (Patrick Stewart), the unfailingly tasteful decorator in the film version of "Jeffrey," explains why his dancer boyfriend is the exception to all his rules.
"On some dancers the toes are all smooshed together, and I would just say, 'Sorry, Misha, not without socks.' "
"Jeffrey" onstage was Paul Rudnick at his best, a consistently funny story of sex and romance in the age of AIDS.
The play's message -- carpe diem, carefully -- was handled without heaviness or pretension.
The story is the same on screen.
Jeffrey (Steven Weber) is a young gay man who decides that AIDS has made sex too unromantic and difficult.
Celibacy is a workable plan until he meets his dream man, Steve (Michael T. Weiss), who turns out to be H.I.V. positive.
Sterling and his lover, Darius (Bryan Batt), a happy chorus boy in "Cats," encourage their friend Jeffrey to try one more romance.


Executive Changes
FREEPORT-MCMORAN INC., New Orleans, named Rene L. Latiolais, its president, to the additional position of chief executive, succeeding James Moffett, who continues as chairman.
Also, Richard C. Adkerson, chief financial officer, was named vice chairman; Richard Block was named chief operating officer, and Charles W. Goodyear was named chief financial officer.


Knicks-Heat Battle Is Just Warming Up
In the midst of a messy labor dispute that presents David Stern with the greatest challenge of his National Basketball Association career, officials of the Knicks and the Miami Heat will dump another load of ill will today on the beleaguered commissioner's desk.
He figures to be in a fine mood to referee what is hardly a landmark battle over a coach, albeit one who is the author of inspirational speeches and books.
With his players at war with the league and each other, the last thing Stern needs are teams slinging mud over Pat Riley.
He has better things to do.
So unless the Knicks present compelling evidence that the Heat made overtures to Riley before his resignation on June 14, Stern is very likely to encourage a deal that would release Riley from the final year of his contract in exchange for compensation.


Home Video; Home Video Healthy
Last year, the average household with a VCR rented 51 tapes, bought four movies or other programming on cassette and spent a total of $182.43 on home video.
The statistics, which are in a survey of the communications industry issued yesterday by the investment banking firm of Veronis, Suhler &amp; Associates, indicate an upward trend for home video that is expected to continue until the turn of the century.
At that time, many analysts expect, electronic delivery will begin to cut significantly into visits to the video store.
In the meantime, the new study finds the country in no hurry to scrap its VCR's.
The machines are now in 82 percent of households, with 90 percent penetration predicted for 1999.
About the only downward projection is the annual number of cassette rentals per household, which peaked at 57 in 1987 and is expected to drop to 50 in 1999 when VCR's become even less of a novelty to most people.


Molex Inc.(MOLX,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


ReliaStar Financial Corp.(RLR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Pedroso's World Mark In Long Jump in Doubt
Ivan Pedroso of Cuba apparently set the world record in the long jump at altitude on Saturday, but he landed hard at sea level today with the news that the record will most likely be returned to Mike Powell.
The Italian track and field federation recommended that Pedroso's jump of 29 feet 4 3/4 inches not be considered for a world record because an Italian coach had interfered with the wind gauge during all six of the Cuban's jumps at Saturday's meet in Sestriere, Italy.


Doctor on Trial in Abortion Death Describes Fatal Procedure
Dr.
David Benjamin, the man accused of having left a 33-year-old mother of four to bleed to death when an abortion procedure went awry, took the witness stand on his own behalf yesterday.
Ending two years of silence, Dr.
Benjamin composedly told the jury at his trial in State Supreme Court in Jamaica, Queens, that he had made a mistake in calculating the gestation period of Guadalupe Negron's fetus.
He testified that he discovered the mistake after the abortion procedure, conducted at a Queens clinic, was already under way.


Simpson Witness Tells of Shoddy Lab Work
Another of O. J. Simpson's expert witnesses denigrated more prosecution evidence today, noting that poor custodianship of Mr.
Simpson's Ford Bronco diminished the value of tests performed on blood samples taken from it two months after Mr.
Simpson's former wife and a friend of hers were killed.
"We can't be assured if something or someone or a number of individuals might not have been in there," said the witness, Dr.
John Gerdes, the molecular biologist from Denver who completed his direct examination today.


New Stadium Chant: Ruben! Ruben! Ruben!
The chant was a faint one, but not so much so as to go undetected.
After the Yankees had gone quietly in the seventh inning, and seemed well on their way to doing so for the night, wisps of "Dar-ryl! Dar-ryl!" could be heard from the suddenly restless crowd of 25,391.
They had come, after all, not to witness the death of an offense, but the start of a Yankees stretch drive.
And the Milwaukee Brewers' Ricky Bones was not cooperating, having limited the Yankees to three hits and one lone run through those first very quiet seven innings.


Devils Hire Nilan
The Devils replaced LARRY ROBINSON, who became head coach of the Los Angeles Kings, with another former member of the Montreal Canadiens yesterday when they named CHRIS NILAN to be JACQUES LEMAIRE's top assistant.
Nilan also played for the Rangers and the Bruins after nine years with the Canadiens.


Art in Review
Fourth Annual National Showcase Exhibition  Alternative Museum 594 Broadway (near Houston Street) SoHo Through Aug. 12
This big, uneven show of 50 artists doesn't seem particularly concerned with looking hip -- that's good -- and some of the best entries are figurative works along traditional lines.
Among them are Diane Kepford's oil-on-canvas female torso, thinly painted and glistening with a moist, metallic sheen, and Jose Morales's two fine charcoal and pastel drawings on paper, in which overlapping figures twist together.


International Briefs; Credit-Union Run Spreads in Taiwan
Taiwan's worst bank run spread to at least three other credit unions yesterday, but President Lee Teng-hui assured depositors that they would not suffer any losses.
On Wednesday, the Finance Ministry closed the Changhua City Fourth Credit Cooperative Bank after a run touched off by reports that a bank manager had embezzled about $107 million.
The ministry said yesterday that the Taiwan Cooperative Bank would take over all debts and assets of that credit union today.


Rangers Sign Lidster
The Rangers signed defenseman DOUG LIDSTER, 34, who was obtained from St.
Louis for JAY WELLS on Monday.
Terms of Lidster's contract were not made available.


Art in Review
'The Matchbook Show'  Art in General 79 Walker Street (near Broadway) TriBeCa Through Aug. 24 Foramen Magnum Gallery 252 Elizabeth Street (near Prince Street) East Village Through Aug. 26
Ten years ago the artist John Rosis was hanging around Club 57 at St.
Marks Place, wondering what to do with himself.
Looking down at the bar, he saw the answer: matchbooks.
More precisely, an exhibition of art made from and about matchbooks.
The first "Matchbook Show" took place at Club 57 in 1983.
Another appeared at CBGB's 313 Gallery on the Bowery in 1990.
Now a third version is on view at Art in General and Foramen Magnum.


Irwin Bazelon Is Dead at 73; Wrote Symphonies and Jingles
Irwin Bazelon, a composer whose angular, rhythmically complex and sometimes jazz-tinged works evoke the tension, energy and restless drama of contemporary urban life, died on Wednesday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 73 and had homes in Manhattan and Sagaponack, L.I.
The cause was complications after heart surgery, said Bette Snapp, his press representative.


Hooked: A Magnificent Obsession
IT'S been said that New York is a cynical town. But fishermen know otherwise.
Look around the waters' edges this summer -- any day, any hour -- and you will see them, bleary-eyed optimists in spite of themselves.
They are in Queens or Brooklyn, say, fishing for porgies on the Cross Bay Boulevard bridge, or for blues on the 69th Street pier in Bay Ridge, or for stripers on the beach at Breezy Point.
They are crabbing, not about the traffic, on the Belt Parkway.


Ralph Smith, 80, a Town Crier in Ohio
Ralph H. Smith, who gave new voice to an old calling by ringing his bell and crying "Hear, ye, hear, ye," died on Monday at a hospital in Cincinnati, leaving the suburban village of Mariemont without a town crier for the first time since 1961.
He was 80.
Mr.
Smith, a lawyer in Cincinnati until he retired in 1981, was believed to be the only elected town crier in the United States.


Corrections
A sports article on Wednesday about Mickey Mantle's condition referred incorrectly to Dr.
Leslie Blumgart, who explained how Mr.
Mantle's cancer might have spread.
The doctor is male, not female.


Why Art Society Shouldn't Have Endorsed West Side Project; The Miller Highway
To the Editor:
The official name of the West Side Highway (news article, July 26) is the Miller Highway, named for my father, Manhattan Borough President Julius Miller, who conceived it during the 1920's as a means of relieving mid-Manhattan traffic congestion by providing motorists with an incentive to use the waterfront.
The highway was elevated so as not to interfere with the trucks and taxis serving the many piers for oceangoing ships.
PETER MILLER  New York, July 31, 1995


Abroad at Home; A Cry Of Outrage
The bill passed by the House and Senate to break the arms embargo on Bosnia is not a policy.
It is a cry of outrage -- outrage at Bosnian Serb atrocities, and outrage at the long absence of an American commitment to stop them.
A policy would necessarily include measures for the period after the embargo is lifted, when the United Nations Protection Force would pull out and the Serbs would undoubtedly try to seize Sarajevo.
It would face up to the need for American force to protect what is left of Bosnia while its army gets heavy weapons, and to protect the withdrawal of Unprofor.


BUSINESS DIGEST
House Delays Final Vote On Communications Bill  House Republican leaders delayed final action early this morning on legislation that would open the nation's telephone and cable companies to freewheeling competition.
The bill is still expected to pass the House of Representatives by a comfortable margin -- though it faces a threatened Presidential veto.
But the House adjourned until 8 A.M. after protracted debate and action on an unrelated appropriations bill ran well beyond midnight.
The House's decision comes after several Democrats criticized Republicans for wanting to debate the telecommunications bill under the cover of darkness.  [ Page A1. ] Corporate Profits Surge, Despite Sluggish Quarter  The economy barely budged in the second quarter, growing at an annual rate of five-tenths of 1 percent, but corporate profits continued to rise.
The operating profits at the companies that make up the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index rose about 18 percent in the spring quarter, off slightly from the 21 percent rise in the first quarter.  [ D3. ] NBC to Acquire Outlet  NBC has agreed to acquire Outlet Communications for $47.25 a share, or about $311 million.
NBC has also settled its dispute with Renaissance Communications, which had a deal for Outlet that came undone.  [ D4. ] Retail Sales Rose in July  Many of the nation's large retailers reported moderate sales gains during July.
The heat wave helped them reduce inventories of lightweight clothing and ring up strong sales of air-conditioners.  [ D2. ] Factory Orders Fall  Factory orders declined two-tenths of 1 percent in June, the fourth time in five months orders have fallen, with demand slipping for aircraft and communications equipment.
But in a hint of economic strength, jobless-benefit claims took a surprising 51,000 tumble.  [ D3. ] Ford Sales Climb 4.9%  Ford said its car and light truck sales rose 4.9 percent in July, but the increase, added to other auto makers' results, was not enough to lift the industry out of its slump.  [ D3. ] F.A.A.
Market Place.  [ D6. ] Campaign Focuses on Hurley  Estee Lauder is reported to be spending $12 million to $15 million on a new ad campaign with Elizabeth Hurley, but it is also completely refashioning its advertising look to suit the actress.
Ms.
Hurleywas the Woman Wronged in the Hugh Grant affair, and Estee Lauder said the dignified way that she handled the publicity over the actor's arrest might actually help the campaign.
Advertising.  [ D5. ] Group Bids for Canary Wharf  Prince Walid bin Talal of Saudi Arabia said he and a group led by the Canadian businessman, Paul Reichmann, had joined their competing bids for the huge, once-bankrupt Canary Wharf development in London.  [ D2. ]


U.S. Says Iraq Still Violates U.N. Terms for Lifting Sanctions
The Clinton Administration disclosed new intelligence information today in an effort to persuade its allies not to lift economic sanctions against Iraq, asserting that Baghdad still uses terrorism to kill opponents abroad and had developed vast stocks of germ warfare agents.
In a hearing before a Senate Foreign Relations subcommittee, Madeleine K. Albright, the chief United States delegate to the United Nations, took an unyielding attitude toward easing the sanctions, a move that France and Russia hope the Security Council will approve next month.


Defendant Says He Lied When He Vowed to Get Detonators
A man accused of being the weapons supplier for a group charged with a terror-bombing conspiracy in New York testified yesterday that he lied to two other figures in the case when he told them that he would try to get bomb detonators for them.
"I said it," the defendant, Clement Hampton-El, an American-born Muslim, told a jury at the trial in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
"I didn't mean it."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  BATTLES IN CROATIA INTENSIFY
Despite concessions from a Serbian rebel leader in Croatia, the army opened a strong attack against the Serbs that occupy a large swath of the country.
A1  U.S.
America continuesd to oppose easing Serbia sanctions.
A3  RUSSIA'S NEW WEALTHY ELITE
Russia is once again becoming a members-only society.
Cash is the criterion for admission, and as the rich get richer, their tastes are growing less democratic and more decadent.
A1  Russia's leader stood firm against Chechnya independence.
A2  SENATE MOVES ON MISSILE DEFENSE
The Senate moved ahead with plans to revive a version of "Star Wars," beating back attempts by Democrats who oppose a land-based missile defense.
A3  U.S.
TO INVESTIGATE SPY CHARGES
As China expelled two American military officers it accused of spying, the State Department asked for an investigation into why the men were sent on the mission.
A4  COLOMBIA SCANDAL GROWS
The former campaign treasurer for Colombia's President testified that the President instructed him to take campaign money from a drug cartel, a newspaper said.
A5  The investigation of the Hamas political leader broadened.
A6  Ntarama Journal: Rwanda is building a holocaust museum.
A4  National A10-24  THE LATE SHOW IN CONGRESS
House Republican leaders delayed until 8 A.M. today final action on legislation to open the nation's telephone and cable companies to freewheeling competition.
The bill is expected to pass the House, although it faces the threat of a Presidential veto.
A1  CALIFORNIA SWEATSHOP RAIDED
A raid in California found nearly 70 workers from Thailand who lived and worked in what agents called involuntary servitude.
A1  CRACKS IN PARTY UNITY REVEALED
Exposing fault lines in what was once solid unity among House Republicans, party moderates broke ranks to vote with Democrats against conservatives' attacks on several Federal programs.
A1  A SISTER'S PARALLEL LIFE
Special Report: Jennifer McVeigh, the sister of one suspect in the Oklahoma City bombing, was a star college student in upstate New York.
But another side her parallels the personality of her brother and makes her a central figure in the investigation.
A1  SHERIFF TELLS OF KILLER'S PATH
The sheriff who handled the case of Susan Smith said he treated her like a piece of glass, afraid her brittle psyche would shatter and leave him with an unsolved case.
A10  G.O.P.
SELLS MEDICARE PLAN
Republicans began a campaign to sell their Medicare overhaul, promising to "preserve, protect and improve" the program.
A13  Law B18  Battling over access to the historic legal papers of a civil-rights group.
Metro Digest B1
The region's transportation chief proposed increasing city subway and bus fares by 25 cents on Nov. 1 and raising railroad fares and bridge and tunnel tolls to avert service cuts and right the transit system's wobbly finances.
A1  YOUTHS HELD IN BEATING HOMELESS
Five teen-agers were arrested for burning a homeless man alive and beating another with bricks until he fell into a coma.
After interrogating the boys, detectives could find only one motive: simple boredom.
A1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-28  Favorite places to go fishing.C1  For Children C21  Theater: "The Fiery Rain." C2  Film: "Unzipped." C1  "Something to Talk About." C3  "Babe." C3  "Jeffrey." C10  "Virtuosity." C14  "Bushwhacked." C19  "River of Grass." C19  "Roy Cohn/Jack Smith." C20  Music: Elvis Costello.
C2  Ivan Lins, Brazilian style.
C27  Restaurants C25  Art: "In the Anchorage." C1  Photos by Leon Levinstein.
C22  Exquisite Islamic works.
C23  Inside Art C26  Art in Review C18  Books: "Songs in Ordinary Time," by Mary McGarry Morris.
C28  Television: TV Weekend D17  Home Video D17  Sports B7-12  Baseball: Sport's antitrust exemption is threatened.
B7  New Met has ailing elbow.
B9  3 Yanks wait for ax to fall.
B9  Basketball: Dissident players imperil union deadline.
B12  Columns: Vecsey on Cone.B7  On Pro Basketball.
B7  Football: Jets Brock changes attitude.
B11  Racing: Trainer mourns horses lost in fire.
B10  Track: Long jump record to revert to Powell.
B7  Obituaries A25  Irwin Bazelon, composer.
Edward P. Whittemore, novelist.
Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27  Editorials  The Packwood vote.
Courage in Colombia.
Richard E. Mooney: Voyager.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: Save the drug czar.
Bob Herbert: Buying clothes without exploiting children.
Anthony Lewis: A cry of outrage.
Lucette Lagnado: Assisted suicide and rational choice.
Ron Erickson: More software.
Gee.
Chronicle B6  Crossword C22


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Tuesday tracing the history of television network ownership misidentified Paramount Communications' partner in the founding of the United Paramount Network.
It was BHC Communications, not Universal Pictures.


Editorial Notebook; Around the World, Without Radar
"Early the next morning, August 4, I discovered Spain." That was Aug. 4, 1895, exactly 100 years ago.
The narrator was Joshua Slocum, recounting his historic voyage around the world alone aboard the Spray, a 37-foot sailboat.
Slocum was the first to circle the world alone, and he did it with none of the electronic gear, daily weather reports or other technological paraphernalia that help protect sailors today.
He told time with a tin clock that lost its minute hand halfway through the journey.
Yet he had the humility to acknowledge that his adventures were "prosy and tame" compared with the sufferings of earlier explorers.


One of 3 Yanks Will Get Ax
With the uncertainty of the Darryl Strawberry saga lingering over the Yankees, there is tension floating in the parts of the clubhouse occupied by Luis Polonia, Russ Davis and Dion James.
Manager Buck Showalter insisted yesterday that the Yankees already know which player will be jettisoned when Strawberry is summoned from Class AAA, but some confusion persists.
Polonia has been serenaded with "Darryl! Darryl!" chants at Yankee Stadium, Davis is worried about the apartment he leased in New Jersey and James questioned the audacity of one reporter to suggest that he might be sacrificed if Strawberry joins the Yankees today in Detroit.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the funeral of two Korean immigrants from Queens who died in a van accident reversed the identities of two women in some editions.
Romina Ahn was at the center, and Rosa Kim at the right.


Unyielding on Independence, Yeltsin Backs Chechnya Pact
President Boris N. Yeltsin said tonight that he embraced an agreement for combatants to lay down arms in Chechnya, but firmly reiterated that the republic must remain a part of the Russian Federation.
The republic's effort to gain independence led Moscow to invade last December, and Chechen rebel leaders' continued insistence on independence has hobbled negotiations on a political settlement.


5 Youths Are Held In the Fiery Death Of a Homeless Man
They were a young gang without guns, or even a name, and to break the monotony of their lives, investigators said, they hurt homeless people for fun, killing one man and beating another senseless.
The five youths, 12 to 19, were arrested Wednesday night and yesterday in the two attacks.
In one, a homeless man was burned alive in Mount Morris Park in Harlem on the morning of May 9, and only six days later, a second homeless man was beaten with bricks until he fell into a coma.
After interrogating the youths, detectives could only find one motive: not disdain for the helpless or the poor, but simple boredom.


Tragic Traffic Death in Manhattan


U.S. Power Project Is Derailed in India
In a setback for foreign investors in India, an American company's $3 billion project to build a power plant outside Bombay has been canceled.
The move by the nationalist Hindu government of the Maharashtra state is reminiscent of the 1970's, when I.B.M. and Coca-Cola were driven out of the country.
And it is a challenge to the national Government, which in recent years has sought to open India's markets, encouraging investment by American companies in particular.


2 Extremes of Gay Life
Jill Godmilow's film of Ron Vawter's 1992 performance piece, "Roy Cohn/Jack Smith," records one of the most virtuosic and unsettling theater performances to be seen in New York City in recent years.
Partly because the film breaks the play into fragments, it conveys only a small fraction of the impact the work had in the theater.
But the movie, which opens today at the Anthology Film Archives, is still a valuable document and has moments that are both funny and chilling.
Those fortunate enough to have seen "Roy Cohn/Jack Smith" in the theater witnessed one of the most remarkable dramatic stretches undertaken by an actor in a single evening.
In the show's first half, Vawter, attired in a purple velvet smoking jacket and bow tie, impersonated Roy Cohn, the right-wing lawyer and New York power broker delivering an imaginary and hate-filled speech to the American Society for the Protection of the Family.


Humana Inc.(HUM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Union Pacific In Bid to Form Top Railway
In a takeover that would create the biggest freight railroad in North America, the Union Pacific Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to buy the Southern Pacific Rail Corporation in a deal valued at $5.4 billion.
Union Pacific's interest in buying Southern Pacific, a railroad that operates in 15 states in the West and Southwest and has 14,500 miles of track, has been speculated on by analysts for months.
That speculation became stronger after Union Pacific was thwarted in its bid to acquire the Santa Fe Pacific Corporation.
The Interstate Commerce Commission unanimously approved the Burlington Northern Corporation's $4 billion takeover of Santa Fe several weeks ago.


Gingrich Gets New Audience In Capital City
Speaker Newt Gingrich dropped into unfamiliar surroundings on Wednesday night as he listened for more than an hour to residents of Washington asking, begging, him to help their city out of its swamp of problems.
Billed as a discussion in town-meeting style, as part of the House Republicans' effort to find solutions to decades of urban ills, it quickly became something much more.


Apria Healthcare Group Inc.(APRAV,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Just Too Bored to Be Bad
"River of Grass," a no-budget film about a deadbeat couple who are too enervated to go on a Bonnie and Clyde-like crime spree, is a pointed antidote to the hyperbolic romance of violence evoked by such movies as "Natural Born Killers" and "True Romance." The film, which opens today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, is also a hate letter to the climate, architecture and people of south Florida.
Written and directed by Kelly Reichardt, a film maker who grew up in the area, the movie is set in Dade and Broward Counties, specifically in the strip between Miami and the Everglades.
Ms.
Reichardt points her camera out a car window and records mile after mile of shabby convenience stores, motels and shopping centers, interspersed with twisted palm trees.
Everything looks temporary, as though it were waiting to be flattened by the next hurricane.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  Burlington Industries, Greensboro, N.C., filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell as much as $400 million of debt securities.
Federal Home Loan Bank, is selling $45 million of bonds due in 2010 through Dean Witter Reynolds Inc.
Callable in one year, the issue is priced at par to yield 8 percent.


Jobless Data Send Treasury Prices Down
Prices of Treasury securities headed south yesterday, after a surprisingly large drop in the latest weekly jobless claims report sparked fears of rapid growth and rising inflation.
Claims were down to 321,000 for the week ended July 29 compared with the average trade estimates of 371,000 and against a downwardly revised 372,000 the week before.


Hooked: A Magnificent Obsession; The Esopus
Here are some favorite regional fishing spots of eight New York Times anglers. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
The Esopus is a hoary name in American trout fishing, a wide stream in the Catskill Mountains that drains into the Ashokan Reservoir, part of New York City's water system.
Its rocky, continuously interesting course and its wild trout have won fame among masterhand fly fishermen.
But for me, the Esopus is where I learned the importance of not catching fish.


Hooked: A Magnificent Obsession; Woodland Valley Creek
Here are some favorite regional fishing spots of eight New York Times anglers. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
Woodland Valley Creek is the perfect mountain stream.
From its source, somewhere up on Slide Mountain, down to its terminus, at Phoenicia, where it flows into its larger and more illustrious cousin, the Esopus, Woodland Creek flows gently and dreamily through some of the prettiest country in the Catskills.


Villainy by Computer
Brett Leonard, director of "The Lawnmower Man," "Hideaway" and now "Virtuosity," is on the cutting edge of cyber-cinema, in which humanity takes a back seat and technology is king.
Coming closer than ever in "Virtuosity" to simulating the video game experience on the big screen, Mr.
Leonard deploys his most sophisticated set of high-tech tricks to tell a story that has similarly specialized, not to say bewildering, circuitry.
The result is a virtual-reality thriller so arcane and gimmick-driven that it seems custom-made for viewers whose pulses quicken when they see software.
Its hero, a convict and ex-cop played by Denzel Washington, moves in and out of a computer-generated virtual-reality minefield, where the scenery can buckle or blip in erratic ways.
Sometimes his hairdo -- dreadlocks in the real world, short cut in fantasy -- is the only sure indication of which world he's in.
Also switching realms freely is the film's villain, Sid 6.7 (Russell Crowe), who has "almost 200 different personality structures" and is familiarly known as "the prototype of future humanoid nanotechnology." Sid also bleeds blue ooze and can regenerate damaged body parts with his silicon-based nanotech cells.
Please, let's not have a quiz.


Kimball International (KBAKB,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


In a World of Peril, Let's Keep B-2 Bomber
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 2 editorial alleges that the B-2 Stealth bomber is a "billion-dollar lemon." This broadside is reminiscent of the 1980's, when critics sought to undermine the Reagan rearmament program by questioning the idea that a high-technology military could perform in combat.
Before World War II, bomber advocates thought air defense was futile -- until radar was invented.
Suddenly, bombers could be detected and engaged.
The United States lost 2,200 aircraft over North Vietnam as missiles were added to anti-aircraft guns and fighters.
From this experience came the push for "stealth" technology that would blind radar.


Olympic Decathlete Faces Disputed Drug-Test Result
As he aims for another medal at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, the decathlete Dave Johnson finds himself involved in a disputed drug-test result, two people familiar with the case said today.
Johnson, 32, a bronze medalist at the 1992 Barcelona Games and familiar then as Dave of the "Dan and Dave" Reebok commercials, has not been suspended, nor has the disputed test been announced by the International Amateur Athletics Federation, track's world governing body.
The dispute, the two people said, was the result of an unannounced, out-of-competition drug test administered earlier this year by the I.A.A.F.


Building a Synagogue For 60's Generation; Woodstock Congregants See Faiths the Distilled Essence of Judaism
One evening nine years ago, three middle-aged survivors of the 1960's were sitting around talking about the long, strange trips they had taken away from the Judaism of their childhoods.
The experience of one, Nathan Brenowitz, was fairly typical of a whole segment of Jews of his generation.
He had forsaken Brooklyn's Jewish temples, which he found showy and hollow, for the Buddhist temples of India and Nepal.
"I did whatever was going on in those days," he said.


Yanks Make Polonia the Odd Man Out
Luis Polonia called his lawyer as soon as he woke up this morning and told him to inform the Yankees that they should hand him the blindfold, allow him his last meal and let him check out of the hotel if their plans were to trim him from the roster for Darryl Strawberry.
So when Manager Buck Showalter summoned Polonia to his hotel room two hours later, the left fielder knew the end of his career with the Yankees was an elevator ride away.
"I always wanted to be part of the Yankees," said Polonia, "but not this way."


Recess Begins, But Fails to End House Fighting
After passing two of the biggest bills on its legislative slate in a span of 14 hours, the House of Representatives wound up its first seven months of the session today and departed for a monthlong recess, testy, tired and tellingly partisan.
Speaker Newt Gingrich succeeded early this morning in coaxing through the largest and most disputed of the Federal spending bills -- legislation that he described as "the most difficult bill we'll face." To do so, the Georgia Republican held together a fractious group of conservative and moderate Republicans that split over social issues like abortion in a family feud that briefly threatened final passage.


No Bias Charge
The five Greenwich High School seniors accused of planting a racist message in their yearbook will not face criminal charges under Connecticut's bias laws, the Greenwich police said yesterday.
The State's Attorney said there was not enough evidence to prosecute.
The decision was attacked by the Coalition for Justice, a local group that had been sharply critical of the town's handling of the incident.
Article, page 24.


No Charges Over Yearbook Hate Message
The five Greenwich High School seniors accused of planting a racist message in their yearbook will not face criminal charges under Connecticut's bias laws, the Greenwich police said today.
The decision not to charge the five was made with the State's Attorney's office on Thursday, according to a statement issued by the Police Chief, Kenneth Moughty, after State's Attorney Harry Callahan determined that the department lacked enough evidence to prosecute the case.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  WAR FLARES ANEW IN CROATIA  The Croatian Government launched a long-threatened offensive to retake a swath of territory that has been under the control of rebel Serbs since 1991. 1


Mott Has a Whitney Threat
The 68th running of the Whitney Handicap on Saturday won't have Cigar in the lineup, but it will have nine other horses racing for Saratoga's second biggest purse.
And Bill Mott, who trains Cigar, the leading candidate for Horse of the Year, will be represented by the 4-year-old colt Amathos, who ran second to L'Carriere two weeks ago at the Whitney distance of a mile and an eighth.
But Amathos will be no better than fifth in the early betting behind Key Contender, winner of the Suburban Handicap at Belmont Park last month; Unaccounted For, who wore blinkers in his last start and won by nine-and-a-half lengths in the mud; Our Emblem, trained by Shug McGaughey, and his rival, L'Carriere.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about Monday's trading in the credit market misstated an economist's assessment of a Commerce Department report on personal income and spending that affected the market.
The economist, Anthony Chan of the Banc One Investment Advisers Corporation in Columbus, Ohio, said the gap between personal income and spending suggested that consumption would indeed grow, in the second half of the year.


A Sort-of Train to the Plane
It has been 30 years since New York City first thought about rail connections to its airports.
There is still no connection.
But there is now in the works a plan that could make a subway trip to Kennedy Airport a more inviting prospect.
The Federal Aviation Administration has authorized funding for a five-mile light-rail system smoothly connecting the various terminals at Kennedy airport.
Getting from one terminal to another at Kennedy is now a daunting and frustrating task.
This system, in turn, would be directly linked to the Howard Beach subway station nearby.


Corrections
An article yesterday about fare and toll increases proposed by the chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority misstated the amount of the increase for the six tunnels and bridges that now have $6 round-trip tolls.
The round-trip toll would increase by $1, not by 50 cents.


Andretti and New Team Impatiently Await a Victory
John Andretti leaned against the rear fender of his race car today, his garage sheltering man and machine from the intermittent showers washing out the schedule here at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway.
Andretti, wearing his driver's suit, was waiting for the track to dry so he could do some final tuning for the Brickyard 400 stock car race Saturday; he will start 23d in the 41-car race.
The atmospheric conditions called for patience from a driver caught up in an atmosphere of impatience.
"None of us is real patient," Andretti, 32, said earlier in the week.
"We want to win the minute we unload the truck."


World News Briefs; Italian Lawmakers Pass Reform of Pension System
The interim Government of Prime Minister Lamberto Dini fulfilled one of its last major missions today with the passage of a long-debated plan to reform Italy's bloated pension system.
But as Italian lawmakers prepared to break for their summer recess, there was no sign of any breakthrough on the question of what kind of Government will run Italy once Mr.
Dini's nonpolitical team of technicians wraps up its program next month.
Recent polls indicate that most Italians are satisfied with the performance of the Dini Government.
But as President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro said this week, time is running out.
He indicated that if Italy's political parties did not give Mr.
Dini a clear new mandate in September to keep running the Government until they schedule elections, he will be forced to call elections.


Tesoro Petroleum (TSO,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Injury May Keep Lewis Out of Long Jump
Track and field's fifth world championships unfurled today with the opening ceremonies and a potentially closing chapter in the glorious, fading career of Carl Lewis.
As 1,959 athletes from 192 countries gathered for nine days of competition that begin Saturday, Lewis said a hamstring injury suffered last weekend may prevent him from entering the long jump, the event at which he has won three Olympic gold medals.


Religion Journal; One Man's Life of Virtue Earns the Papal Spotlight
If Americans' book-buying habits are any indication, lots of people are curious about what makes up a virtuous life.
Just look at the best-seller lists, where "The Book of Virtues," by the erstwhile Presidential prospect William J. Bennett, has ridden high for months.
Yet to assess the virtuousness of a person's life is essentially a religious matter.
In the Roman Catholic Church, to take a prime example, there is the Vatican's Congregation for the Causes of Saints, which examines those lives in which dedication to moral good seems truly extraordinary.


Sithe Energies (SYT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Judge Orders N.F.L. Fund to Pay Sweeney
The National Football League pushed drugs on the former San Diego Chargers guard WALT SWEENEY and must pay for his lost wages and rehabilitation, a Federal judge ruled yesterday in San Diego.
The N.F.L. retirement fund was ordered by United States District Judge RUDI BREWSTER to pay Sweeney, 54, a lump sum of at least $550,000 in retroactive pay and $4,000 a month in disability payments the rest of his life.
The fund had been paying Sweeney $1,800 a month.


Manley Sentenced to Four Years in Prison
The former Washington Redskins defensive lineman DEXTER MANLEY pleaded guilty yesterday in Houston to two counts of cocaine possession.


Life Re Corp.(LRE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Salvadoran Labor Law Protects Workers
To the Editor:
Re the Bob Herbert columns "Children of the Dark Ages" and "Sweatshop Beneficiaries" (July 21 and 24) and "Blame the U.S. Customer for Latin Sweatshops" (letters, July 27):


Unemployment Rate Edges Up
The unemployment rate in New Jersey inched up to 6.8 percent in July from 6.6 percent in June, Federal officials said yesterday.
That rate is more than a percentage point above the national unemployment rate, which rose to 5.7 percent from 5.6 percent in June.
It is also the second highest unemployment rate among the nation's 11 major industrial states, after California, which posted a 7.9 percent rate.
James Hughes, a professor at Rutgers University, said the state continued to feel the effects of restructuring and layoffs by major corporations.
But he noted that the change in July was statistically insignificant and said he doubted that unemployment would rise much more in the coming months.  [ Related articles in Business Day, pages 31 and 44. ]


Obscure Global Bank Moves Into the Light
In a small Swiss city sits an international organization so obscure and secretive that for many years visitors got lost looking for a small plaque next to an otherwise undistinguished doorway.
Control of the institution, the Bank for International Settlements, lies with some of the world's most powerful and least visible men: the heads of 32 central banks, officials able to shift billions of dollars and alter the course of economies at the stroke of a pen.
For years, the United States participated in the closed conclaves of the Basel-based bank only as an observer, having turned down a chance to join the bank upon its founding in 1930.


Enter, Spiritedly, the Black Theater
In a question-and-answer session at the National Black Theater Festival, a young playwright told a panel of professionals about his career problems.
Responding, Woodie King Jr., the head of the New Federal Theater in New York, advised him, "You should have brought 30 scripts with you to the festival and said, 'Read my script.' " Without blinking, the writer opened a briefcase and took out a stack of plays, not 30 but at least 6, and offered them to Mr.
King, the playwright Joseph A. Walker and the other panelists.
Interaction and networking were the keys to the theater festival, held here every two years.
At the current festival, black artists from theater, films and television presented an eclectic array of performances and readings of new plays.
They also participated in workshops and discussions on the widest variety of subjects, from "Funding: Disappearing Resources" to "New Black Poetry and Its Impact on Hip-Hop Performance Art." During an intensive week, the 20,000 visitors received an exuberant message about the vitality of black theater.


Bradley Challenge by D'Amato
Alfonse M. D'Amato, the Republican junior Senator from New York, thinks that Bill Bradley, the Democratic senior Senator from New Jersey, can easily be defeated.
And Mr.
D'Amato said yesterday that he is willing to put his money -- $710,000 -- where his mouth is to help the Republican who runs against Mr.
Bradley.
Actually it is not Mr.
D'Amato's money; it will come from the National Republican Senatorial Committee, whose chairman is Mr.
D'Amato.
The New Jersey race is the third 1996 campaign where the committee has decided to commit $710,000, the maximum allowed.


Just What They Asked For: Higher Transit Fares
THE most urgent question on this city's political table right now is whether transit fares will rise this fall, as the chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority proposed this week.
The smart betting is yes, for the most basic of reasons: New Yorkers voted for it, whether they realized it or not.
They voted George E. Pataki into office last November, and Governor Pataki did what candidate Pataki promised he would do: He cut taxes.
But tax cuts inevitably come at a cost.
The changes in income taxes and business taxes enacted last spring weren't really cuts, they were tax shifts.
If New Yorkers would tell themselves the truth, they would realize that the proposed transit increases are actually a tax increase, one that falls less on the Republican, suburban electorate that voted for Mr.
Pataki and more on New York City residents who by and large did not.


A Sexual Harasser? His Friends Don't Recognize the Description
To some of his female subordinates, Dan K. Wassong was not only the powerful head of a major cosmetics company but also a boss who walked around with his fly unzipped, solicited sex and threw telephones and cigars at his secretaries.
To his friends, Dan K. Wassong was a driven but ethical man who never forgot a birthday, gave generously of his time and money and seemed too smart to throw away his reputation and his career by swatting women on the behind or propositioning them.


American Indian Culture, With Jazz, Via Garth Fagan
Garth Fagan has one of the most distinctive styles of his generation of modern-dance choreographers.
The root of that style is the kind of simple, repetitive, powerful movement that he created for his first, untutored company in the 1970's in Rochester.
To that, Mr.
Fagan brought a perspective formed by his years in Jamaican and American modern dance, adding ballet accents as he and his dancers developed.
That history, and particularly his gift for simplicity early on, made "Earth Eagle First Circle" seem like a promising idea.
Presented on Tuesday night at Damrosch Park at the Lincoln Center Out of Doors festival, the new piece draws its inspiration from American Indian culture, sending Mr.
Fagan's superb dancers through patterns, gestures and smooth-flowing movement based on elements of Indian dancing and ceremony.
But the piece was a disappointment.


Morality, Reduced To Arithmetic
Can the deliberate massacre of innocent people ever be condoned?
The atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki on Aug. 6 and 9, 1945, resulted in the deaths of 120,000 to 250,000 Japanese by incineration and radiation poisoning.
Although a small fraction of the victims were soldiers, the great majority were noncombatants -- women, children, the aged.
Among the justifications that have been put forward for President Harry Truman's decision to use the bomb, only one is worth taking seriously -- that it saved lives.
The alternative, the reasoning goes, was to launch an invasion.
Truman claimed in his memoirs that this would have cost another half a million American lives.
Winston Churchill put the figure at a million.


Treasury Prices Move Up On Weakness in Jobs Data
Prices of Treasury securities rose modestly yesterday, after the employment report suggested there was still weakness in the economy, easing fears of rapid growth and rising inflation.
It also caused some early short- covering by some traders who often sell borrowed securities, hoping to buy them back later at lower prices and pocket the difference.
But if prices begin to rise instead of fall, as happened yesterday, these traders have to cover their short positions by buying back the securities to limit their losses.


Jerusalem Journal; With Souls in Mind, Israelis Minister to Bodies
When terror strikes in Israel, as when a suicide bomber blew up a bus near Tel Aviv last week, the Orthodox men in the black hats and white smocks invariably arrive almost as soon as the police.
Their self-appointed task is to gather every last piece of flesh and drop of blood scattered by a disaster, so the bodies of the victims can be buried as completely as possible.


U.S. Criticizes Croatia, but Only Halfheartedly, for Attack on Serbs
The United States and the major European powers urged Croatia today to halt its offensive to recapture Serb-held lands, but Washington's criticisms were muted.
White House and Pentagon officials said they understood Croatia's motive for the attack.
But the Administration said Croatia should seek to regain the land through negotiation, not fighting.


Fairfax Financial reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Executives Expect Approval For Merger of 2 Railroads
Top executives from the Union Pacific Corporation and the Southern Pacific Rail Corporation expressed confidence at a meeting with securities analysts yesterday that Union Pacific's proposed takeover of Southern Pacific would not only meet with regulatory approval, but would promote greater efficiency and service as well.
In large measure, analysts who attended the meeting in New York, as well as transportation experts who did not, said they agreed with that assessment.


Clinton Ends Ban on Security Clearance for Gay Workers
Ending decades of common cold-war practice, President Clinton today signed an executive order barring the Federal Government from denying security clearances to homosexuals simply on the basis of their sexual orientation, a move long sought by gay rights groups.
The measure is part of a sweeping new directive -- intended to aid investigators seeking evidence of espionage -- that would require thousands of civilian and military workers with access to classified information to disclose extensive personal financial records.
The order would also bar the denial of security clearances to employees solely because they had undergone psychiatric or psychological treatment.


Decertification Has Court Date It May Not Use
The National Labor Relations Board, moving ahead in the National Basketball Association union's intramural dispute, set two dates yesterday for a decertification election that will most likely never take place.
The election is expected to be unnecessary because Simon Gourdine, the union's executive director, said if there is no new labor agreement by midnight next Tuesday, the union plans to disclaim any further interest in representing the players in collective bargaining.


Bush Is Criticized for Plans to Speak in Vietnam
George Bush, who pleased conservatives throughout his Presidency by refusing to lift a trade embargo and to establish diplomatic relations with Vietnam, is now under pressure from some of the same groups over plans for a speaking tour here that will reportedly earn him a six-figure fee.
Vietnam veterans, some conservative Republican lawmakers and some Vietnamese-Americans say that a visit by a former President would give Vietnam's authoritarian Government a propaganda windfall.
They also fear it would hinder American efforts to determine the fate of the 2,198 Americans still listed as missing in action in Vietnam.


For Vietnam, a U.S. Visitor Signals End of Isolation
With sun-leathered hands that once clutched an army rifle on the jungle battlefields of Vietnam, Nguyen Dinh Tuyen now holds a paint bush and a bucket of off-white paint.
His employer today, the United States Government, was his enemy in that long-ago war.
"The Americans killed 40 of the men in my army unit, and it was wartime, so certainly we fired back on the Americans," said Mr.
Tuyen, 38, a veteran of the People's Army of North Vietnam who saw not the slightest irony in the fact that today he was helping spruce up a building that will be converted into a United States Embassy in Hanoi.


Jack N. Berkman, Philanthropist, 90
Jack Neville Berkman, a communications executive and philanthropist, died on Thursday at his home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
He was 90.
At his death, Mr.
Berkman was chairman of the Associated Group, a Pittsburgh-based enterprise involved in cable television, cellular telephones, radio paging and related businesses.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the heat wave in the New York area misstated the number of consecutive days on which temperature had exceeded 90.
The National Weather Service reported that the temperature in Central Park reached a high of 88 on July 28; thus Wednesday was the 5th day in a row, not the 10th, of 90-degree temperatures.


Washington, Senior Jet, Sees a Fresh Attitude
In a word, the Jets' opening preseason game Saturday night is about "attitude," Marvin Washington said.
His own attitude to the history of the team since he's been on it is one of frustration.
"I think Rich Kotite is looking for a good attitude, though," Washington said.
"An N.F.C. East attitude."


Filly Is Hambletonian Pick
CR Kay Suzie is heavily favored to win the 70th running of the $1.2 million Cadillac Hambletonian today at the Meadowlands Race Track in East Rutherford, N.J.
Seeking to become the first filly to win harness racing's premier event since Duenna in 1983, CR Kay Suzie will be one of eight horses in the first division of the first heat, scheduled for 2:18 P.M.
The overwhelming 1-5 favorite in her heat, CR Kay Suzie will leave with Rod Allen from Post 6, and will probably be challenged by Tagliabue, a 6-1 shot driven by John Campbell from Post 4, and Tap In, an 8-1 shot with Berndt Lindstedt and Post 8.


Corrections
An article and a chart in Business Day on Monday about the publication of a growing number of books on religious topics misidentified the publisher of "God: A Biography," by Jack Miles.
It was Alfred A. Knopf, not Random House.


Keep the Base-Closing Machinery Alive
The House National Security Committee verified last week that military bases must be closed, like it or not, and that the current nonpolitical procedure for closing them is the way to do it.
By a convincing vote of 43 to 10, the committee rejected an attempt by a member from Texas to block last month's recommendations by the independent base closure commission.
But it appears that the political heat generated by this round of closings, particularly from Texas and California, has dampened Congress's interest in continuing the process.
The base-closings law expires at the end of the year, and no one is pressing for its continuation.


Clintons, in Responses on Whitewater, Cite Role as 'Passive Investors'
In their most detailed explanation of the Whitewater affair, the Clintons have insisted in sworn statements that they were passive investors who had no idea that their partner in the real estate venture was paying a disproportionate share of its losses.
The White House today made public written replies by President Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton to dozens of detailed questions from Federal investigators examining the collapse of Madison Guaranty, the Arkansas savings and loan owned by James McDougal, the couple's partner in the Whitewater investment.


Business Digest
House Votes Radical Shift In Phone and Cable Laws  The House approved a radical change in communications laws for the first time in six decades.
Members voted 305 to 117 for vastly reduced regulations on everything from cable television to local and long-distance telephone services.
The bill would give the Baby Bells something they have long sought: the right to enter the long-distance market.
The State of Louisiana and some 30 private investors argued that big Wall Street firms had benefited from wide price spreads in the stocks that they bought and sold to private investors.
The defendants included dozens of firms.  [ 35. ] Rail Streamlining Is Predicted  Union Pacific and Southern Pacific Rail executives expressed confidence that their union would promote greater efficiency and service.
Securities analysts largely agreed, suggesting shippers would benefit from lower rates to come.  [ 33. ] Atlantic Bank Fined $1.1 Million  Atlantic Bank of New York was fined $1.1 million after it pleaded guilty to helping its clients avoid declaring large cross-border transactions.
The bank is a unit of the National Bank of Greece and has strong ties to the Greek-American community.  [ 34. ] Phone Strike Deadline Near  Four of eight regional telephone companies face strike threats by the Communications Workers of America if contracts are not reached by midnight.
The 164,000 workers involved include operators, repair personnel, technicians and other employees.
The companies are: Bell Atlantic, Ameritech, Bell South and Pacific Telesis.  [ 7. ] Recycling Plant for New York  Pratt Industries of Australia agreed to build a $250 million waste paper recycling plant in Staten Island, which will be the first of its kind in New York.  [ 22. ] Sweatshops Are Flourishing  At least one-fifth of the garment workers in Los Angeles are toiling in unregulated, sweatshop conditions, labor officials, economists and union organizers said.
Experts said that employers take advantage of the workers' legal status, naivete and cultural alienation, despite a host of regulations intended to shut down the companies.  [ 6. ]
Stocks Drift Lower  Blue-chip stocks sagged in lethargic trading, although technology issues rebounded.
The Dow Jones industrial average lost 17.96 points, closing at 4,683.46, which was off 32.05 points for the week.
Walt Disney gave up some of its gains from earlier in the week, slipping 1 3/8, to 58.
Oil stocks dropped on prospects for lower earnings.  [ 35. ] Prices of Treasury securities rose modestly, after the employment report suggested there was still weakness in the economy, easing fears of rapid growth and rising inflation.  [ 34. ] The dollar rose to a 21-week high of 91.43 yen, as traders suspected the Bank of Japan and the Federal Reserve would intervene in the market to drive up the dollar.  [ 41. ]


METRO DIGEST
M.T.A.
SEEKS RENEGOTIATED LABOR PACT Seeking sharp reductions in spending, New York City transit officials want to renegotiate the existing contract with subway and bus workers, insisting on work rule changes or even wage cuts and threatening thousands of layoffs if the union balks.
The strategy reflects the Metropolitan Transit Authority's efforts to cope with rising costs, stagnant revenue and declining government subsidies.  [ Page 1. ] M.T.A. officials briefed Governor Pataki on their plan to increase transit fares and bridge tolls.
Mr.
Pataki told the group he thinks the plan "is credible" and ready to be presented to the public, his aides said.  [ 22. ] New Yorkers have already voted for fare increases, whether they realized it at the time or not.
Metro Matters by Joyce Purnick.  [ 22. ] IT'S NOT THE HEAT, IT'S THE CONTINUITY The temperature in Central Park exceeded 90 degrees for the seventh consecutive day.
From the burning city pavement to the steaming beaches, people throughout the region have sunk into a state of deepest lethargy.  [ 1. ] NEW YORK CITY  FINGERPRINTS IN BOMBING CASE The fingerprints of a Palestinian man charged in the World Trade Center bombing match those left in a Jersey City apartment where the bomb was assembled, law enforcement officials said.
An Australian company has agreed to build a $250 million waste-paper recycling plant in Staten Island, the first of its kind in New York State, company officials and Mayor Giuliani said.
The city agreed to give the company $28 million in tax breaks, and the state will provide an additional $14 million in abatements.  [ 22. ] A hand grenade was discovered on the roof of the City Center theater complex.  [ 23. ] REGION  HURDLES EASED IN CASINO PLAN Connecticut is easing the financial requirements for development of a casino in Bridgeport, following intense criticism from a Bridgeport business group and one of the leading contenders to build the casino.  [ 25. ] Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves 24


Taste Test Shows Strawberry Doesn't Ruin Recipe
The Darryl Strawberry era finally began for the Yankees today, and it became obvious quickly that the atmosphere surrounding this surging team would change immediately.
The focus shifted to Strawberry before his first swing and a hefty portion of the attention will follow the former Met, who might have endured more bogus arrival dates in the past five weeks than any baseball player in history.


Transit Agency Seeks to Alter Union Contract
Seeking sharp reductions in spending, New York City transit officials want to renegotiate the existing contract with subway and bus workers, insisting on work-rule changes or even wage cuts and threatening thousands of layoffs if the union balks.
"We're looking at 2,000, maybe 2,500 positions that would have to go," unless there are major union concessions, said an official of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority who spoke on condition of anonymity.
While some reductions could be made through attrition, he said, most would inevitably be made through layoffs.


Trail of Guns Sold Illegally Led to Newark
The guns began showing up on the streets of New Jersey in late 1993 -- an arms bazaar of Smith &amp; Wessons, Glocks and Tec-9s, snapped up by the underworld and used in almost every crime imaginable: a drive-by shooting that wounded a child, a murder, countless drug deals.
But this morning, the authorities said, the source of those weapons was finally stanched.
A dock foreman was arrested and accused of having stolen about 300 guns that were being shipped through the United Parcel Service warehouse where he worked.
He then sold them, officials said, feeding a demand for illegal firepower that has grown steadily.


Canadian Tire reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Senate Whitewater hearings referred imprecisely in some editions to the discovery of a suicide note written by Vincent W. Foster Jr.
The note, which had been torn up, was discovered four days after the search of his White House office, not four days after his suicide.


INSIDE
The Clintons on Whitewater
The White House made public sworn statements that the Clintons gave to Federal officials investigating the Whitewater venture.
Page 8.
Jobless Rate Worsens
Factories cut back jobs last month, sending the nation's unemployment rate up one-tenth of a point, to 5.7 percent.
Page 31.
Ending a Longtime Practice
President Clinton issued an executive order barring the Government from automatically denying security clearances to homosexuals.
Page 9.
Shipper Held in Gun Thefts
A U.P.S. foreman in New Jersey was charged with stealing hundreds of guns from shipments and reselling them, often to criminals.
Page 21.
Strawberry Dons Pinstripes
The Yankees called Darryl Strawberry up from the minor leagues yesterday and put him in the lineup.
He singled in his first at-bat.
Page 27.


Serb Chief's Response To Events Is Restrained
President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia, who is considered to hold the key to whether the new Balkan fighting will be contained or will ignite the wider war that the West has long feared, tried to portray himself today as a man of reason.
But Mr.
Milosevic has goaded Serbian passions and military actions through much of the last four years of fighting in the Balkans.
How long he will keep his restraint as Serbs are attacked is unclear, Western diplomats and Serbian analysts said.


Acquitted of Murder, But Arraigned Again
Lemrick Nelson Jr., who faces Federal civil rights charges in the killing of a Hasidic student during the Crown Heights riots of 1991, was arraigned in Manhattan Criminal Court yesterday after being arrested on a fugitive warrant from a Georgia judge.
Mr.
Nelson did not agree to return to Georgia and was ordered held without bail, said Wayne Brison, a spokesman for the Manhattan District Attorney's office.
The case was adjourned until Sept. 1.


Sex Offender Law
To the Editor:
As the Assembly sponsor of New York's sex offender registration and community notification law, I am grateful that "Megan's Law, Rewritten" (editorial, July 29) acknowledged our efforts to craft a sound law.
However, I take exception to the way you characterize the law as flawed.


Use of Sonogram Is at Issue In a Case of Fatal Abortion
Under intense cross-examination, a doctor accused of killing a woman in a botched abortion acknowledged yesterday that he had performed a sonogram on the woman -- but he continued to insist that he did not know how advanced her pregnancy was when he began the abortion.
The prosecution focused on the issue of the sonogram in an effort to show that the doctor, David Benjamin, knew that his patient was 19 weeks pregnant, rather than 13, and should have realized that the abortion would be a complicated and difficult procedure.


Clinton to Toughen Rules on Lobbying the White House
President Clinton announced today that he would soon tighten the rules for contacts between lobbyists and the executive branch and chided Speaker Newt Gingrich for the House's "delay, debate and division."
Mr.
Clinton complained that despite his handshake agreement with Mr.
Gingrich in New Hampshire nearly eight weeks ago to set up a bipartisan commission on campaign financing, lobbying and other issues, the Speaker had been unwilling to follow up.


Unemployment Rises Slightly In New York and New Jersey
Unemployment rose in New York and New Jersey last month, but Labor Department officials said yesterday that the increases were small enough to allay any concerns about a regional economic downturn.
"We're still in a holding pattern," John L. Wieting, the regional commissioner for the Bureau of Labor Statistics, said in an interview.
"The situation has been pretty flat for nearly six months, and July brought no signs of improvement." He added, "But the fact that there has been no real deterioration is somewhat of a postive sign."


Let Our Stamps Honor Our Scientists
To the Editor:
Now that the Postal Service has issued stamps honoring Elvis Presley and Marilyn Monroe, perhaps it is time for stamps in recognition of contributions of American scientists, mathematicians and engineers.


Symbol Technologies Inc.(SBL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Ida Lupino, Film Actress and Director, Is Dead at 77
Ida Lupino, an earthy, intelligent movie actress who created a luminous gallery of worldly wise villainesses, gangster's molls and hand-wringing neurotics, died on Thursday night at her home in Burbank, Calif.
She was 77 years old.
Miss Lupino had cancer and had recently suffered a stroke, Mary Ann Anderson, her former secretary, said yesterday.


3 Indicted in Cocaine Smuggling
Two brothers and a man who crewed on their boat were indicted yesterday on charges of smuggling more than 1,100 kilograms of cocaine from St.
Lucia in the West Indies to the Netherlands from 1991 to 1993, said the United States Attorney, Faith S. Hochberg.
David and Stephen Schulz, both of Long Branch, and their hired hand, Eddie Delossantos of Ocean Township, face life in prison and $8 million in fines if convicted.


CHRONICLE
ELLEN BURSTEIN, a former television consumer affairs reporter, had reason to celebrate this week.
And rallying around her the other evening for champagne at her Manhattan apartment were family members including her mother, BEATRICE S. BURSTEIN, a former State Supreme Court justice, and her sister KAREN BURSTEIN, a 1994 candidate for State Attorney General.
The reason for the gathering was a decision by the State Professional Medical Conduct Administrative Review Board to uphold the revocation of the license of Dr.
IRVING I. DARDIK for defrauding and exploiting patients with multiple sclerosis.
Five others had joined Ms.
Burstein, who has had multiple sclerosis since 1986, in a complaint to the State Department of Health.
Dr.
Dardik charged her $100,000 before treatment began, a fee that he said he needed for full-time therapists.


Marlins Rattle Rookie Pitcher
Sooner or later it was bound to happen: Jason Isringhausen would learn what it's like to get roughed up in the major leagues.
After pitching well in his first three starts, Isringhausen was knocked around by the Florida Marlins last night at Shea Stadium, suffering his first defeat -- a 7-2 setback that extended the Mets' losing streak to four games.
Isringhausen, who had given up a total of six earned runs in his previous three starts, lasted just three innings, giving up five runs and eight hits.
He allowed a solo home run to Jeff Conine in the first and came apart in the second when the Marlins scored four runs on five hits and two walks.
A rattled Isringhausen also was charged with a balk and a wild pitch in the inning as the Marlins sent 10 batters to the plate to earn a 5-0 lead.


Blues Trade Joseph, a Goalie, to Edmonton
Goalie CURTIS JOSEPH, who fell out of favor with Blues Coach MIKE KEENAN after a lackluster playoff performance, was traded to Edmonton yesterday for two first-round draft picks.
The Blues sent Joseph, who is a free agent, and the college forward MIKE GRIER to the Oilers for first-round choices in 1996 and 1997. (AP)


Piccadilly Cafeterias Inc.(PIC,N) reports earnings for Year to Jun 30


St. Joe Paper Co.(SJP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


RESULTS PLUS
SWIMMING  Bennett Beats Evans for a Third Time
Janet Evans got trounced by Brooke Bennett in the 1,500-meter freestyle last night, leaving the ailing four-time Olympic champion 0 for 3 against her teen-age heir apparent in the Phillips 66 national championships in Pasadena, Calif.
Amy Van Dyken lowered her American record in the 50 freestyle by five-hundredths of a second, winning in 25.13 seconds on the final night.
Summer Sanders finished second in the 200 individual medley to land a spot on the United States team for next week's Pan Pacific championships in Atlanta. (AP) GOLF  Stewart Takes Buick Lead by One Stroke
Payne Stewart shot his second consecutive 65 yesterday for a one-stroke lead over Woody Austin after two rounds of the Buick Open in Grand Blanc, Mich.
Some in the 156-player field were stopped by darkness and were to complete their second round before the start of the third round today.
Austin day, tied the course record with a nine-under-par 63 and came back with 68.
The 63 over the 7,105-yard layout had been equaled by six others.
But it all became moot when Jim Furyk, taking advantage of lift, clean and place rules, birdied his final five holes for a record 62 in the second round. (AP) TENNIS  Ivanisevic and Enquist Reach Semifinals
No. 1 Goran Ivanisevic of Croatia and No. 5 Thomas Enqvist of Sweden rebounded from first-set losses yesterday to win their quarterfinal matches in the Infiniti Open in Los Angeles.
Ivanisevic beat Marcos Ondruska of South Africa, 2-6, 6-1, 6-3, and Enqvist defeated Michael Joyce, 1-6, 6-1, 6-1.
Also, Jakob Hlasek of Switzerland beat Patrick Rafter of Australia, 6-7 (7-1), 6-4, 7-6 (7-5), and No. 2 Michael Stich of Germany defeated No. 7 Alexandr Volkov of Russia, 6-3, 6-2. (AP) ARCHERY  American Men Finish 1-2-4 in World Meet
Gary Broadhead won the first individual gold medal at the world archery championships in Jakarta, Indonesia, by defeating a fellow American, John Vozzy, 110-106, in yesterday's final in the men's compound division.
The bronze medal was won by an Australian, Phillip Tremelling, who defeated another American, Tom Crowe, 110-109. (AP)


Bombing Conspiracy Defendant Admits Guilt in a Plea Deal
One of 11 defendants in a terrorism trial pleaded guilty yesterday to a bombing-conspiracy charge in a deal with prosecutors.
Under the deal, the defendant, Matarawy Mohammed Said Saleh, would most likely not be sentenced to much more time beyond the two years he has served since his arrest.


A New Copper Top for the Pierre


Wherein Deep Breaths Are Through Clenched Teeth
MAYOR DONALD PRICE would be the last to admit that his village has the slightest thing to worry about.
But if prodded, he concedes that these days, the municipal parking lot is always full.
All day.
And that can be a bit stressful.
Not to mention that there are people driving around the streets who do not know where they are or where they are going or how to get from here to there.


C-Tec Corp.(CTEX,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


No Headline
"I think the effect of the heat is cumulative. I feel like I cannot get enough oxygen. I'm tired and short of breath all the time. Each day I feel worse." -- GINA VON EISS, of Mamaroneck, N.Y.  [ 1:2. ]


Carl B. Rubin, 75, Judge in Cincinnati
Carl B. Rubin, a Federal district judge in Cincinnati who helped to settle lawsuits over a fire that killed 165 people and an anti-nausea drug that was suspected of causing birth defects, died on Wednesday at the University of Cincinnati Hospital.
He was 75.
The cause was cancer, hospital officials said.


Some Hi-Tech Voyeurism For a Summer Evening
Spying on strangers when they are not being observed is a temptation that is particularly ripe in a city like New York where the windows of neighboring buildings present whole fields of voyeuristic opportunity.
That's one reason why "C'est la Vie," an event produced for Lincoln Center Out of Doors and billed as "an audience-as-voyeur theater piece," promised to explore and perhaps to explode conventional notions of privacy, voyeurism and urban life.
That promise is unfortunately subordinated to loftier goals that are not met.
In the event, which plays through Tuesday at the Fountain Plaza at Lincoln Center, the audience, equipped with binoculars and radio headphones, observes 11 different interwoven dramas, broken into 51 segments played out in the windows of the nearby Radisson Empire Hotel.
A soundtrack broadcast through the headphones tuned to an FM frequency plays the dialogue spoken by characters whose actions are pantomimed by actors behind the theatrically lighted windows.


Health Official Gives Issues Fair Hearing
To the Editor:
Your July 26 profile of Mayor Rudolph W. Guiliani's chief health adviser and chairwoman of the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation, Maria K. Mitchell, depicts her in ways that do not match our experience either in her current positions or previous ones.
This administration has made a concerted effort to involve New York City's health care community in major policy issues since its earliest days.


Plan Devised for Fixing Seals on Grounded Shuttle
Engineers have developed a plan for repairing faulty seals in the space shuttle booster nozzles, but it may be another week before the work can begin, and so the launching of the next mission remains indefinitely postponed, the space agency said yesterday.
Officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration said they still hoped to get the flight of the shuttle Endeavour under way before the end of August.
Its liftoff had been scheduled for today before the O-ring problems emerged from the last two shuttle flights..


Court Upholds Donations Ban In Bond Market
A Federal appeals court panel yesterday upheld the so-called pay-to-play ban, which prevents investment bankers from making political contributions to state officials who are in a position to hand out municipal finance business.
In a unanimous decision, the three-member panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia said the ban, which was approved by the Securities and Exchange Commission, violated neither First Amendment protections of free speech nor 10th Amendment protections of a state's right to control its own elections.


Seles to Skip Her Next Scheduled Event
MONICA SELES has revised her preparation plan for this month's United States Open and will not play in a tuneup tournament in California.
A recent hurricane near her Sarasota, Fla., home interrupted her practice schedule, forcing her decision to skip the Los Angeles Championship at Manhattan Beach. (Reuters)


So What's a Kid to Think When Mom Smokes?
To the Editor:
In "Young, Carefree and in Love With Cigarettes" (front page, July 30), a teen-ager reminds us of the importance of focusing on the young when talking about tobacco.
He said, "I figure if it's really so bad for you, they wouldn't be selling them everywhere."


Lalas Uses His Head, But to Parma's Benefit
Alexi Lalas, who played his college soccer at Rutgers, received a loud reception by 34,826 fans who turned out tonight to watch the Parmalat Cup at Giants Stadium.
But 32 minutes later, the cheers turned to groans.
Lalas headed a ball into his own net, putting the United States national team in a 1-0 hole, and Parma of Italy went on to score a 2-1 victory.


John Coolidge, Art Museum's Director, 81
John Coolidge, arts professor emeritus and former director of the Fogg Art Museum at Harvard University, died on Monday at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
He was 81 and lived in Cambridge, Mass.
Born in Cambridge on Dec. 16, 1913, Mr.
Coolidge held a bachelor's degree from Harvard and a master's degree and Ph.D. from New York University, where he studied at the Institute of Fine Arts.
He was a founding member of the Society of Architectural Historians in 1940.
He taught at Vassar and at the University of Pennsylvania before going to Harvard as an assistant professor in 1947.


Funds for Rail Projects
A key Senate panel has approved $85.5 million for transportation projects in New Jersey.
The projects include a new train station in Secaucus providing access to Newark and midtown Manhattan and a new rail line linking Newark International Airport with towns in the Newark-Elizabeth corridor.


Executive Changes
CELESTIAL VENTURES CORP., Houston, named Irwin Schneidmill president and chief executive.
RAYMOND CORP., Greene, N.Y., named Ross K. Colquhoun, its president and chief operating officer, to the additional post of chairman.


COMPANY BRIEFS
COASTAL CORP., Houston, announced that its trucking unit, ANR Freight System, Denver, would merge with Advance Transportation Co., Milwaukee, to form a new company serving the central states region.
Terms of the merger were not disclosed.
FEDERAL SIGNAL CORP., Oak Brook, Ill., a maker of fire trucks and signaling equipment, said that it had purchased closely held Bronto Skylift Oy A.B., Tampere, Finland, a maker of access platforms for fire trucks and construction sites.
Terms were not disclosed.
MENTOR GRAPHICS CORP., Wilsonville, Ore., a software company, said it planned to buy back from investors up to $50 million worth of its common shares, representing about 2.9 million of its 55 million shares outstanding, in the next 18 months.
WILCOX ELECTRIC INC., a U.S. subsidiary of Thomson-CSF S.A., Paris, said that it had received a contract valued at $475 million from the Federal Aviation Administration to set up a satellite-based air navigation system.


'Kids' Evokes Strong Reactions From Youths as Well as Parents
He was 14 years old, he said.
He was standing, skateboard in one hand, cigarette in the other, with two male friends his age in a line for the movie "Kids" at the Lincoln Plaza Theater last Saturday afternoon.
"Kids" happens to be about teen-age New York skateboarders, and the portrait it paints is anything but flattering.
So what was he expecting from the film?
"I don't know," he said, shrugging. "My mom said I should see it."


3d Arrest in Soft-Drink Hijack
The target of the hijackers was a truck carrying $6,100 worth of Mango Madness and other flavors of Snapple soft drinks.
The police said yesterday that it was an inside job and they arrested Herman Murphy of Irvington, who works at a Snapple distribution center in Union City.
They say he had been riding in the truck July 28 when it was commandeered by his accomplices.
Two brothers, Darien and Jeffrey Battle of Newark, were arrested on Thursday.


Belmont Rider Dies After Being Thrown
Antonio Vizcarrando, a 47-year-old exercise rider, died after the horse he was working out threw him into a rail at Belmont Park early yesterday morning.
He was exercising Lavender Blue for the trainer TOM WALSH when she apparently ran into the inner rail, crushing Vizcarrando's upper body.


Quantum Health Resources Inc.(QHRI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A Sighting of Elvis? No, but Quite a Studying
Just days after one group of international scholars finished their annual conference here on the life and works of William Faulkner, a second wave of them is arriving to examine another famous native Mississippian, Elvis Presley.


Transactions
Baseball  Major League Baseball MLB PROPERTIES -- Named Gail Hunter director of promotional events and Ethan Orlinsky director of legall affairs.
American League BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Recalled Armando Benitez, pitcher, from Rochester of the International League.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Recalled Rod Bolton, pitcher, from Nashville of the American Association.
Optioned Mike Bertotti, pitcher, to Nashville.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Purchased the contract of Darryl Strawberry, outfielder, from Columbus of the International League.
Designated Luis Polonia, outfielder, for assignment.
National League ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Placed Geronimo Pena, second baseman, on the 15-day disabled list.
Purchased the contract of Mark Sweeney, first baseman, from Louisville of the American Association.
Football  National Football League SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Waived Joe Tofflemire, center.
College  CONNECTICUT -- Extended the contracts of Jim Calhoun, men's basketball coach, and Geno Auriemma, women's basketball coach, for four years.


India Will Examine Project's Cancellation
The Indian Government, seeking to reassure foreign investors, said today that it would examine ways of resolving the controversy that led to the cancellation of a $3 billion power project headed by the Enron Corporation of the United States.
"There will be some way out," said Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, where he is on an official visit.
He offered no specifics, however.


Salvadoran Labor Law Protects Workers; What Mexicans Earn
To the Editor:
Kenneth Schwartz's information in "Mexican Maquiladoras" (letter, July 27) is out of date.
Based on his experience "just before and after the passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement," he tries to differentiate Mexican and Central American maquiladoras, or free-trade zone factories.
Since he was there, the peso devaluation cut the value of Mexican worker paychecks by half.
When I examined the pay stubs of workers this spring, I found all were receiving in the 53 to 59 cent an hour range.


Journal; The Disney Trap
When a TV set still had so few channels you could count them on your fingers, Americans constantly complained, "There's nothing on!" Now we've entered that long-awaited multi-channel nirvana.
But except for those who can't get enough of sub-equatorial soccer and Capitol Hill bombast, who believes that the vast wasteland has given way to the promised land?
Most nights there's still nothing on.
The phenomenon of hunger amidst cultural plenty is hardly unique to TV.
The movie palace that once housed a single film is now a multiplex, but if you're not part of the teen-age common denominator, isn't it harder than ever to find something to see, no matter how many screens?
A new book?
The superstore dwarfs the old independent bookseller, but for all the extra titles, the variety in the mix seems less.


HOUSE PASSES BILL CURTAILING RULES ON PHONES AND TV
The House of Representatives approved a bill today that would radically rewrite the nation's communications laws for the first time in more than six decades.
In a frenetic session before breaking for a monthlong recess, House members voted 305 to 117 for vastly reduced regulations on everything from cable television to local and long-distance telephone services.


So What's a Kid to Think When Mom Smokes?; MTV's Models of Cool
To the Editor:
"Young, Carefree and In Love With Cigarettes" (front page, July 30) does not deal with an obvious promoter of the acceptability of teen-age smoking, especially among young adolescents: MTV.


Mr. Dole and Deregulation
Corporate managers perpetually squawk about costly, job-killing regulations that Washington dreams up for no good reason.
They exaggerate, but they have a point.
Yet few in the Senate listened until the majority leader, Bob Dole, took up the issue.
Now there are two regulatory reform proposals -- one good and one bad -- before the Senate.
Neither has enough votes to pass.
A "rump" group of Democrats is grasping for a faulty compromise.
One bill, proposed by John Glenn, Democrat of Ohio, would require agencies to weigh the costs as well as the benefits of health, safety and environmental regulations in order to weed out those that would do more harm than good.
The idea is to use cost-benefit analysis to inform public debate.


World News Briefs; U.N. Lifts Restrictions On Human Rights Group
A decision to bar Freedom House, a New York-based human rights organization, from taking part in United Nations conferences and other events was reversed at a meeting in Geneva last Saturday of the Economic and Social Council.


For Edwards, 59-0 Was a Leap of Faith
Jonathan Edwards broke the world record in the triple jump on a Tuesday, which was just fine by Edwards but not quite the perfect ending for those who have followed his slow, unconventional and ultimately astonishing rise.
Sunday is the day that best symbolizes Edwards.


IN BROAD ATTACK, CROATIA IS TRYING TO DISLODGE SERBS
The Croatian Government launched a long-threatened offensive at dawn today, sending tanks, troops and jets into action to retake a swath of territory that has been under the control of rebel Serbs since 1991.
More than 1,500 shells landed in Knin, the headquarters of the breakaway Serbian region, United Nations officials said.
Other towns along the 90-mile-long Serb-held territory, known as Krajina, were also reportedly shelled or bombed.


To Atone for the Misdeeds of the Past


Bearings Inc.(BER,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Could This Metal Thing Be a . . . Oh, No!
Two construction workers were repairing a skylight at the City Center theater complex about 11 A.M. yesterday when they found a pineapple-shaped piece of metal on the roof.
The two passed the object back and forth a few times.
"At first, we weren't sure what it was," said one worker, Bob Hargreaves of Skylight Surgeons in Ronkonkoma, L.I.


Arno Werner, 96, Master of Bookbinding Craft
Arno Werner, a German-born bookbinder who was credited with keeping the craft alive in the United States, died on July 28 at his home in Hadlyme, Conn.
He was 96.
His work, often executed in painstakingly hand-tooled morocco leather, was marked by a sturdy yet elegant simplicity.
Until 1982 he was chief bookbinder for rare editions at the Houghton Library at Harvard University.


Los Angeles Sweatshops Are Thriving, Experts Say
Almost one-fifth of the garment industry workers in Los Angeles, many of them foreigners who came to the United States to escape the crushing poverty of their homelands, are toiling in unregulated, sweatshop conditions, labor officials, economists and union organizers said today.
Exactly how many find themselves bound to employers who take advantage of their legal status, naivete and cultural alienation is not known.
But experts said their numbers were flourishing despite a host of regulations on labor, health, safety and immigration designed to flush them out and shut their employers down.


Affiliated Computer Services Inc.(ACSA,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Knicks and Heat State Cases on Riley
The Knicks, who had accused the Miami Heat of tampering with the Knicks' former coach PAT RILEY, presented their case yesterday in a hearing in Manhattan before Commissioner DAVID STERN of the National Basketball Association.
So did the Heat, who denied tampering.
Barring a settlement between the two teams, Stern will probably render a decision in a few weeks.


Circling the Grocery Carts; Stop &amp; Shop Plans a Foothold in the New York Region
The Yankees are coming.
Stop &amp; Shop, the supermarket leader by a mile in southern New England with well-managed stores that have been praised for their variety and spaciousness, has begun a southward push into what its executives, like Whitehall officials, call "the new territories": the suburbs of New York City.


Quebecor Inc.(PQB,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CHRONICLE
HELEN THOMAS, the chief White House correspondent for United Press International, has written about the birthdays of eight Presidents.
Yesterday, the current President honored her 75th birthday with two gifts: an exclusive interview in the Oval Office and a surprise party for her colleagues in the Press Room, with beer and chocolate cake.
"How do you stand doing this year in and year out?" PRESIDENT CLINTON demanded in a rapid-fire imitation of the woman who covered the Rose Garden ceremony where he shook John F. Kennedy's hand as a teen-ager.
"Aren't you sick of this?"


Pianist of the Old School, With Experience in Africa
The pianist Randy Weston has one of those expansive conceptions of jazz shaped by the 1960's and rarely found any more.
Mr.
Weston lived and studied in Africa, and his music sounds like a response to his experience.
But he grew up in Brooklyn, and he is one of the last great pianists to come out of the New York school that included Thelonious Monk, Bud Powell and Elmo Hope.
His improvising has a rigor that makes it gleam with intelligence.
Mr.
Weston, who is performing through tomorrow at Sweet Basil (88 Seventh Avenue South, above Bleecker Street, Greenwich Village), played pieces in his second set on Tuesday night that seemed to mix everything he knows.
He performed his harmonically sophisticated "Berkshire Blues," and a piece that made reference to the black African Gnowan musicians of Morocco.
The work had an open-ended, revelatory quality that related more to folk music than to jazz.


Manatee Heads North, Again
Chessie, the wandering manatee, has been spotted again, further north than ever.
Fishermen saw him yesterday morning near the Coast Guard station at the Shark River inlet, according to the Federal Fish and Wildlife Service.
Florida is the natural habitat of the 1,250-pound manatee.
Last year he headed north, making it as far as Chesapeake Bay -- hence his name -- before scientists decided to intervene and take him back south.
SUSAN JO KELLER


A Mendelssohn Warhorse Gets the Perlman Treatment
By this point perhaps even Itzhak Perlman doesn't know how many times he has performed the Mendelssohn Violin Concerto throughout his long and celebrated career.
He played it again on Monday night, at Avery Fisher Hall with the Mostly Mozart Orchestra conducted by Gerard Schwarz.
And once again the trademark qualities of his playing were there for all to hear: the opulent sound, the silken tone, the supple bow arm, the effortless technique.
But there were other qualities present that have also become trademarks of Mr.
Perlman's playing in recent years, qualities that suggest he is having trouble keeping the mainstream works that are his calling cards vital.
There was often a perfunctory quality to Mr.
Perlman's performance.
In places his intonation was surprisingly off.
Passagework was rushed through in an attempt, it seemed, to create a generic excitement.


No Disruption in Phone Service
If telephone company workers walk off the job at midnight tonight, there will be no disruption in phone service, Bell Atlantic officials said yesterday.
Jim Carrigan, a Bell Atlantic spokesman, told The Associated Press: "We always have contingency plans for a work stoppage and those are in place. There will be telephone service and people will be able to make calls." The Communications Workers of America and Bell Atlantic were negotiating in Washington as the three-year contract was set to expire.


Visiting a New Cambodia


Mothers Need to Know if They Have H.I.V.
To the Editor:
Re "Forced H.I.V. Testing Won't Help Newborns" (letter, July 22): Diane Welsh, president of the New York chapter of the National Organization for Women, states that the Ackerman bill introduced in Congress, which would require that mothers be notified of test results, "would not insure the most effective care for newborns who test positive."


Sports of The Times; Taking It One Single At a Time
THE American League East race began at 2 P.M. yesterday when the team made this terse, long-awaited announcement: "The minor league contract of Darryl Strawberry has been purchased by the New York Yankees."
With that, Darryl Strawberry -- the ex-Met, the ex-Dodger, the ex-Giant and the former next Willie Mays -- had joined one of the best-known franchises in professional sports.
Strawberry was a Yankee.
A Yankee inserted into the lineup right away at designated hitter as New York beat the Tigers last night by 4-1.


Grandfather Fought The Klan in Indiana
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 2 article about the discovery of a 1920's Ku Klux Klan roster in Noblesville, Ind., reminds me of my grandfather Melvin Greensfelder, a merchant from Logansport, a small town in northern Indiana.


Jobless Rate Edged Higher Last Month
The economy shed factory jobs at an accelerated pace in July, as the unemployment rate edged up one-tenth of a point, to 5.7 percent, the Labor Department reported today.
The Clinton Administration expressed disappointment in the figures, which came after a more upbeat series of recent reports had given signs that housing, consumer spending and even industry were rebounding from the economy's flat overall performance in the spring.


Ivaco Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Fingerprints Link Suspect To Bombing, Officials Say
The fingerprints of a Palestinian man charged on Wednesday in the bombing of the World Trade Center match those left in a Jersey City apartment where the bomb was assembled, law enforcement officials said yesterday.
The man, Eyad Ismoil, 24, was arrested in Jordan on Tuesday afternoon and turned over to the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Thus ended a two-and-a-half-year manhunt by the F.B.I. and the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
Agents had identified Mr.
Ismoil, an engineering and computer student, as a suspect by sifting mounds of telephone records and airline passenger manifests.


Bridge
Two old rivals faced each other in the Spingold Knockout Team Championship here on Thursday at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.
More than a quarter of a century ago, Edgar Kaplan opposed Benito Garozzo of Italy in some famous world championship battles and had the worst of it.
Here he seemed about to get some revenge, but was disappointed.
He went to bed leaving his teammates with a 42-imp lead, but Garozzo, a Florida resident nowadays, stormed back to win by 24, making the comeback of the year.
Garozzo's teammates were Dan Rotman, Richard Reisig, Lea Dupont and Glenn Eisenstein, who are also Floridians, and Haig Tchamitch of Don Mills, Ontario.


Pataki Keeps His Distance From a Plan for Higher Fares
Meeting at the World Trade Center on Wednesday afternoon, the leaders of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority briefed Gov.
George E. Pataki about their plan to increase transit fares and bridge tolls.
Mr.
Pataki, his aides said, told the group he thought that the plan "is credible" and ready to be presented to the public.
Perhaps not surprisingly, the M.T.A. chairman, E. Virgil Conway, a Pataki appointee and friend, seemed to view that comment as the Governor giving his blessing to the plan.
So on Thursday, when Mr.
Conway was asked about Mr.
Pataki's position, he said, "It is my clear understanding that he approves the actions we're taking today."


Canadian Pacific (CP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


On Amendments, a Democrat Knows the Value of Coalitions
In his first years in Congress, Edward J. Markey was the archetypal liberal Democrat -- a protege of Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., who was then Speaker of the House.
Mr.
Markey became a champion of consumer rights, a vigorous opponent of nuclear power and a leading organizer in Congress for a nuclear weapons freeze.
His views on those topics have not changed, but his priorities have as he has grown older.
By virtue of seniority, Representative Markey, a Democrat from suburbs north and west of Boston, became chairman of the House Commerce Subcommittee on Telecommunications and Finance in 1987.
And the more he mastered the issues before his subcommittee, the more he realized that he needed to forge coalitions with Republicans and conservative Democrats to get his way.


Technology Stocks Rebound, But Dow Declines by 17.96
Stocks were mixed yesterday in a lethargic trading session, as the blue chips slipped and technology issues rebounded.
"The stock market had a whipsaw action for most of the day," said Robert Freedman, chief investment officer of John Hancock Funds.
"A lot of people just went home."


Flowers Industries (FLO,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 1


Esoteric Wedge of Academia Is Roiled by Hunt for Bomber
Last October an agent from the Federal Bureau of Investigation showed up in New Orleans at the annual meeting of The History of Science Society, the main professional gathering for academics studying the origins of science and how it has transformed the world.
The agenda featured esoteric items like a discussion of 19th-century social attitudes toward the germ theory and a detailed analysis of the inks that Galileo used in one of his manuscripts.


American Re Corp.(ARN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Dole Offers Welfare Bill, But Conservatives Reject It
Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, set the stage today for a bitter debate over welfare policy as he introduced a compromise bill intended to overcome splits within the Republican Party.
Conservatives immediately criticized it, saying it would not significantly reduce the number of babies born to unmarried women.
With the floor debate expected to begin on Saturday, Senator Dole and other Republicans were moving to the right in the hope of rounding up 51 votes for their bill.
But in the process, they seemed to be diminishing their chances of winning support from moderate Republicans and conservative Democrats.
So the outcome is in doubt.


After Criticism, State Eases Casino Requirements
The State of Connecticut is easing the financial requirements for the development of a casino in Bridgeport, following intense criticism from a Bridgeport business group and one of the leading contenders to build the casino.
The state will no longer require a minimum annual payment of $230 million from the casino after its first three years of operation.
It also will not demand that the casino operator renew a three-year, $610 million letter of credit when it expires, as the original agreement mandated.


Paper Recycler Will Build Plant on S.I.
An Australian company has agreed to build a $250 million waste-paper recycling plant in Staten Island that will be the first of its kind in New York State, company officials and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced yesterday.
To persuade the company, Pratt Industries, to build a plant in New York, the city agreed to give it $28 million in tax breaks and the state will provide an additional $14 million in abatements.


Bratton Says He Doubts Injury Story
As dozens of police officers patrolled the streets of Washington Heights in upper Manhattan to maintain calm yesterday, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton curtly dismissed the account of a witness who said she had seen a police officer push a man out the window of a neighborhood apartment.
"She will be interviewed," Mr.
Bratton said of the woman, Damaris Payano.
"But she is full of baloney, to be quite frank."


Corrections
A picture in some editions yesterday with the Chronicle column, showing Ellen Burstein, a former television consumer affairs reporter, was published in error.
It was intended for a report that was postponed for today.
That report appears on page 20.


Giant Special Teams Coach Unfazed by Loss of Meggett
The Giants' coaching staff is probably no different than many others in the National Football League.
The coaches work hard, get up early, stay late and watch more film than Siskel and Ebert.
And one of the hardest-working coaches is Joe DeCamillis on special teams.
He has had to work harder, perhaps, than the others because he came to his position with only one year of experience.
But in the two-plus seasons since his 1993 arrival, the Giants' special teams have got steadily better.
Now DeCamillis leads a young but talented group that will have to deal with the loss of the ace return specialist David Meggett, who is in New England.


Treaty Proposal to Curtail Overfishing Is Approved at U.N.
A treaty to control fishing on the open seas and curtail the overfishing of the world's shared waters was approved today by delegates from 100 countries.
The pact, which needs approval by the 185-member General Assembly later this year and ratification by at least 30 nations before taking effect, applies only to what are known as "straddling" or "migratory" fish, which move in and out of national maritime boundaries.
It does not cover fishing in territorial waters.


Corrections
A front-page headline yesterday about the Congressional debate on the telecommunications bill referred incorrectly in some editions to the House action.
The issue was not debated Thursday night; the House adjourned early yesterday until 8 A.M. without any further debate or action on it.


Stiffing Straphangers
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority's need to raise fares and cut costs is an unavoidable consequence of huge cutbacks in Federal, state and city subsidies.
But its remedy for this problem is warped, and the abruptness of its unveiling by the M.T.A. chairman, E. Virgil Conway, was impolitic to say the least.
The plan penalizes New York City riders and threatens an economy that is the core of the metropolitan area's prosperity.
Local subway and bus fares paid by many low-income people within the city would go up 20 percent, while commuter railroad fares would rise by only 9 percent.
Worse, free passes for city school students would be eliminated.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.69
5.79
4.28
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.39
5.40
4.45
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.39
5.40
4.89
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.48
6.51
7.27
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.91
6.93
7.54
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.75
7.78
8.31
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.22
6.21
6.37
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


So What's a Kid to Think When Mom Smokes?; We Choose the Risks
To the Editor:
I was angered by "Young, Carefree, and in Love with Cigarettes" (front page, July 30).
While you paint a realistic picture of young people's obsession with cigarettes, you also portray teen-agers as ignorant flakes who believe of cancer, "They can shrink it up and make it go away."


Observer; What A Line!
This is the golden age of the bottom line.
When you're out of work, don't scowl and whine.
Unemployment's good for the bottom line.
So smile, be happy, flash the "O.K." sign because you're doing your bit for the bottom line.


Pain, and Dreams, Greet Christopher in Cambodia
The last time a Secretary of State arrived in this poorest corner of Southeast Asia, 40 years ago, Cambodia still had its tragedies ahead of it: two savage wars, the secret bombings, the horror of the killing fields.
Today Secretary of State Warren Christopher landed here to declare that Cambodia had finally "emerged from a cruel darkness," and in small and sometimes unspoken ways, he spent much of the visit atoning for America's role in Cambodia's many miseries.


To New Yorkers, It's Not Just The Heat, It's the Continuity
New Yorkers seemed to be getting really edgy yesterday.
Central Park temperatures exceeded 90 degrees for the seventh consecutive day, bringing the number of such scorchers so far this year to 18 -- one day more than the annual average.
From the burning city pavement to the steaming beaches, people throughout the region have sunk into a state of deepest lethargy.
"I think the effect of the heat is cumulative," said Gina Von Eiss, an administrative assistant from Mamaroneck, N.Y.
"I feel like I cannot get enough oxygen. I'm tired and short of breath all the time. Each day I feel worse."


Texas Utilities Co.(TXU,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-13  SERBIAN OUTPOST FALLS TO CROATS  Croatian Government forces captured Knin, the capital of the Serbian rebel region of Krajina, and linked up with troops of the Bosnian Muslim enclave of Bihac. 1


Domino Real-Estate Deal Cleared
A final obstacle has been removed to a complex deal to relocate both the City University Graduate Center and the State University College of Optometry in a $173 million project involving the old B. Altman department store and two other sites.
In a three-year process, the college will move from 315 Park Avenue South at 24th Street to CUNY's building at 33 West 42d.
CUNY will move to the Altman building, on Fifth Avenue at 34th.
To allow the deal, Gov.
George E. Pataki signed a special law cutting off state funds for the optometry college's $7 million annual rent, breaking its lease without penalty or compensation to the landlord.
Mr.
Pataki's press office did not respond to a reporter's inquiries.


Rock Of Warmth, Worked in The Old Way
THERE is a cliff of Connecticut brownstone that to Michael Meehan is akin to, say, Ayers Rock rising spectacularly from a virtual wilderness in Australia or the jagged sides of the Grand Canyon.
It is a thing of wondrous, almost breathtaking, beauty, changing colors as the sun reflects off it.
"I like it best here in the winter when the foliage is gone and it's quiet," he said.
"Here" is a ledge of brownstone near the Connecticut River in Portland, the town once famed for the reddish brown rock that was cut out in huge blocks from steep cliffs near the river's edge.
Brownstone was quarried at several sites, but Portland was the largest and had the best stone, rich in color, relatively free of blemishes.
Most people don't think of brownstone much these days.
It is a stone associated with the past, with a long and honorable history ranging from Colonial gravestones to Civil War monuments to 19th-century mansions and rowhouses built in New York City, Boston and dozens of other urban settings.


Hominid Dreams
ANCESTRAL PASSIONS  The Leakey Family and the Quest for Humankind's Beginnings.
By Virginia Morell.
Illustrated. 639 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $30.


The Nation; Washington: Not Just Another Big City?
DESPITE the gloss and pomp of its Federal superstructure, the nation's capital offers as much urban pathology as Detroit and New York City.
Underneath a patina furnished by museums and monuments, the city has lurched from mayoral scandals to fiscal crises, with high rates of crime, homelessness and teen-age pregnancy.
The capital, in the view of some Republicans, represents the failed liberal agenda writ large.
So it was all the more remarkable last week that Newt Gingrich, the Speaker of the House, attended a town meeting at a local high school to emphasize his commitment to rejuvenate the capital and make it a model of urban policy.
He says he is receptive to ideas that cost money, whether they involve hiring more police officers or giving special tax breaks to city residents.


Teams in Semifinal of Bridge Tournament
Four of America's best bridge teams battled here this afternoon in the semifinal of the Spingold Knockout Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.
The defending champions, led by Richard Freeman of Atlanta, trying for their third straight victory, led a team headed by Richard Schwartz of East Elmhurst, Queens, by 9 imps after 16 deals.
In quarterfinal play Friday night, the Freeman team won by 28 imps against Steve Weinstein of Glen Ridge, N.J., and his squad.
The Schwartz team won by 59 against a group headed by Geoff Hampson of Fenton, Mich.


MARKET TIMING
Monday The Federal Reserve reports consumer credit for June.
Forecast: up $10.5 billion, after an $11.51 billion increase in May.
Analysts said strong car sales in June helped lift auto credit.
It will be the 25th consecutive month that consumer borrowing has risen.
The Chiron Corporation is expected to report a second-quarter loss of 22 cents a share; Healthsource, a gain of 39 cents a share.
Tuesday The Commerce Department releases June wholesale trade.
Forecast: up 0.4 percent, following a 0.1 percent increase in May.
The Labor Department reports second-quarter productivity and costs.
The General Re Corporation is expected to report second-quarter earnings of $2.24 a share.
Wednesday The Federal Reserve releases its "Beige Book" report of current economic activity.
Columbia/HCA Healthcare is expected to report earnings for the second quarter of 70 cents a share; Federated Department Stores, a loss of 9 cents a share.
Thursday The Labor Department releases the producer price index in July.
Forecast: unchanged, following a 0.1 percent decline in June.
The index was also unchanged in May.
The Equitable Companies is expected to report second-quarter earnings of 42 cents a share; the Gap Inc., 24 cents a share.
Friday The Labor Department reports the consumer price index for July.
Forecast: up 0.2 percent, after a 0.1 percent increase in June and a 0.3 percent increase in May.
The Labor Department also reports real earnings for July.
They rose 1.2 percent in June.
The Commerce Department releases July retail sales.
Forecast: up 0.4 percent.
They had risen 0.7 percent in June.


Mascots Are Ruled Safe at Home
Umpires in the Texas-Louisiana League can no longer kick out mascots, scoreboard operators or announcers.
"In the absence of procedure, the umps have taken it upon themselves to deal with the persons involved, and we've decided that's not correct," the league's president, DOUG THEODORE, said.


Corrections
A picture caption with the Streetscapes column last Sunday, about street trees in Manhattan, misidentified the corner shown.
It was Madison Avenue and 80th Street, not 50th Street.


A Never-Ending Season for Stripers in New York
Striped bass is the great light tackle saltwater gamefish of the Northeast.
It is also very much a New York fish.
Millions upon millions of striped bass are born, return to spawn and winter in the Hudson River watershed.
When summer warms our waters, the stripers' range extends to the end of Long Island Sound and down through Raritan Bay.
Taken on bait, lures and, lately, flies, the striper is challenging and rewarding, the greatest trophy for the surfcaster.
With the explosion of popularity in fly fishing, the striper has become the salt water version of the trout: a fish that you can study in a habitat that you can learn to read.
The fish has a way of showing itself by swirls, slurps, whooshes and gulps that any angler will understand.
And in every month of the year, somewhere in New York waters, you can bet someone is angling for stripers.


Transplanted New Yorker Is Nostalgic for Austin St.
To the Editor:
Even though I live so far away, I was pleased to receive a copy of your June 25 Shoptalk article "Mom and Pop Hang Tough on Austin St." from my sister Rita Belletti in Forest Hills.


Cautiously, Clinton Backs Croats' Goals
President Clinton said today that Croatia's offensive to recover a swath Croatian that has been under the control of rebel Serbs since 1991 could prove helpful in resolving the four-year-old Balkan conflict.
Mr.
Clinton, who had delivered his weekly radio address at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., made his comments to the ABC News correspondent Sam Donaldson, who had undergone surgery on Tuesday to remove a cancerous lymph node from his groin.
After questioning the President, Mr.
Donaldson filed a radio report from his hospital bed.


Conversations With Miss Mary, Mayor of 9th St.
In June, an addict was shooting up behind a rose bush in the Ninth Street garden, a peaceful oasis in a decidedly unpeaceful neighborhood.
Mary Owens, or Miss Mary, as she is known to virtually everyone on her block, Ninth Street between Avenues B and C, asked him to move on.
"He told me he was busy," Ms.
Owens said.
The man, needle feeding a vein, used an expletive that angered Ms.
Owens, a disciple of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. who nevertheless has been known to wield an iron pipe.
This time, she grabbed the needle.
"I broke it off right in his arm," she said.
"He screamed and ran off."


Anger Within: A Healer Who Also Suffers
IN that high-up bed and sitting room where the whites of the upholstery and walls only subtly give way to pale grays, no trace of the oppressive, extraordinary heat of outside seems to enter.
As the holiday voices waft up from the beach and come softly through floors and shut doors, the bay becomes only an area of blue that is seen through a window.
A fan cools us.
A calm settles, human created; banishing irrational force.
We are talking about anger.
"I am not very popular in certain of the 'hidden child' circles," Yehuda Nir says, "because I have a great deal of trouble with the concept of righteous gentiles."


Hiroshima: A special report.; The Bomb: An Act That Haunts Japan and America
The ones who were vaporized instantly, leaving nothing but permanent shadows on the walls behind them, they were the ones Shizuko Abe envied.
Mrs.
Abe, then an 18-year-old newlywed, was one of the unlucky survivors, broiled, irradiated and flayed, skin peeling from their bodies but not quite dead, who were witnesses when the United States ushered the world into the nuclear age 50 years ago today.


Another Restaurant Near the L.I.R.R.
The restaurant I refer to is the Blue Marlin Restaurant.
I am the sole proprietor.
FRANKLIN U. GAUGLER Montauk


Firms Seek Profits Among Co-ops' Fiscal Troubles
FIVE years ago, when Kenneth S. Horn started in the business of resurrecting financially troubled co-ops, he named his company Alchemy Properties, after the medieval science that aimed to transform base metals into gold.
"Actually, it's also an amalgam of my children's names," Mr.
Horn said.
"But the image of trying to create gold from semiprecious metals seemed appropriate."


Despite Predictions, Astros Stay in Hunt In the N.L. Central
The recent flurry of trades that sent players, mostly pitchers, scrambling upward in the standings for mostly minor league prospects was viewed generally as a whole lot of salary dumping.
Last December, the Houston Astros were accused of executing a similar economic move.
The Astros, who ended last year's abbreviated season half a game from first place, engineered a 12-player swap with the San Diego Padres, shedding two high-salaried players in third baseman Ken Caminiti and center fielder Steve Finley.
They would be contenders no more, the consensus concluded.


When Growths on Plants Aren't Harmful
THOSE curious duncelike caps on oak leaves are harmless.
These oddities are merely deformities caused by a tiny insect called the gall wasp; there is no reason to worry that the tree is ailing.
On some oak trees, larger galls can be seen and these are called oak apples.
The apple is simply a leaf that has become deformed by the feeding of tiny wasps.
Adults emerge from the gall and mate.
Females then lay their eggs near the root system, the eggs winter over and the whole cycle begins again the next spring.


Yet Another Big Bank Swallows a Smaller One
It wasn't quite on the scale of Disney and Capital Cities/ABC, but this week UJB Financial Corporation became the latest bank to acquire a smaller competitor when it announced its merger with Flemington National Bank.
UJB Financial Corporation, based in Princeton, paid $47.9 million in stock to buy Flemington National Bank, which had been the largest independent bank in Hunterdon County with $288 in assets and eight branches.


Marketa A. Janku, Scott H. Rogers
Marketa Anna Janku, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jan A. Janku of Atherton, Calif., and Prague, was married yesterday to Scott Harrison Rogers, a son of Mrs.
William A. Dickinson of Roanoke, Va., and the late Judge Robert J. Rogers.
The Rev.
Vladimir Strejcek performed the Unitarian ceremony at St.
Nicholas Church in Prague.
Mrs.
Rogers, 29, and her husband, 30, are founding partners in the Globe Bookstore and Coffeehouse in Prague.
She graduated from the University of California at Davis.
Her father is a computer consultant based in Prague.
Her mother, Dr.
Jana Janku, is an internist in Atherton.


Three More States Raise Speed Limit to 65
Three Northeast states are joining the ranks of those that have raised the maximum speed limit to 65 miles per hour on highways outside urban areas, modifying the 55-mile-per-hour standard set by Washington in 1974.
On Aug. 1, New York State became the 45th state to permit the higher limit, affecting 1,135 miles of highway.
The 65-mile-per-hour speed limit will be in effect in rural areas, on sections of the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway, Interstate 81, Interstate 84, Interstate 87 (Northway), Interstate 88 (Warren M. Anderson Expressway), Interstate 390 (Genessee Expressway) and Route 17 (Southern Tier Expressway).
Last month Maryland adopted the 65-mile-per-hour limit for approximately 265 miles of highway, and Pennsylvania for about 1,400 miles.


Jeffrey H. Patterson, Eloise D. Clark
Eloise Derby Clark, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Christopher T. Clark of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Holland Patterson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David H. Patterson of South Natick, Mass.
The Rev.
Edward French, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the Ascension Memorial Church in Ipswich, Mass.
The bride, 28, and bridegroom, 27, were until recently assistant vice presidents in the London office of the Bank of Boston.
She was in the multinational banking group; he was in the media finance group.
Next month, they are to begin studying for master's degrees in management at Northwestern University.
The bride graduated from Princeton University.
The bridegroom graduated from Bowdoin College.


The Nation; The Military's Getting Queasier About Death
EVER since the Persian Gulf war, with its famously low number of American casualties, the public has become increasingly intolerant of images of body bags and humiliated hostages.
The United States is now more reluctant than ever to send its troops to conflicts abroad.
And when the military does go, one key criterion of its success is a small casualty rate.
Generals and admirals now fear that this cautious mind-set may soon insinuate itself into the thinking of young sergeants, lieutenants and captains, with disastrous implications for the quality of the American fighting force.
"I'm concerned we do not start in our young leaders this notion that it's better to be hesitant and timid," Gen.
John M. Shalikashvili, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said in an interview.
"The result will not be that they will take fewer casualties. The result will be they will take more casualties. We need to guard against that in our school system."


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
GRAMERCY PARK AREA  $705,600
1 Irving Place  (Zeckendorf Towers)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,163-sq.-ft. condo in a 10-year-old building; 24-hr. doormen, concierge, dining area, 2,329-sq.-ft terrace, 3 exposures, Hudson River view; common charge $759; taxes $4,690, listed at $725,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: JR Realty Property Management Corp.)  GREENWICH VILLAGE  $365,000
140 Thompson Street  1-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; live-in super, wooden columns and beams, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,324, 74% tax-deductible, listed at $395,000, 13 weeks on market (Broker: Douglas Elliman)  UPPER EAST SIDE  $650,000
315 East 68th Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,750-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doormen, entry foyer, 2 fireplaces, roof deck, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,554, 50% tax-deductible, listed at $695,000, 13 weeks on market (Brokers: Bellmarc; Halstead Property Co.)  UPPER WEST SIDE  $273,000
320 Riverside Drive (104th St.)  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doormen, dining area, herringbone floors, 2 exposures, Hudson River view; maintenance $895, 50% tax-deductible, listed at $289,000, 42 weeks on market (Broker: A.J. Clarke)  BRONX
RIVERDALE  $90,000
2575 Palisade Avenue  (River Terrace)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doormen, dining area, terrace, pool, Hudson River view; maintenance $889, 54% tax-deductible, listed at $100,000, 1 year on market (Broker: Sopher)  WILLIAMSBRIDGE  $257,500
3987 Paulding Avenue  2-family, 32-year-old, detached brick house; family room in lower-floor unit; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room in each; finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,895, listed at $279,000, 6 weeks on market (Broker: J.A.V.)  BROOKLYN
BAY RIDGE  $180,000
9411 Shore Road  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; elevator, dining area, terrace, harbor view; maintenance $680, 60% tax-deductible, listed at $205,000, 22 weeks on market (Broker: Velsor)  DITMAS PARK  $197,500
664 East 18th Street  7-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 85-year-old, detached frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, double parlor, fireplace, 2-car garage, needs work; taxes $1,800, listed at $239,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: J. Shayovitz) PARK SLOPE  $412,000
338 First Street  3-family, 3-story brownstone to be used as a 2-family residence; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room in primary duplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in simplex; full cellar; taxes $1,621, listed at $429,500, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  QUEENS
FOREST HILLS GARDENS  $392,500
275 Burns Street  2-family, 3-story, 75-year-old brick Tudor; 2 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room, powder room in primary duplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in simplex; fireplace in each; 1-car garage; taxes $2,600, listed at $475,000, 30 weeks on market (Broker: Terrace)  REGO PARK  $221,000
98-29 67th Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 58-year-old attached brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,836, listed at $239,000, 20 weeks on market (Broker: F.H. Realty Executives)  STATEN ISLAND
GRIMES HILL  $625,000
26 Ada Place  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 20-year-old detached colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $2,750, listed at $675,000, 6 weeks on market (Broker: Vitali-Sunshine)  NEW JERSEY
MANALAPAN  $250,000
23 Tracy Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old contemporary; fireplace, underground sprinklers, on cul-de-sac; taxes $5,275; listed at $250,000, 1 week on market (Broker: Weichert)  OLD BRIDGE  $158,000
242 Community Circle  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 9-year-old ranch; 2-car garage, eat-in kitchen, dining room, underground sprinklers; taxes $4,591; listed at $165,000, 15 weeks on market (Broker: The Prudential New Jersey)  PENNINGTON  $315,000
144 South Main Street  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, century-old colonial; fireplace, screened porch, h/ w floors; taxes $4,669; listed at $315,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Richard A. Weidel)  SUSSEX  $71,000
22 Grove Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 63-year-old bungalow; dining room, pantry off kitchen, walk-up attic; taxes $1,600; listed at $75,000, 9 weeks on market (Broker: Weichert) CONNECTICUT
COS COB  $250,000
81 Strickland Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 188-year-old farmhouse; dining room, walk-up attic, h/w floors, .22 acre; taxes $2,493, listed at $272,000, 36 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties; Rachael Lorentzen)  GREENWICH  $670,000
100 Woodside Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 32-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, library, 2 family rooms, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $6,652, listed at $750,000, 40 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties; Russell Pruner)  MIDDLETOWN  $150,000
24 Clover Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 74-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, rear deck and patio, 1-car garage; taxes $2,555, listed at $159,900, 24 weeks on market (Brokers: Sterling; Beazley Co.)  WESTBROOK  $175,000
38 South Main Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1760 Colonial; center chimney with exposed-beams, wide-plank floors, 6 fireplaces, barn with loft on .48-acre lot; taxes $2,648, listed at $179,900, 1 year on market (Brokers: Beazley Co.; Seabury Hill)  WESTCHESTER
MOUNT KISCO  $630,000
54 Indian Hill Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 16-year-old colonial; office, deck, playroom, workshop, 1.2 acres; taxes $15,365, listed at $630,000, 20 weeks on market (Brokers: Houlihan/Lawrence; Holmes &amp; Kennedy)  RYE  $162,500
66 Milton Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 67-year-old co-op; entry hall, fireplace, remodeled kitchen and bath; maintenance $750, 51% tax deductible, listed at $175,000, 12 weeks on market (Brokers: Houghton &amp; Banks; Weichert)  SCARSDALE  $725,000
116 Brite Avenue  6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 78-year-old colonial; modern eat-in kitchen, 2 fireplaces, mud room, dining room; taxes $12,977, listed at $725,000, 16 weeks on market (Broker: Julia B. Fee)  WHITE PLAINS  $480,000
3 Leir Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 9-year-old contemporary; cathedral ceiling, 2-level deck, fireplace, balcony, family room; 1/3 acre; taxes $9,357, listed at $489,000, 14 weeks on market (Brokers: Century 21 Wolff)  LONG ISLAND
FAIR HARBOR (FIRE ISLAND)  $155,000
111 Walnut Walk  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 25-year-old bungalow; new kitchen, dining area, decks, 40- by 80-foot lot; taxes $2,600, listed at $155,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Don Goldman)  GLEN HEAD  $350,000
17 Beechwood Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 40-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, attic, finished basement, 2-car attached garage, pool; taxes $5,500, listed at $399,000, 8 weeks on market (Brokers: Douglas Elliman-Jane Hayes; Little Neck Realty and Daniel Gale)  MILLER PLACE  $180,000
6 Winfield Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, finished basement, fireplace, 2-car garage, near beach; taxes $7,300, listed at $199,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: ERA Manzoni)  OLD BROOKVILLE  $570,000
8 Wren Court  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 30-year-old colonial; dining room, den, basement, fireplace, 2-car attached garage, heated pool, 1 acre; taxes $9,400, listed at $649,000, 20 weeks on market (Broker: Harmonious Homes)


A Road Many Newcomers Travel By
Cruising down Main Street in Flushing, Queens, in a faded Toyota Camry, Ben Lin is just beginning to settle into the third lesson of the day when he suddenly jerks in his seat and barks in Chinese: "Red light! Red light!"
His student, Michael Sun, a bespectacled professor from China who has vast experience on mopeds but only a few hours behind the wheel of a car, jolts the Camry to a halt.
Mr.
Lin, dressed in a polo shirt, light slacks, leather sandals and dark aviator glasses, barely breaks a sweat, and in the next hour and a half calmly guides his student past a variety of errors, including cutting off a jaywalking pedestrian, turning across the path of an oncoming car and exceeding the speed limit several times.


Wheels, Deals, Half-Pipe Dreams
Kanaf Hagi lay in his cramped room in a Oneida County juvenile detention center on a warm July morning and imagined himself flying.
A hyper kid with trigger reflexes, Kanaf could feel his feet twist in phantom intimations of what they could do on wheels, and his mind spun with images of himself mid-sky, body stretched beyond the ground and way beyond the fences of juvenile hall.
Kanaf had just served a year-long sentence for beating a man with a pair of num-chuks while stoned.
Today he was leaving.
There was only one thing on his mind: getting back to the skate ramps of Mullaly Park.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on July 16 about how companies deal with problems that threaten to deflate the value of their stocks referred incorrectly to an award of $5 billion in punitive damages against the Exxon Corporation in connection with the 1989 oil spill off Alaska.
The Exxon Corporation is considering an appeal of the punitive damages; it has not paid them.


Go Easy On the Purism
To the Editor:
I enjoyed Paul Goldberger's analysis of the architectural facelift at 320 Park Avenue  [ "A 30-Something Tower Tries So Hard for a 90's Look," July 9 ] , but his critique of the post-modernization of a Bauhaus office building seemed a bit harsh.
I agree that tampering with history is always hazardous, as evidenced by the now-embarrassing "modernizations" inflicted on so many grand old buildings in the 1940's and 50's.
But purism should not be carried to extreme either.
Not all of us prefer to hear Mozart on original instruments all the time.


POSTINGS: After the Takeovers; Marketing Millenniums
CDL International's recent purchase of the Plaza Hotel overshadowed its earlier takeover of the Millenium and Macklowe Hotels.
But as CDL absorbs these two hotels into its worldwide chain, it hopes to make the name of one of them -- under a slightly different spelling -- far better known.
On Oct. 10, it will change the Hotel Macklowe's name to the Millennium Broadway.
And, CDL is combing its portfolio of 37 hotels, to see which others might benefit from the Millennium name.


Driving in a New Land
Learning to drive ranks with getting a job as a top priority of newly arrived immigrants.
In Queens, dozens of driving schools cater specifically to Chinese, Korean, Indian and Pakistani students.
For Ben Lin, an instructor at Union Auto Driving School in Flushing, a typical day is 12 hours and 12 lessons, guiding students past all manner of errors and near-misses.
"When I started this job, I had no white hair," he said.
Article, page 38.


Grassy Sound Once Had Its Own Railroad Station
To the Editor:
The July 23 On the Map, "Whispers of the Past in Grassy Sound, a Former Fishing Town," showed that a quiet pace can still be found in New Jersey.
Just a note about the railroad service provided by the Anglesea railroad: Service started in July 1883 and lasted until 1933, when the two railroads serving southern New Jersey merged and this route into Wildwood was abandoned.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on July 16 about bias crimes misidentified Niger Innis of the Congress of Racial Equality.
He is a spokesman for the organization; the chairman is his father, Roy Innis.


Pataki Signs Bill to Study Job Loss Due to Domestic Violence
Gov.
George E. Pataki has signed a bill that could pave the way for awarding unemployment benefits to people, mostly women, who lose their jobs because they are victims of domestic violence.
The bill, intended as the first step in a two-part process of changing the current law, would seem to run contrary to Mr.
Pataki's general aim of restricting government benefits rather than expanding them.
In fact, several people involved in negotiations said his aides had sent strong signals that he might veto the bill because of concern about cost.


SUNDAY, August 6, 1995; SMARTS: Air Bags That Think?
Safety sells, and the people who put Morton salt on your table also want to put air bags in your car and maybe even on your motorcycle.
"Automobile air bags are now being treated more like a commodity than before," says George Kirchoff, vice president of automotive programs at Morton International, which has sold 40 million bags since 1989.
New items now being developed for the 1997 model year include a nonsmoking (it has nothing to do with cigarettes) bag, which eliminates the possibility that a burst of smoke will appear when the bag inflates and make an already terrified passenger think the car is on fire.
Also in the works are door-panel bags that inflate during side collisions.


53 Are Injured by Pepper Spray
Fifty-three residents of a Lower East Side apartment complex for elderly people were injured yesterday when someone discharged pepper spray into an air-conditioning unit in a dining room.
The elderly residents, who were about to eat lunch, began coughing and wheezing as the powerful irritant circulated, Capt.
Ellen Scibelli of the Emergency Medical Service said.


Kirsten L. Hill and Jonathan R. Avery
Kirsten Lila Hill, a daughter of Drs.
Richard and Ann Hill of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Jonathan Reid Avery, the son of Dr.
Laurence and Rachel Avery of Chapel Hill, N.C.
The Rev.
Victor J. Marchioro, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Plymouth Church of the Pilgrims in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Avery, 25, graduated magna cum laude from Yale University.
She is a fourth-year student at the Cornell University Medical College in New York, where her father is a clinical assistant professor of psychiatry.
Her mother is a dermatologist in New York.


And This Little Piggy Stayed Off the Platter
Waterworld  Kevin Costner, Jeanne Tripplehorn, Tina Majorino, Dennis Hopper Directed by Kevin Reynolds PG-13 120 minutes


Laying Bare the Dog Days Of Their Walking Lives
DOWNTOWN -- Kathy Jablow, the owner of Pet Patrol, an animal care service with a high-end clientele, likes to convene her staff of dog walkers every six weeks.
"When you're out there walking dogs eight hours a day, you begin to feel very isolated," Ms.
Jablow said at a staff party on July 27 in her East Village apartment.
She had asked her dog walkers each to prepare two notes for the party: one a sample of a real note they might leave an owner, the other a note they'd like to leave.


Good Sports
Southampton, L.I., July 29.


THE WILD BUNCH
They're cute.
They're hip.
They're nuts.
Select their back-to-school clothes accordingly.


CRIME
You don't really want to know what goes on in the kitchen of your favorite restaurant.
The waiters could be smoking the chef could be snorting heroin, the sous-chef chould be running with mobsters, the mobsters could be chopping up some guy in the meat locker, and the F.B.I. could be lurking in the alley.
Anthony Bourdain, a bona fide chef who currently hangs his toque at Vince &amp; Linda at One Fifth in Manhattan, dishes out all this agita in his satirical and prodigiously self-assured first novel, BONE IN THE THROAT (Villard, $20).
Sharper than the doper chef's $450 customized Japanese carving knife, the clever narrative follows the farcical complications of an F.B.I. sting that an agent who drives a red Alfa Romeo and goes by the name of Al has set in motion at the Dreadnaught Grill in SoHo.
The F.B.I. wants the goods on Sally Wig, the Mafia racketeer who is bankrolling this beanery, so Al puts the pressure on Sally's nephew, Tommy, the Dreadnaught's gifted sous-chef.
Squeezed by bullies on both sides of the law, Tommy has to come up with something quick to keep everything from boiling over.


Can the Garment District Refashion Itself?
BUD KONHEIM is the fourth-generation of his family to make a living in the city's garment trade.
But not long after the industry began its long, slow decline, Mr.
Konheim was on the front lines of the exodus of manufacturers from the Garment District to foreign factories where labor was much cheaper.
"We were one of the first ones to go to Hong Kong in the 70's," said Mr.
Konheim, then managing director at P. J. Walsh, the predecessor to Nicole Miller Ltd., the women's high-end apparel company where he is chief executive officer.


Surprise: Your Park Is Closed!
To the mothers and baby sitters who regularly take children to John Jay Park, it all happened overnight.
One day they were pushing the children on swings, and the next they were watching construction trucks roll by.
"There was no notice about the closing," said Faith Kinslow, whose two sons play and take swimming lessons in the park, at the east end of 77th Street.
"This is about the worst time to close a playground."


U.S.-Vietnam Ties: War Is Yesterday, Hope Is Today
Declaring an end to "a decade of war and two decades of estrangement," Secretary of State Warren Christopher arrived here today to open formal diplomatic relations with the Communist leaders of Vietnam, and immediately plunged into talks about turning a former enemy into an emerging trading partner.
In a day constantly haunted by images of a war from which neither side has fully recovered, Mr.
Christopher began his visit by witnessing the return of fragmentary remains of four American servicemen who were among the 58,000 who died here.
More than a million Vietnamese also died.


'Everything I Like to Do, the Track Favors It'
AN hour before the first race, Joe Bravo was leaning back in a lawn chair near the jockeys' swimming pool at Monmouth Park looking pretty much as if he owned the place.
This is not too far from the truth.
Bravo, 23, appears to be on track to win his fifth straight riding title at Monmouth, an honor that's losing some of its allure.
"It's getting a little boring," said Bravo, who varies the routine by routinely winning the riding title at the Meadowlands during the fall season.
At Monmouth, the script usually goes like this.
Bravo, a master at getting horses quickly out of the gate, goes to the early lead or, more often, sits two or three lengths off the front-runner.
"I like to consider myself a stalking rider," he said.
"On the lead, you feel like a rat, with the cat right beind you ready to pounce."


Will Jungle Be the Next Craze From Britain?
JUNGLE -- A FRENETIC, fiercely percussive dance sound made using samples and computers -- is the most exciting musical movement to emerge from Britain since the rave explosion of the late 80's.
But where rave culture was initially based around house and techno records imported from Chicago and Detroit, jungle music is purely home-grown.
Emerging from underground status last summer, jungle has been the focus of intense media and record-business interest ever since.
Now major labels in America are following their British counterparts by releasing compilations of jungle music and single-artist LP's.
But doubts remain whether jungle, a London-centered subculture, can be transplanted to America.
It's handy that the word jungle was coined, because a more musicologically precise term would be an ungainly, hyphenated hybrid.
Jungle music has multiple roots, all of them non-British.
Like subatomic particles colliding in an accelerator, elements of hip-hop, techno and reggae fused to create a distinctively British sound.
The anything-goes experimentalism of untrained musicians grappling with cheap computer technology combined with the druggy delirium of the rave scene and multiracial mix of working-class London -- all these factors conspired to create a new musical form.


Quiet Charm, And Solid Fare
BRIGHT FOOD SHOP ++  (212) 243-4433; 216 Eighth Avenue, at 21st Street; $; no credit cards


AUGUST 6, 1945
THE JAPANESE: Were the atomic bombings justified?
A survivor argues the attacks had "special features" that made them inhumane.
Page 10.
THE CREW: The pilot and the navigator of the plane that dropped the bomb express no regrets.
Page 10.


Newport on 91st St.
Lawn of the Cooper-Hewitt Museum, July 31.


Jessica Blake, Daniel Hawke
Jessica Anne Blake, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas R. Blake of Amherst, Mass., was married yesterday to Daniel Matthew Hawke, a son of John D. Hawke Jr. of Washington and the late Marie R. Hawke.
Jane R. Chittick, a justice of the peace, performed the ceremony at the home of the bridegroom's family in Tisbury, Mass., on Martha's Vineyard.
Mrs.
Blake Hawke, 29, is to begin studying this month for a master's degree in social work at the Catholic University of America in Washington.
She graduated from the University of Arizona.
Her father is a professor of mechanical engineering at the University of Massachusetts in Amherst and is the director of the Center for Manufacturing Productivity there.


Merrill Lynch: We Had It First
To the Editor:
To say that Merrill Lynch &amp; Company is "jumping on the bandwagon" of a so-called recent boom in financial planning is ironic to say the least ("In the 90's, Advice Is the Hottest Commodity," Investing It, June 25).


Hiroshima Survivor Went on to Nagasaki
To the Editor:
The 50th anniversaries of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki have inspired substantial national and individual reflection.
One historical footnote to these events has been lost in the commentary, articles and television stories.


Washington's Ancient Rain Forest
IT wasn't raining the day I visited the Hoh Rain Forest.
In fact, the sky was blue and the sun unusually warm as my husband, Ken, and I drove the 19-mile road that leads from Washington's Highway 101 into Olympic National Park, and into the most carefully preserved temperate rain forest in the Northern Hemisphere.
It is a place that averages 12 feet of rainfall a year (Los Angeles averages 14 inches), a place of 20-story trees, a place so green and dark and wet that at times it appears to be under water.
Less than a hundred miles from Seattle, the Hoh Rain Forest is perhaps the most dramatic example of original old-growth woodland, a place remarkable not only for its longevity but also for its idiosyncrasies.
It lies in the most protected of four rain forest valleys on the 6,400-square-mile Olympic Peninsula, which comprises the state's northwesternmost corner.
Outlined by wooded inlets, tidepools and driftwood-strewn beaches, the peninsula angles into the Pacific a bit like a bear's head pointing inquisitively upstream.
Both coastal and mountainous, this cool, misty cape forms a splendid arboreal incubator in its river valleys, where trapped thermal winds and mineral-rich soil produce some of the most magnificent trees in the world.


Caroline Jan Yu and Amarind Tan
Caroline Jan Yu, a senior personnel administrator for the New York State Division of Human Rights in New York, is to be married today to Amarind Tan, an events-marketing coordinator for Philip Morris U.S.A., also in New York.
The Rev.
Jann Arevalo, a nondenominational minister, is to perform the ceremony at the San Ramon Marriott at Bishop Ranch, in San Ramon, Calif.
The couple, both 26, graduated from the University of California at Los Angeles.
The bride, who is keeping her name, received a master's degree in public administration from Columbia University.
Mr.
Tan is to begin studying for an M.B.A. at New York University next month.


Men Crowd Stadiums to Fulfill Their Souls
Deep in the outfield at the Thunderdome, an indoor sports arena here, a religious band played pop-music style as the words, "Let Christ be glorified," appeared on a large screen.
Out in the stands Friday night, nearly 50,000 men, filling every seat in the house, raised their arms and linked hands.
For an all-male audience, gathered on a weekend night in a place built for the clash and roar of professional sports, it was a singular sight.


Down on the Farm in the Big City
GOATS, sheep, pigs, chickens, roosters and a cow named Daisy are the stars of the Queens County Farm Museum.
You can spend a day on 47 acres of farmland, going on hay rides, buying home-grown fruits and vegetables, touring the farmhouse (which dates back to 1772), walking on nature trails and playing with the animals, all of it right on the border of Queens and Nassau County.


Most Russians Suffer a Decline in Health; The Desk General
To the Editor:
An Aug. 1 news article suggests that Col.
Gen.
Dmitri A. Volkogonov was dismissed as director of the Military History Institute in Moscow solely because of his anti-Soviet views.
As an independent researcher I interviewed a subsequent director of this institute, Gen.
Ivan Shavrov, in April 1991, and got a different impression.


At the Casinos
What's happening on stage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.


From Lynch's Lips to Everyman's PC
PETER LYNCH is going on line.
Mr.
Lynch, who earned superstar status in the investment community with his spectacular run as manager of Fidelity's Magellan Fund from 1977 to 1990, is preparing a software package that combines a CD-ROM and an on-line service to give home investors electronic access to his expertise.


New Jersey Family Fights Centuries-Old Land Claim
For the family of Carl Yard 2d, whose forebears fought in the Revolutionary War, the news was stunning: Emissaries of a 17th-century King of England were claiming ownership of nearly 35 acres of undeveloped waterfront on the Manasquan Inlet that had been in family hands for generations.
Its value today: $5 million.
"I kept telling myself it couldn't be true," Mr.
Yard said.
"Didn't we fight something called the War for Independence over who owned this land?"


When Growths on Plants Aren't Harmful
THOSE curious duncelike caps on oak leaves are harmless.
These oddities are merely deformities caused by a tiny insect called the gall wasp; there is no reason to worry that the tree is ailing.
On some oak trees, larger galls can be seen and these are called oak apples.
The apple is simply a leaf that has become deformed by the feeding of tiny wasps.
Adults emerge from the gall and mate.
Females then lay their eggs near the root system, the eggs winter over and the whole cycle begins again the next spring.


The Other End of the Boardwalk
FOR as many years as casinos have been legal in Atlantic City, Historic Gardner's Basin has provided an alternative to their glitz by honoring the city's maritime and fishing industries and the environment that supports them.
A few years ago, the basin was nearly engulfed by its ruined neighborhood, but now a trip there proves that the residential side of Atlantic City is on its way back.
The basin, a collection of renovated wood-frame structures, historic boats and a restaurant in the style of Mystic Seaport in Connecticut, clings to the northwestern dockside edge of Absecon Inlet about a mile from the casinos.
Most of the deteriorated housing nearby has been replaced by Victorian-style row houses.
Streets have been widened, landscaped and brightly lighted.
Between the basin and the end of the Boardwalk is a sea wall; once a lovers' lane, it is now part of a $2.8 million project to connect the basin to the Boardwalk.


Lina Papandreou, David Stevens
Lina Papandreou, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Elias Papandreou of Athens, was married yesterday to David Averell Stevens, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Stevens Jr. of Washington.
The Rev.
David Bolton performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church in Dark Harbor, Me.
The couple graduated from the American University in Paris.


Rutgers No Patsy
To the Sports Editor:
I do not agree with several points William C. Rhoden made in his column "Finally New Talent in Jersey" (The Times, July 19).
He said that Rutgers is in the athletic doldrums.
But the program Vivian Stringer takes over is a very successful one, which Rhoden does not mention.
Theresa Grentz, the outgoing coach, had a 434-148 record at Rutgers and took the team to 9 N.C.A.A. tournament appearances in the last 10 years.
This is the doldrums?


Sex, Lies and Vanity in a More Mannerly Era
THE sexual backlash of Restoration comedy, after Oliver Cromwell's repressive rule in 17th-century England, is most lasciviously manifested in "The Country Wife," by William Wycherley.
Wycherley's world, populated by ladies of honor (read: hypocrites) and men of vanity (read: nincompoops) is an artificial representation of artifice.
Guile, deceit and treachery were not just a way of life for high society, but its very aspiration.
One is reminded of the classic take on Hollywood by Oscar Levant, who remarked that it is necessary to strip away the tinsel to get at the real tinsel underneath.


Stardom Shaped By the Street And the Makers Of Image
WHEN THE MUCH Anticipated second albums by the groups Arrested Development and Digable Planets floundered last year, few hip-hop insiders were surprised.
Both groups' debut albums had been hugely successful and influential, but in hip-hop the first album is often the artist's best; casualties of the sophomore slump are legion.
Not so for Mary J. Blige.
Her 1992 debut album, "What's the 411?", sold 2.2 million copies; her follow-up, "My Life," has sold 2 million copies and spent more than four months in the top 10 on Billboard's rhythm-and-blues albums chart.
Ms.
Blige is not a rapper but a hip-hop singer, and her experience provides a window on the world of hip-hop, where it's not enough to talk about the streets; an artist must seem to live there.
Yet such authenticity doesn't often translate into career longevity; the trick for record companies is finding a balance between the two.


F.Y.I.
Room With a View Q.  Why do the old, circular elevator windows have chicken wire in them?
A.
In the dark days before shatterproof glass, the chicken wire was used to keep the glass from spraying all over when the windows broke, said Dennis Barrow, historical archivist for the Otis Elevator Co., one of the nation's oldest, biggest up-and-down companies.


COLORING HISTORY
In "Coloring History, Our Way" (July 2), David E. Sanger asserts that "We  [ Americans ]  are matching the Japanese in historical amnesia" on the issue of World War II and the atomic bombings.
I am the curator of "Nagasaki Journey: The Photographs of Yosuke Yamahata, Aug. 10, 1945," an exhibition that raises the issues Sanger says are not being discussed.
It features photographs taken less than 24 hours after the atomic bombing.


Conversations With Miss Mary, Mayor of 9th St.
In June, an addict was shooting up behind a rose bush in the Ninth Street garden, a peaceful oasis in a decidedly unpeaceful neighborhood.
Mary Owens, or Miss Mary, as she is known to virtually everyone on her block, Ninth Street between Avenues B and C, asked him to move on.
"He told me he was busy," Ms.
Owens said.
The man, needle feeding a vein, used an expletive that angered Ms.
Owens, a disciple of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. who nevertheless has been known to wield an iron pipe.
This time, she grabbed the needle.
"I broke it off right in his arm," she said.
"He screamed and ran off."


Punch Lines
Shana Alexander riffs on free speech by way of introducing George Carlin (in photo) as the host of "20 YEARS OF COMEDY ON HBO," a fast ride through two decades of stand-up from the comedians who set today's standards for making audiences laugh.
Billy Crystal, Whoopie Goldberg, Alan King, Richard Pryor, Jerry Seinfeld, Garry Shandling, and Damon Wayans talk about the inspiration behind their work, and clips from past HBO specials feature routines from Lily Tomlin, Jim Carrey, Roseanne and Robin Williams when they were up and coming -- SATURDAY at 10:30 P.M. on HBO.
Kathryn Shattuck


OASIS
I enjoyed Bruce Davidson's pictures and Patrica Volk's essay on Central Park ("Oasis," July 16).
I, too, used to think of Central Park as an oasis, a refuge from the urban desert.
But my frequent escapes there yielded more than just recreation and relief.
While riding my bike one fall afternoon, I met a woman cyclist whom I introduced to my best friend and fellow rider.
They fell in love and eventually married.
Nine months after this chance encounter, I was out biking again when I lucked upon my future wife as she laced up her roller skates near the 72d Street roadway.
The four of us can fondly testify that magic happens in Central Park.
PAUL GILBERT San Francisco


Margot Zalkind-Schur, K. A. Shuster
Margot Zalkind-Schur, a graphic designer, was married yesterday to Kenneth Ashton Shuster, an industrial engineer.
The Rev.
Gretchen Woods, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Potomac Boat Club in Washington.
The bride owns the Very Graphic Design Company in Arlington, Va.
She graduated from the Philadelphia Museum College of Art.
She is the daughter of the late Sophia and Robert Schur.
The bride's first marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


As Divided by Dialect as the Homeland
IN ADDITION TO THE Chinese films at the Asian American International Film Festival, which ended its Manhattan run last Sunday, New York moviegoers will be treated to more Chinese films at Festival Hong Kong '95, opening Friday.
Between those events lies a tale of two cultures.
The 10-day Asian film festival showed movies that Western audiences might see in art houses.
It featured Mina Shum's "Double Happiness," a Canadian comedy that has been hailed as the "heterosexual 'Wedding Banquet.' "


THE DEADLIEST D.A.
The deadliest D.A.?
I would substitute "firmest" or "staunchest" in describing Lynne Abraham.
ARTHUR J. MORGAN New York


Elizabeth Blair, Kenneth M. Fenyo
Elizabeth Leigh Blair, the daughter of Jean Blair of West Hartford, Conn., and Dr.
Stanley Blair of Farmington, Conn., was married yesterday to Kenneth Martin Fenyo, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Fenyo of Ramsey, N.J.
The Rev.
Charles Melton, a nondenominational minister, performed the ceremony at La Valencia, a hotel in La Jolla, Calif.
The bride, 27, is keeping her name.
She is an associate at Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &amp; Hamilton, the New York law firm.
She graduated summa cum laude from Yale University and received a law degree from Harvard University, as did her husband.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
On Central Park Pond, Miniature Sails in the Sunset While vacationing in Paris last year, Guy Kohn, a Manhattan architect and an avid sailor, strolled through the Luxembourg Gardens and noticed people renting miniature radio-controlled sailboats by a small pond.


Brooklyn Needs a Saint
MADELEINE'S GHOST  By Robert Girardi. 356 pp. New York: Delacorte Press. $21.95.


Greatness Achieved
To the Editor:
Henry A. Kissinger, in reviewing my biography of Churchill (July 16), seemed to be conducting a polemic that had little actual bearing on the book I wrote.


Plants Disappearing? First, Check All Burrows
This appears to be the summer of the mole.
Or is it the vole?
Or even the gopher? (It's native to the prairie, but what else could be dragging whole tomato plants down a hole?)
About a month ago, a friend of mine who lives near Riverhead, L.I., was happily anticipating the blooming of some hollyhocks.
Then the leaves shriveled up, the buds withered.
Within a week, the stalks were nothing but dry, hollow sticks.


Sarah Williams, Andrew Kimball
Sarah McNaughton Williams, a daughter of Dr.
Katherine Johnston Williams of Washington and the late Dr.
Charles Sheldon Williams, was married yesterday to Andrew Hardin Kimball, the son of Carol Hardin Kimball of Lyme, Conn., and Geoffrey Dodge Kimball of New York.
The Rev.
Thomas Brunkow, a United Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at the Greensboro (Vt.) United Church of Christ.
The Rev.
Leslie Simonson, a Congregational minister, took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Williams, 29, is keeping her name.
She is the assistant director for corporate philanthropy at Pfizer Inc., the health-care company in New York.
She graduated from Wesleyan University.
Her father was a professor of anthropology at the University of the District of Columbia.
Her mother is a clinical psychologist and the director of the graduate program in art therapy at George Washington University in Washington.


It's Never Too Early To Look for Some Votes
A tiny straw in the hot summer wind: cold calls to the legislative offices of half a dozen members of the State Assembly found all but one of them at their desks last week, which is the last place you would expect to find busy men and women with real jobs and real lives outside of their part-time legislating.
What is keeping them there is the prospect of the Assembly elections this fall.
Not many other New Jerseyans may be aware that there will be a statewide vote, and even on Nov. 7 voter turnout will be low in a state where people tend to be pretty good voters.
Even if the election fails to catch the imagination of the public, however, it has already gripped the attention of Republicans and Democrats in Trenton and in district offices, because it will be the first test at the polls for Governor Whitman since her election in 1993.


Lisa Carney, David Eldridge
Lisa Ann Carney, a daughter of Doris and Gary Carney of Putnam Valley, N.Y., was married there yesterday to David Latham Eldridge, the son of Lucy and Richard Eldridge of New York.
The Rev.
Walter Steinard performed the ceremony at the Grace Methodist Church.
Mrs.
Carney Eldridge, 29, is an associate at Fox, Rothschild, O'Brien &amp; Frankel, a law firm in Philadelphia.
She graduated from Colgate University and received her law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the director of tax operations for the International Business Machines Corporation in Armonk, N.Y.


A New Group Will Accredit Some Colleges
The Federal Department of Education, in an unusual decision, has granted a group of tradition-minded scholars the authority to judge and accredit liberal-arts colleges.
The organizers of the group, called the American Academy for Liberal Education, say their aim is to turn the liberal arts curriculum away from faddish courses and back to solid surveys in literature, history and philosophy that were typical core courses 30 years ago.


Habitats: Brownstone Renovation; Persistence Pays Off on West 103d St.
TALKING to Peter Feldman about house renovation is like talking with Philip Johnson, say, about architecture or Bill Gates about computers.
Or maybe it's more like discussing the latest construction techniques with Steve and Norm, of "This Old House."
Mr.
Feldman and his "co-owner," as he introduces Kerstin Hasenpusch, are living the Life of Renovation: They bought a four-story foreclosed brownstone on West 103d Street a year ago for the incredible price of $265,000 and have proceeded to tear out all the walls and rip off all the elaborate tiger oak and mahogany wood trim. (Preservationists can relax; the trim has been sent off to the stripper.)


July 30-Aug. 5; The Heart May Like Tofu; What About the Stomach?
Delicious news.
The New England Journal of Medicine reported last week that the simple addition of soy protein to the diet can cut cholesterol levels in those who suffer from moderate to severe cholesterol overload.
For longstanding lovers of tofu, miso soup and veggie burgers -- and yes, we're out there -- the findings feel like a congratulatory pat on the back.
Yet a closer look at the requirements of how much soy protein one needs to eat to pare down on those irritating low-density lipoproteins makes clear that it will be a considerable menu challenge to improve one's heart disease risk through the beauty of the bean alone.


They Couldn't Take It With Them
THE LOST FORTUNE OF THE TSARS  By William Clarke.
Illustrated. 312 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $24.95.


Two Minor Leaguers Draw Suspensions
Two minor leaguers who climbed into the stands and fought heckling fans Monday in Wichita, Kan., have been suspended for 30 days, the Texas League said.


Checking Septic Systems
RAMON GONZALEZ hardly considers himself an expert on lawn care.
But this spring, when he looked out of the window of his new home in Holmdel, N.J., he knew something was definitely wrong.
"There was one spot where the grass was growing like wildfire," Mr.
Gonzalez said, recalling his initial puzzlement.


Salt Substitute From Tarrytown Company
FOR millions of Americans with high blood pressure, the salt shaker is a deadly weapon.
And even when it is banned from the kitchen and the table, the amount of salt used in food processing is still too high for those on low-salt diets.
Now a food and pharmaceutical company in Tarrytown, Applied Micro Biology, a public company traded on the Nasdaq, is marketing a product called Pansalt, which not only has the taste of regular salt but also contains minerals that may lower blood pressure.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Business Often Goes to the Swift, Not the Best
IT was Emerson, by most accounts, who said: Build a better mousetrap, and the world will beat a path to your door.
And for a nation of optimists, inventors and entrepreneurs, the maxim embraces an American ideal -- smarts and hard work will be rewarded.
Woolly-headed nonsense, according to some leading economists.
"It's naive to believe that efficient engineering solutions win in the marketplace," declares Paul A. David, a professor at Stanford University and a senior research fellow at Oxford University's All Souls College.
"That view is not supported by the study of history."


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
On Central Park Pond, Miniature Sails in the Sunset While vacationing in Paris last year, Guy Kohn, a Manhattan architect and an avid sailor, strolled through the Luxembourg Gardens and noticed people renting miniature radio-controlled sailboats by a small pond.


Booked Up all Summer
There was a time when it was hard to find a sleepier place than a college campus in July and August.
But nowadays, when students leave for the summer, it is almost as if some campuses turn on a neon sign that flashes: "FOOD AND LODGING AHEAD."


Labor Dept. Hears Tales of Abuses
A high-ranking official from the United States Department of Labor visited Chinatown for the first time last week to hear testimony from workers who pleaded for a crackdown on illegal labor practices in the garment and restaurant industries.
Maria Echaveste, administrator of the Wage and Hour Division and a presidential appointee, appeared at the behest of the Chinese Staff and Workers Association, which had been demanding greater government enforcement of unfair labor practices as it conducted a well-publicized four-month-long boycott of Jing Fong, a 1,500-seat restaurant at 18 Elizabeth Street.


BACKTALK: Ripken Should Keep Going and Going and. . .; A Dedicated Pro
The headline on Robert Lipsyte's column last week presented his point of view: "Baseball Needs Ripken to Take a Day Off." Letter writers overwhelmingly disagreed.
To the Sports Editor:
The idea that a new generation of fans and players should give up one of baseball's great joys -- record breaking -- out of respect to traditions and legends they never knew, is preposterous.
What's worse is that Lipsyte infers that Ripken lacks class.


Mark S. Lewis, Erinn F. Harley
Erinn Francoise Harley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo F. Harley Jr. of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Mark Stuart Lewis, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sherwood C. Lewis of Bloomfield, Conn.
Msgr.
Edward M. Connors performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Immaculate Heart of Mary Church.
Mrs.
Lewis, 25, is an associate at Whitman Breed Abbott &amp; Morgan, a law firm in New York.
She graduated from Emory University and received her law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the manager of staffing at CMP Publications, which specializes in computer trade magazines, in Manhasset, L.I.
Her mother, Stephanie Harley, teaches the fourth grade at the Greenacres School in Scarsdale.


Earnhardt Trashes Talk About His Demise
In case anyone forgot, Dale Earnhardt issued a reminder in the Brickyard 400 today: talk is cheap, and a lot slower than what it takes to beat him and his team.
Earnhardt, who took the lead in his Chevy Monte Carlo after the final round of pit stops, held off Rusty Wallace's Ford Thunderbird over the last 28 laps to win by 0.426 seconds, with Dale Jarrett right behind in third.


Wheels, Deals, Half-Pipe Dreams
Kanaf Hagi lay in his cramped room in a Oneida County juvenile detention center on a warm July morning and imagined himself flying.
A hyper kid with trigger reflexes, Kanaf could feel his feet twist in phantom intimations of what they could do on wheels, and his mind spun with images of himself mid-sky, body stretched beyond the ground and way beyond the fences of juvenile hall.
Kanaf had just served a year-long sentence for beating a man with a pair of num-chuks while stoned.
Today he was leaving.
There was only one thing on his mind: getting back to the skate ramps of Mullaly Park.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
HARLEM  A 19-Day Week Of Celebration
It started 21 years ago as a one-day celebration of Harlem.
This year, Harlem Week is running for 19 days with concerts, films, basketball competitions, a carnival and a conference on economic development.
The activities, most of which are free, will be held throughout the sprawling, diverse community.
"This is our festival to showcase Harlem in a positive light," said Marko Nobles, a spokesman for the event.
"The mood of Harlem changes during this time."
Through Aug. 27, the Museum of African-American History and Arts will show films daily as part of the 1995 Harlem Week Black Film Festival in the art gallery of the Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
State Building, 163 West 125th Street, at Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard.
The Harlem Carnival will take place Thursday at noon at 123d Street and Morningside Avenue.
Harlem Week; for more information and a schedule of events: (212) 427-3315.
VAN CORTLANDT PARK  A Musical Mosaic: Rag, Pops and Bach
The Bronx Arts Ensemble's Summermusic concert series continues Sundays through Aug. 27.
The ensemble is made up of a core group of about 15 freelance musicians playing the flute, oboe, clarinet, bassoon, horn, violin, viola, cello and bass.
On Sundays the group plays outdoors at 2 P.M. at the Rockwood Drive Circle in Van Cortlandt Park (near Mosholu Parkway and Broadway) and then again indoors at 4 P.M. at McGinley Center at Fordham University, Bronx Rose Hill Campus at Southern Boulevard.
Concerts, different each weekend, include the Brass Pops today, Ragtime Favorites on Aug. 13, Latin American Celebration on Aug. 20 and Bach Festival on Aug. 27.
Bronx Arts Ensemble; for information and directions call (718) 601-7399.
FLUSHING  Call: Save Qu Yuan!
Response: What, Again?
The dragons are coming back to the lake in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park today with the fifth annual Hong Kong Dragon Boat Festival.
The boats, which are 39 feet long, have dragon heads at the prow and tails at the stern.
Each is powered by a team of 20.
The race is based on an ancient Asian legend, said Melinda Parsons of the Hong Kong Government office in New York.
Around 400 B.C., Qu Yuan, a court minister who was loved by the people but not by the king, was banished.
For a time, he wandered about the countryside, writing poetry, but he eventually decided to drown himself in a river.
Local fishermen raced to save him, but in vain.
Their rescue dash is re-enacted in the dragon boat race.
Six boats will race today, and the championship will be decided next Sunday.
Hong Kong Boat Festival, Meadow Lake in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park; today, 1 P.M. to 4 P.M., and next Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; free; (212) 629-0370.
ALSO AROUND TOWN CHILL OUT Central Park Wildlife Center, Fifth Avenue at 64th Street; weekend-long event focusing on polar bears and penguins; games and crafts; $2.50 for adults, 50 cents for children 3 to 12, $1.25 for the elderly; (212) 861-6030.
HEALTH FAIR Diagnostic screenings, demonstrations by the Fire and Police Departments, massages and information on subjects like baby care, victim counseling and services for the elderly; Wednesday; Townsend Avenue between Mount Eden and East 174th Street; food, entertainment; (718) 716-8000.
HIROSHIMA A silent peace walk in remembrance of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki 50 years ago will start at the New York Buddhist Church on Riverside Drive between 105th and 106th Streets and continue north to Riverside Church at 122d Street; today, 1 P.M. to 4 P.M.; (212) 678-0305.
MONIQUE P. YAZIGI


Women Press For Hearings On Packwood
Members of the National Women's Political Caucus voted overwhelmingly today to urge the United States Senate to reconsider holding open hearings on allegations of sexual misconduct by Senator Bob Packwood and to expel the Oregon Republican if the charges are found to be true.
Meeting in its biannual convention here, the 24-year-old group addressed the issue of the charges against Mr.
Packwood even after the Senate had already voted earlier this week against hearings and was moving this weekend toward recess.


A Bridge's Misspelling Spreads in Throggs Neck
To the Editor:
Your article about the students at the State University of New York's Maritime College at Fort Schuyler ("Seasoned Sailors of SUNY Return From Semester Asea," July 23) never mentioned the name of our little peninsula, but a heading referring to the area as "Throgs Neck" demands comment.


Pastrami and Rice?


U.S. and Vietnam Open Ties in Hanoi
Declaring an end to "a decade of war and two decades of estrangement," Secretary of State Warren Christopher arrived in Hanoi to open formal diplomatic relations with the Communist leaders of Vietnam, and immediately plunged into talks about turning a former enemy into an emerging trading partner.


In the End, the Oklahoma Bombing May Be the Work of 2, Not a Major Conspiracy
Federal prosecutors in the Oklahoma City bombing case, are preparing to charge that the deadliest terrorist act in American history was not the widespread, well-organized conspiracy first suspected, but the work of only two or three disgruntled former soldiers.
The indictments, which must be brought by Friday under Federal speedy trial regulations, are expected to charge the only two suspects in custody, Timothy J. McVeigh and Terry L. Nichols, with the truck-bomb explosion that ripped apart the Federal office building, killing 167 people, including 15 children in a day care center.


A Bridge's Misspelling Spreads in Throggs Neck
To the Editor:
Your article about the students at the State University of New York's Maritime College at Fort Schuyler ("Seasoned Sailors of SUNY Return From Semester Asea," July 23) never mentioned the name of our little peninsula, but a heading referring to the area as "Throgs Neck" demands comment.


BACKTALK: Ripken Should Keep Going and Going and. . .; Promote Honesty
The headline on Robert Lipsyte's column last week presented his point of view: "Baseball Needs Ripken to Take a Day Off." Letter writers overwhelmingly disagreed.
To the Sports Editor:
I remember Lou Gehrig well. He was my boyhood hero.


Breathing New Life Into Couture
THE bride wore white lace, a diamond tiara and an orthodontist smile.
The July wedding of Prince Pavlos of Greece and Marie-Chantal Miller was not just the social event of the London season.
It beamed out a worldwide message: the display of class, social clout and uptown style are back in fashion.
A new generation of glamorous young royals came out of the gilded woodwork -- even if some of their parents and grandparents had mislaid their thrones.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
PHOTOGRAVURE PRINTS
Forty rare hand photogravure prints of John Singer Sargent's paintings may be seen at the Bruce Museum in Greenwich through Oct. 1.
Produced with the artist's permission in 1903, the painstaking intaglio process was carried out by the London firm of William Heinemann, and the results bear little resemblance to the inferior machine reproductions that came later.
Sargent was so impressed with the work that he ordered sets of the 62 prints sent to his friends as Christmas presents.


The World; Breathing Life Back Into the K.G.B.
THEY'RE BAAACK!
That is the lament of many Russians as they fearfully contemplate the personnel changes at the K.G.B. and the Kremlin wrought by the Yeltsin administration.
Ever since the war in Chechnya began and Boris N. Yeltsin's popularity plummeted, the Kremlin has been growing increasingly authoritarian and paranoid.
And Russian journalists and political analysts are increasingly jittery over its latest steps to consolidate its power and crack down on political opposition before the parliamentary elections in December and presidential elections next June.


Political Legacies Trail a Campaign
In some ways, they are much alike, each well-known because of a famous relative, each a survivor of emotional pain that helped shape her political activities.
Yet their differences have brought Linda (Toddy) Puller and Sandy Liddy Bourne together as candidates for a seat in the Virginia Legislature in potentially historic state elections this fall.
After years of steady gains, Republicans in Virginia are optimistic they can win control of both chambers of the Legislature for the first time.


No Headline
"It's typically misunderstood what it means to go home and be the leader. Leadership is servanthood. For the guy to be the leader means he out-serves his wife." -- BILL MCCARTNEY, founder of Promise Keepers.  [ 30:1. ]


Quiet Charm, And Solid Fare
BRIGHT FOOD SHOP ++  (212) 243-4433; 216 Eighth Avenue, at 21st Street; $; no credit cards


Taking The Faithful To Prison Gates; With Smiles and Tears, Families Ride Buses to Faraway Inmates
This is the bus to the land of broken dreams.
It rolls along New York City streets to the broad highways, along the country roads to the Attica Correctional Facility, carrying visitors, overwhelmingly women, to see the convicts they continue to love.
Buses assemble at Columbus Circle every Friday night.
Over-the-windshield destination signs say either "Chartered" or "Mystery Tour."


A Hamptons Tag Sale
The Lawford home, Southampton, L.I., July 29.


Air-Conditioned
This summer's air-cooled shoe designs have replaced other embellishments as fashion focal points.
The season's best-looking feet have an open-air freedom with only a few delicate quarter-inch straps holding the sole of the shoe on the foot.
These straps often suggest a spider web or, in a more exaggerated form, a delicate cage.
Many of the styles with no back straps slip on like slippers, and unlike previous eras in which open-air shoes tottered along on spindly spikes, most of the new designs are balanced on chunky heels.
These range from quarter-inch sandal heels to the more common inch-and-a-half blocks.


In Harlem, Diverse Views on Pathmark Deal
To reach agreement on a plan for a new Pathmark store in East Harlem, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said last week that the city would hold a 49 percent stake in the project until a Hispanic developer was found to take its place.
The Hispanic group will join the East Harlem Abyssinian Triangle, which includes the non-profit arm of the Abyssinian Baptist Church.
The ownership agreement represents a sharp departure for Mr.
Giuliani, who has long denounced using ethnicity as a factor in municipal decision making.
Jonathan P. Hicks Calvin O. Butts 3d, pastor of the Abyssinian Baptist Church


Business Best Sellers
HARD COVER *1.
TO RENEW AMERICA by Newt Gingrich (HarperCollins, $24).
The Speaker of the House describes his solutions to the country's problems. *2.
THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS by Deepak Chopra (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95).
How to "generate wealth in all its forms." *3.
HOW TO ARGUE AND WIN EVERY TIME by Gerry Spence (St. Martin's, $22.95).
A lawyer describes ways to win arguments at home and at work. 4.
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE by Philip K. Howard (Random House, $18).
How government regulations are fettering Americans. 5.
FIRST THINGS FIRST by Stephen R. Covey et al. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23).
Ways to organize your life. 6.
THE BEARDSTOWN LADIES' COMMON-SENSE INVESTMENT GUIDE (Godin/Hyperion, $19.95).
Tips for successful investing from 16 Illinois women. 7.
MICROSERFS by Douglas Coupland (Regan Books/Harper-Collins, $21).
A novel set on the campus of Microsoft, featuring "geek" heros. *8.
THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS by Michael Treacy and Fred Wiersema (Addison-Wesley, $25).
A discussion of competitive business strategies. 9.
THE TAKEOVER by Stephen W. Frey (Dutton, $19.95).
A novel in which Wall Street investment bankers scheme about monster deals and murders. 10.
A PENNY SAVED by Neale S. Godfrey (Simon &amp; Schuster, $18.95).
Lessons in budgeting for families, inspired by business: what's a fair price for mowing the lawn?
PAPERBACK *1.
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE by Stephen R. Covey (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12).
Principles for success. *2 CREATING A NEW CIVILIZATION by Alvin GToffler and Heidi Toffler (Turner Publishing, $7.95).
A proposal for reshaping society to meet 21st century conditions. 3.
THE 1995 WHAT COLOR IS YOUR PARACHUTE?
By Richard Nelson Bolles (Ten Speed, $14.95).
Advice about careers. *4.
RE-ENGINEERING THE CORPORATION by Michael Hammer and James Champy (Harper Business, $13).
Business innovation. 5.
THE TAX RACKET by Martin L. Gross (Ballantine, $12).
A plan for income tax reform that starts with eliminating the I.R.S.
Rankings are based on July sales figures of 3,050 bookstores and of wholesalers serving 28,000 hard-cover retailers and 38,000 paperback rfetailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets).
The numbers are statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above. *Some bookstores report receiving bulk orders of these titles.


Underground New Jersey
OUT where New Jersey nestles against the Delaware, the fields stretch out and begin to fill with cornstalks that offer the first hint of the miles to the west.
And just up from the fields, in an abandoned limestone quarry near Flemington in Hunterdon County, are two narrow culverts that give the first indications of an underground universe that stretches to the Mississippi.
At least, I was trying to convince myself of that in the gathering twilight one recent evening as I looked at the opening of a plastic pipe extending from a solid rock face.
After putting my head in, I had to hunch my shoulders to the roundness of the pipe and inch along on elbows and knees, into Leigh Cave.


Beth Anderson and Rusty Harold
ELLIOTTE (RUSTY) HAROLD 3D and Beth Anderson met last year at a potluck dinner for the New York Macintosh Users Group.
Members range from poets who have just bought their first laptop to techies like Mr.
Harold, a computer whiz who wears a ponytail (a "rubber band" in the computer world) and talks about his favorite hangouts in cyberspace the way people used to talk about taverns.


Angry Debate On AIDS Center Splits W. Village
"The whole Village is polarized," exclaimed Arlene Koenig, president of the Greenwich Village Block Association.
Perhaps not the whole Village.
But Housing Works plan to open an AIDS adult day healthcare program in the genteel northwest Village has pitted neighbor against neighbor, shop owner against shop owner and a Catholic priest against some parents who send their children to his parish school.
Not to mention dividing Community Board 2, which on July 20 voted to support the project, to be housed at 320 West 13th Street, after two raucous hearings.
The vote: 34 to four, with four abstentions and one recusal.


We'd Better Treat Anesthesiology Seriously
To the Editor:
The tragedy at Long Island Jewish Medical Center (front page, Aug. 1) -- a cluster of deaths over 10 weeks that has precipitated a New York State Health Department investigation of the hospital's surgical services -- will no doubt be repeated at other large and smaller institutions if the practice of anesthesiology is no longer given the respect it deserves.


IN BRIEF;
How much is a leaky pipe worth? How about $850 million?
That's how much the Hoechst Celanese Corporation, a chemical manufacturer, and the Shell Chemical Company agreed to pay to settle a nationwide class-action suit.
The settlement, approved by a Tennessee chancery court judge on Monday, will go to pay homeowners to replace polybutylene plumbing that degrades after contact with the chlorine in tap water.


The Crowd Is Good, but for Sampson, the Debut Is Not
The Parmalat Cup, which will conclude Sunday afternoon at Giants Stadium, is being used by the United States Soccer Federation as a dress rehearsal for Major League Soccer, the professional league that is supposed to be the legacy of last summer's World Cup.
Friday night's doubleheader was a rather encouraging first rehearsal.
A crowd of 34,826 turned out to see Parma of Italy defeat the United States national team by 2-1 and Boca Juniors of Argentina edge Benfica of Portugal by 3-2 on penalty kicks after a 1-1 tie in regulation.


No One Could Tell A Musical Tale Better
IN 1829, THE 16-YEAR-OLD RICHARD Wagner heard the soprano Wilhelmine Schroder-Devrient as Leonore in Beethoven's "Fidelio." "If I look back on my life as a whole," he wrote four decades later, "I can find no event that produced so profound an impression on me." The greatness he perceived in Schroder-Devrient lay in her ability to identify completely with the role she was portraying.
Wagner considered "the intensely human art of this incomparable actress" a benchmark against which all other singers were to be judged.
This century has seen no greater Leonore than Lotte Lehmann, whose performances as Beethoven's heroine under Arturo Toscanini and Bruno Walter became legendary precisely for the reason Wagner gave.
Walter recognized in Lehmann's performances "that rare phenomenon of an artist's personality becoming wholly merged with a poetic figure and of a transitory theatrical event being turned into an unforgettable experience."


U.S. Upholds Role at Talks On Women
The Clinton Administration, aided by a crowded domestic Congressional schedule that has kept attention off foreign affairs, has fended off a Republican-led attempt to boycott or limit American participation in an international gathering on women.
"The Fourth World Conference on Women will convene in China in 33 days and, let there be no doubt, the United States will be there," Madeleine K. Albright, the chief United States delegate to the United Nations, said at a meeting at the Center for National Policy in Washington on Wednesday.
Ms.
Albright is leading the American delegation to Beijing for the conference, which begins Sept. 4.


And This Little Piggy Stayed Off the Platter
Operation Dumbo Drop  Danny Glover, Ray Liotta, Denis Leary, Doug E. Doug and Dinh Thien Le Directed by Simon Wincer PG 108 minutes


GONE FISHING


Shooting for the Basket, and in the Process, for a Better Life
THE stampeding sounds of sneakers echoed through the second-floor gymnasium at the Y.M.C.A. on Riverdale Avenue here, as Randy's Bus and Van team squared off against the team from Saturn of White Plains in a ferocious basketball game.
Despite the sweltering night, unrelieved by the circulation of a few sluggish fans, the players raced up and down the court, leaping to dunk baskets and make jump shots, hitting nothing but net, until Randy's won, 58-56.
But the players in this late-evening game, on July 27, were doing more than just shooting hoops.
As participants in the new Midnight Basketball program in Yonkers, these young men were among 120 local participants in a social experiment that seeks to combine sports and self-improvement.


Political Meal Sans Politicians
The goal was to raise money for the fledgling Asian American Democratic Club of Queens and to endorse the State Supreme Court candidacy of Judge Dorothy Chin Brandt -- and perhaps to curry favor with dozens of invited local politicians.
Money was indeed raised, and Judge Brandt, a Civil Court judge assigned to Criminal Court, was duly honored.
But no favor was curried, since there were no local politicans with whom to trade chits during dinner chat.


Newspaper Decides Not to Fight Singapore Libel Award
The International Herald Tribune, which has been assessed $678,000 in damages in Singapore for an opinion article that was held to have libeled officials of the authoritarian Government there, will not fight the court decision, the paper's president says.
He also says the paper plans to continue printing and distributing an edition in Singapore despite the July 26 ruling.
The fight over the opinion article, published in August 1994, and a second one published by the paper in October has put The International Herald Tribune at the center of an awkward struggle over how far American news organizations will compromise with governments that reject American concepts of a free press.


Adam D. Riess and Pamela S. Bol
Pamela Suzanne Bol, a daughter of Dr.
Morris Bol of Norwich, Vt., and Mrs.
C.
Hugh P. Silk of Washington, Conn., was married yesterday to Adam David Riess, a son of Dr.
William F. Riess of Oakland, Calif., and Suzanne O. Riess of Berkeley, Calif.
The Rev.
Peter M. Hammond, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's mother.
Ms.
Bol, 30, is keeping her name.
She is a freelance writer in New York.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is a general practitioner in White River Junction, Vt.
Her mother, Karen Silk, is a partner in Auchincloss &amp; Silk Real Estate in Washington, Conn.
Mr.
Silk, the bride's late stepfather, was an educational consultant.


And This Little Piggy Stayed Off the Platter
The Net  Sandra Bullock, Jeremy Northam Directed by Irwin Winkler PG-13 118 minutes


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Corrections
The World Stock Markets chart last Sunday depicted the performances of the Norwegian and world indexes erroneously for the week ended July 29.
A corrected chart appears today on page 16.


'Jaws' Did Not Need Saving
To the Editor:
Margy Rochlin's article on the craft of the film editor Richard Halsey strays far afield when it tries to discuss the editing process  [ "In the Editing Room, Many Propose, Few Dispose," July 23 ] .
Ms.
Rochlin mistakenly asserts that "Jaws," "Annie Hall" and "Desparately Seeking Susan" were "saved" by their editors, then fails even to give credit to those alleged saviors; respectively, they were Verna Fields (who won an Academy Award for her work), Ralph Rosenbloom and Andre Mondshein.


POSTINGS: Large Lofts, High Prices; A Touch of the New For Historic TriBeCa
The first apartment building to be built in TriBeCa under the city's new zoning regulations -- permitting from-the-ground-up residential construction there -- will rise at the southeast corner of North Moore and Greenwich Streets.
Groundbreaking for the seven-story building, to be constructed on a parking lot next door to Robert DeNiro's TribeCa Grill, is expected early next spring according to Stewart F. Lane, partner in 377 Associates, its developer.


Down on the Farm in the Big City
GOATS, sheep, pigs, chickens, roosters and a cow named Daisy are the stars of the Queens County Farm Museum.
You can spend a day on 47 acres of farmland, going on hay rides, buying home-grown fruits and vegetables, touring the farmhouse (which dates back to 1772), walking on nature trails and playing with the animals, all of it right on the border of Queens and Nassau County.


SUNDAY, August 6, 1995; THE SWAT TEAM: Mosquito Alert
As if there isn't enough to worry about when you step outside these days, a company called Multidata wants to arm you with mosquito forecasts.
The Minnetonka, Minn., concern combines data from past mosquito counts -- yes, there really are people who count mosquitoes for a living -- with weather reports to predict up to two weeks in advance the number of mosquitoes that will be infesting a given locale.
"Being as how we are from Minnesota and know a little about these critters, we think of mosquitoes in terms of their pestiferous aspects," says David Frenz, director of research at Multidata, which hopes to have the forecasts available by next spring.


In Elizabeth, Dusting Off an Art Deco Treasure
Standing above the discount stores and fast-food restaurants of Broad Street, Hersh Tower is a throwback to another era.
Its facade is an elegant mix of pale brick, black marble and nickel.
Its lobby is an Art Deco showpiece, with terrazzo floors, marble walls and elaborate grill work.
The 14-story bulding languished through a number of owners and an economic malaise that has plaqued Elizabeth for decades.
But the lastest owners, two brothers who own a real estate company in New York City, have renovated Hersh Tower, hoping to attract new businesses to the city.
"The historical value of this building interested us, and the proximity to New York interested us," said Edward Wydra, one of the new owners.
"We think it could be a very viable building."
Hersh Tower was the tallest bulding in Elizabeth when Louis Hersh, an Elizabeth businessman, built it in 1931. (These days, only the Union County Court building is taller.) At the corner of Broad and East Grand Streets, it was brimming with law offices, insurance agencies and other businesses for decades.
But tenants fled as the building fell into disrepair, and by the 1980's it was almost empty.
A bank foreclosed on the bulding in 1990, and three years later, the Wydras took over the $3.4 million mortgage.
Since then they have spent more than $1 million on renovations.
Among other things, they have replaced the elevators, polished the marble for the first time in 64 years, and replaced silver leaf in the lobby.
Because Hersh Tower is within Elizabeth's Urban Enterprise Zone, new tenants can benefit from tax incentives and other forms of state aid.
It is only 45 percent occupied, but the Wydras said they are confident that the building, with its views of the Manhattan skyline and proximity to the Elizabeth train station, will attract more businesses.
"This town is going to come back booming," Edward Wydra said.
"There's a new energy coming that's going to turn this place around."
Meanwhile, the Wydras have a backup plan: last week, they registered the building with the Union County Film Commission so that it might be used for a movie set someday.


Rachel E. Forsyth, Michael H. Martin
Rachel Elizabeth Forsyth, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George J. Forsyth of Franklin Lakes, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Howard Martin, a son of Ann S. Martin of Peoria, Ariz., and the late William Michael Martin.
The Rev.
Albert Berner performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of the Most Blessed Sacrament in Franklin Lakes.
The couple graduated from George Washington University.


BLACKBOARD
SOME THIRSTY engineering students from New York's Rochester Institute of Technology have built a better beer keg -- one with a tap that tells how many beers are left in the barrel.
As any bartender (or college student) can tell you, a keg is already empty by the time the tap starts spitting foam.
So Ray Tesiero, Dave Kneale and Joe Daniels filled an old beer keg with water and went to work on the problem in R.I.T.'s Senior Design class last spring.


A Profusion of String Quartets
STRING quartets are featured at both Music Mountain and the Caramoor Festival this week.
At the Mountain, the Leontovitch and Orlando String Quartets are both performing today at 3 P.M., the former ensemble playing the Second Tchaikovsky, the latter Mozart's K. 428 Quartet, after which members of both groups join for Brahms's String Sextet in G.
Next Sunday, also at 3, the Orlando returns to purvey Haydn's "Joke" Quartet, the 1983 Second Quartet of Alfred Schnittke and, with Pamela Mia Paul as guest pianist, Brahms's Piano Quartet in A. For credit card reservations, call 824-7126.


Streetscapes: The Brooklyn Academy of Music; Restoring the Crown to a 1908 Queen of a Building
OVER four decades, many people have winced and averted their eyes as they passed the Brooklyn Academy of Music, where the removal of the 1908 building's delicate terra-cotta cornice in 1953 created a painful sight.
In a city of preservation successes, it was an awful wound.


Rozella Floranz, John W. Kennedy
Rozella Lorraine Floranz, the director of public affairs at the Bronx Museum of the Arts, and John Wallace Kennedy, a composer and musician, are to be married today on Mustique, in the Grenadines.
The Rev.
Cuthbert Edwards, an Episcopal minister, is to perform the ceremony at the Cotton House, a resort.
The bride, 32, graduated from Tufts University and received a master's degree in French Caribbean literature from the Sorbonne.
She is a daughter of Florence Floranz of Falls Church, Va., and the late William Floranz.
The bride's father was a sound engineer at CBS Records in New York.
Her mother retired as an information systems assistant at the Edison Electric Institute, a trade organization in Washington.


The Fan That Radar Couldn't Track
At once comic and scholarly, the "Out of Order" essays make me laugh out loud.
A recent example, "When an Old-Fashioned Fan Is Cool"  [ July 2 ] , was no exception.
It tapped a hilarious memory of my own experience with a huge fan similar to the one described, but with an important difference.
My fan was battery-powered.
Imbedded in the living-room wall, it had a sophisticated control panel with dials regulating speed and whatnot and a switch for reversing the pitch of its ample blades when a change of air was desired.
However, the fan was never actually tested -- not for all practical purposes, that is, thanks to my 3-year-old nephew.
While the rest of us were sitting in the patio, he turned the fan's speed to Hi Max at the same time that he reversed its spinning blades.
And before you could say antidisestablishmentarianism the roaring fan crashed through the wall, out the side of the house and circled above us briefly before rocketing skyward and vanishing into the wild blue yonder.


Unaccounted For Takes a Focused Approach to Whitney Victory
Unaccounted For, the 4-year-old colt who upset Tabasco Cat in last year's Jim Dandy Stakes, returned to the scene of his triumph today and rallied from deep in the pack to win the 68th Whitney Handicap by close to two lengths over L'Carriere.
He thereby redeemed two fortunes in one race: his own as a horse and Scotty Schulhofer's as a trainer.
His owner, the billionaire John Kluge, does not particularly need any redemption from a horse.
But Schulhofer, a Hall of Fame trainer, had won only three races at Saratoga this year and in general has been enduring thin times.


Portraits and Wall Drawings
THIS week, the lines are drawn between Ivan Olinsky (1878-1962), a portraitist who enjoyed success but little or no critical attention, and Sol LeWitt, a Conceptualist, who, so to speak, has had it all.
Olinsky was about 12 when he immigrated with his parents to the United States from Ukraine and settled in New York City.
The young man, having already studied drawing, was able to enroll a few years later at the National Academy of Design.
He then went to work for John La Farge, who was working on mural and stained-glass commissions at the time.
There followed further study at the Art Students League, marriage, fatherhood and, in 1912, the beginning of a 50-year stint as a teacher at the academy.


When Growths on Plants Aren't Harmful
THOSE curious duncelike caps on oak leaves are harmless.
These oddities are merely deformities caused by a tiny insect called the gall wasp; there is no reason to worry that the tree is ailing.
On some oak trees, larger galls can be seen and these are called oak apples.
The apple is simply a leaf that has become deformed by the feeding of tiny wasps.
Adults emerge from the gall and mate.
Females then lay their eggs near the root system, the eggs winter over and the whole cycle begins again the next spring.


12 Trouble Spots, 1 Pleasant Surprise
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.
1.
ROUTE 4 Fort Lee.
Eastbound left lane and ramp to northbound I-95 closed, through October.
2.
ROUTE 95 Teaneck.
Southbound right lane ramp closed on local and express roadways.
Through Sept. 10.
3.
ROUTE 3 Rutherford.
Various lane closings at night, for repaving, until the end of the year.
4.
OLD MOUNT PLEASANT AVENUE East Hanover and Livingston.
Passaic River bridge is closed for replacement, through December.
5.
ROUTES 1-9 Essex County.
Southbound traffic has been shifted to new northbound express lanes between the Pulaski Skyway and I-78.
Wilson Avenue exit is closed.
6.
INTERSTATE 287 Bridgewater, between Route 22 and Foothill Road.
Work zone setup.
Various lane closures, until further notice.
7.
EAST DUKES PARKWAY Hillsborough.
Road closed for bridge replacement, through December.
8.
ROUTE 1 Woodbridge.
Northbound and southbound lanes shifted at the Garden State Parkway.
Two lanes maintained.
Through Aug. 31.
9.
ROUTE 9 Woodbridge and Sayreville.
Edison Bridge over Raritan River.
One southbound lane closed Monday through Thursday, 10 P.M. to 8 A.M., and Sunday, 9 P.M. to 8 A.M.
For repaving; through Aug. 11.
10. ROUTE 535 South River. The bridge has reopened.
11.
EAST NEW ROAD South Brunswick.
Bridge over the railroad tracks will be closed until Sept. 1.
12.
ROUTE 1 Plainsboro.
Shoulder is closed in both directions between Scudders Mill Road and Forrestal Road.
13.
ROUTE 1 West Windsor.
Northbound shoulder is closed between Nassau Park Boulevard and Alexander Road, until 1996.
The northbound Duck Pond Run jughandle turn is permanently closed.


Ms. Scripko, Mr. Whitcomb
Gail Marie Scripko, a daughter of Margaret B. Scripko of Dravosburg, Pa., and the late Elmer W. Scripko, was married yesterday in Pittsburgh to Arthur Bryant Whitcomb Jr., a son of Arthur and Meg Whitcomb of New York.
The Rev.
Alexis Anania, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Heinz Memorial Chapel at the University of Pittsburgh.
Ms.
Scripko is a manager of training at Estee Lauder Inc. in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pittsburgh and is a candidate for a master's degree in industrial organizational psychology at New York University.


Trotting Queen Falters, So King of Drivers Wins
A guy named Buster Douglas once flattened Mike Tyson.
The New York Jets upset the Baltimore Colts to win the 1969 Super Bowl.
Of course, nothing is a sure bet in sports, but even Joe Namath couldn't have predicted the disastrous outing that CR Kay Suzie had in the 70th running of the $1.2 million Cadillac Hambletonian at the Meadowlands this afternoon.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/BMW 318ti; And Now for Your Basic BMW
THE "starter house," that almost-affordable dwelling for those beginning the climb up the slippery pole to the American dream, has traditionally given realtors a way to coax young families from their rental apartments.
Could a "starter BMW" give the great German auto maker a comparable crack at the upwardly mobile, before they are hooked on the effortless convenience of Camrys or the urban macho-chic of Pathfinders and Cherokees?
BMW is certainly trying, offering the 318ti three-door hatchback for $19,900 plus shipping -- a delightful $5,700 less than its next-cheapest model, the 318i sedan.
And while BMW lovers accustomed to powerful engines, high-tech gadgetry and lush interiors may feel a tad out of place in this baby Bavarian, it does deliver the ride and feel of the real thing.


A Bridge's Misspelling Spreads in Throggs Neck
To the Editor:
Your article about the students at the State University of New York's Maritime College at Fort Schuyler ("Seasoned Sailors of SUNY Return From Semester Asea," July 23) never mentioned the name of our little peninsula, but a heading referring to the area as "Throgs Neck" demands comment.


Benchmark
"HM?. . .What?. . .I'm sorry, were you talking to me?" asks Peter, the startled Central Park bench sitter in "Zoo Story," Edward Albee's 1959 play.
So powerful is the essential drama of breaking into someone's privacy on a park bench that Albee used it as the catalyst for a violent confrontation.
John Guare, in his 1966 play "The Loveliest Afternoon of the Year," used a young man approaching a lonely woman on a Central Park bench to portray quixotic romance -- and deadly jealousy.
Space can be tight on the park bench, but the sitters might as well be miles apart.
A man in Bryant Park naps; his neighbor reads.
On another bench, a couple kisses passionately.
The man a foot away appears oblivious, face straight ahead, buried in the paper.
But is he?


Conversations With Miss Mary, Mayor of 9th St.
In June, an addict was shooting up behind a rose bush in the Ninth Street garden, a peaceful oasis in a decidedly unpeaceful neighborhood.
Mary Owens, or Miss Mary, as she is known to virtually everyone on her block, Ninth Street between Avenues B and C, asked him to move on.
"He told me he was busy," Ms.
Owens said.
The man, needle feeding a vein, used an expletive that angered Ms.
Owens, a disciple of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. who nevertheless has been known to wield an iron pipe.
This time, she grabbed the needle.
"I broke it off right in his arm," she said.
"He screamed and ran off."


Long Island Q&amp;A: George Bundschuh; From H.M.O.'s to AIDS Research, It's More Than Insurance
THIS year the New York Life Insurance Company celebrates its 150th anniversary.
For nearly 40 years George Bundschuh has worked for the company, becoming president in 1990.
He will retire in October.
With $69 billion in assets, New York Life ranks fifth among American insurance companies.
It has 200 offices in North America, with three on Long Island, and others in Europe, Asia and South America.
Life insurance accounts for by far the largest share of business, but the company also owns the Sanus Corporation, a health maintenance organization with 900,000 customers, and sells asset-management services, pension products, mutual funds and annuities.


Experts Debate Proposed Fare Increases
The package of fare and toll increases proposed by the Metropolitan Tranportation Authority risks sending damaging ripples through a region that depends more than any other in the nation on public transportation, some urban planners say.
While much of the emerging debate has focused on schoolchildren, who would lose free and half-fare passes under the proposals, experts say other far-reaching effects may be felt -- from potential job losses as corporate executives weigh the cost of doing business in New York City, to increased traffic congestion and pollution as commuters find it cheaper to drive.


2 Black G.O.P. Lawmakers in House Differ Slightly on Affirmative Action
They have been cited by their fellow Republicans as proof that blacks are welcome in their party.
They have been vilified by some of their fellow blacks as turncoats.
They have been dismissed by some political analysts as irrelevant curiosities.
But as the Republicans struggle for consensus on dealing with the complex issue of affirmative action, everyone is watching Gary A. Franks of Connecticut and J. C. Watts of Oklahoma, the party's two black members of the House of Representatives.


Domino Real-Estate Deal Cleared
A final obstacle has been removed to a complex deal to relocate both the City University Graduate Center and the State University College of Optometry in a $173 million project involving the old B. Altman department store and two other sites.
In a three-year process, the college will move from 315 Park Avenue South at 24th Street to CUNY's building at 33 West 42d.
CUNY will move to the Altman building, on Fifth Avenue at 34th.
To allow the deal, Gov.
George E. Pataki signed a special law cutting off state funds for the optometry college's $7 million annual rent, breaking its lease without penalty or compensation to the landlord.
Mr.
Pataki's press office did not respond to a reporter's inquiries.


Q. &amp; A.
Crossing Property Borders  Q. A recent survey of my property showed that a wall built by me 26 years ago extends three feet onto the property of my neighbor.
What are the implications of such an encroachment? . . .
Milton P. Barbak, the Bronx.
A.
David Clurman, a Manhattan lawyer who specializes in real estate, said that the answer depended on what had transpired between the owners of the two properties over the last 26 years.


An American Icon Scampers In For a Makeover
THE RUMORS WERE TRUE.
Mickey has had a mouse-lift.
The beloved 67-year-old star took the big step in Paris at a Disney animation studio where he was filming "Runaway Brain," his first cartoon short in more than 40 years.
Although public relations executives at the Walt Disney Company in Burbank, Calif., were hush-hush about the seven-minute film, to be coupled with "A Kid in King Arthur's Court," a Disney feature opening at theaters on Friday, they have now confirmed that audiences will see a refurbished rodent.
Nothing radical, mind you.
Having learned from the past, the Disney artists didn't dare tamper with the famed circular head and ears, an internationally recognizable icon.
No, the change is more a return to the insouciant Mickey of the mid-1930's.
Audiences will also see a more active and more emotive performer than the previous model.


The Nation; With Political Discipline, It Works Like Parliament
EVER since Woodrow Wilson was just a professor, scholars have been saying that America needed stronger political parties to govern effectively.
They said that nothing got done in Washington because there was too little common allegiance to principle, that fragmented interest groups were in control (or maybe just lobbyists) and, more recently, that television was turning candidates into independent operators.
But these political scientists, most of them Democrats who saw fragmentation as the obstacle to liberal goals, are cursed today by having their wish come true.
There is, in fact, an organized political party in Congress today: House Republicans have put aside intense differences over issues like abortion, the environment and free speech to vote to cut federal spending, again and again and again, before going home for summer vacation Friday.


Trading Cards Contend in a Whole New Ball Game
THE COLORS SHIMMY AND SHIMMER on Alex Diaz's 1995 Fleer baseball card.
Type and image fracture, mutate and detonate.
Hip-hopping straight out of ESPN2 and MTV, Diaz's card seems to be a rock video captured on cardboard.
It's a beautiful baseball card.
Not bad for a Milwaukee Brewer who had one major-league home run entering the 1995 season.
Graying baseball fans may still lay out hundreds of dollars for vintage Mickey Mantles, but to be honest, a lot of those old cards are kind of dull.
Diaz's card is just one of thousands of stunning pasteboard treasures available to collectors at the corner grocery or the neighborhood hobby shop.
That's because collectible trading cards have discovered graphic design.
And vice versa.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
POLITICS AS A NOBLE CALLING  The Memoirs of F. Clifton White.
By F. Clifton White  with Jerome Tuccille.
Jameson Books, P.O.
Box 738, Ottawa, Ill. 61350, $21.95.


Cheese With Melons or Berries, a Twist on a Summer Classic
WHAT could be more classic than fruit and cheese?
But the fruits most often served with cheese are pears, apples and grapes.
Summer's ripe soft fruits -- melons and berries -- are not the typical partners for cheese.
Yet watermelon with feta cheese is common in Egypt, where it is breakfast fare.
I can remember as a child being told that watermelon actually tastes sweeter with salt on it than without, trying it and finding it so.
The salty feta serves the same purpose.
And together they offer a nice change of pace as a cheese course, whether or not for breakfast.


A Double Whammy for a Playwright
THE reinvention of Joseph Thomas (for doubting) Pintauro from priest to Joe Pintauro playwright is in a renewed state of perpetual buzz.
Taking the term resident playwright to ubiquitously literal lengths on the East End, Mr.
Pintauro has two new works opening next week, "Murder by Chocolate" at the John Drew Theater in East Hampton on Thursday and the first third of a triple bill, collectively called "By the Sea, by the Sea, by the Beautiful Sea," commissioned by the Bay Street Theater in Sag Harbor.


Thoughts After Death
PEDRO PARAMO  By Juan Rulfo.
Translated by Margaret Sayers Peden.
Foreword by Susan Sontag. 124 pp.
New York: Grove Press.
Paper, $11.


Whitewater Papers Cast Doubt on Clinton Account of a Tax Underpayment
In March 1992, Bill Clinton, running for President, acknowledged that he and his wife, Hillary, had improperly claimed tax deductions for interest payments that had actually been made by the Whitewater Development Company, not by themselves.
Mr.
Clinton and his aides said the couple's accountant had simply made a mistake, and he pledged to reimburse the Government.
But no payment was made to the Government until almost two years later, on Dec. 28, 1993.


Transplanted New Yorker Is Nostalgic for Austin St.
To the Editor:
Even though I live so far away, I was pleased to receive a copy of your June 25 Shoptalk article "Mom and Pop Hang Tough on Austin St." from my sister Rita Belletti in Forest Hills.


BACKTALK: Ripken Should Keep Going and Going and. . .; Planes and Turf
The headline on Robert Lipsyte's column last week presented his point of view: "Baseball Needs Ripken to Take a Day Off." Letter writers overwhelmingly disagreed.
To the Sports Editor:
Ripken is more of an Iron Man than Gehrig ever was.
He has played more innings of more games under more grueling circumstances than Gehrig.
He has played every day during a time when that means flying through three time zones among 14 cities, on surfaces ranging from dirt to pavement.


Vasari Frescoes On View in Florence
The 16th-century frescoes of the Last Judgment in Florence's Cathedral, Santa Maria del Fiore, are once again visible to the public after a lengthy restoration.
The cupola, with its cherubim, demons and prophets, was painted by Giorgio Vasari from 1572 until 1574, and was finished by Federico Zuccari in 1579.
The work never received the approval of the Florentines, who even proposed during the 19th century that the entire cupola be whitewashed to better emphasize the pure forms of Brunelleschi's architecture.
The debate raged until 1981, when it was decided to restore the frescoes, which cover an area of about 14,000 square feet.
Though the cupola was first placed under wraps in 1979, the sophisticated restoration only began in 1989 and officially ended in January of last year.
Since then, cathedral workers have been slowly removing the 16 concentric layers of scaffolding that had been erected in the 100-foot dome to permit the restoration.
The removal of the scaffolding will be completed by the end of the year.


Greenwich Swimmer, Olympic Material
PEOPLE who know Greenwich High School's 1995 Athlete of the Year are keeping an eye on the Olympics.
Chantal Rawn, who finally stopped growing at 6-foot-1, has the potential to swim for the United States team.
Last year she shattered a six-year Connecticut record set by 1988 Olympic silver medalist Janel Jorgensen in the 100-yard backstroke.
Rawn clipped it by three one-hundredths of a second to clock :57.00 seconds, then beat that by nearly two seconds this year.
At the Phillips 66 (Senior) National Swimming Championships at the University of Minnesota in March, the 17-year-old All-American swimmer earned an invitation to next year's United States Olympic Trials in March 1996, in Indianapolis.


The World; To Parisians, Nice is a Place, Not an Attitude
THE surly waiter who expects a good tip for bad service, the taxi driver who smiles only at the dog sitting beside him, the bored saleswoman who knows the client is always wrong, the bearded intellectual who blows Gitane smoke in all directions . . .
Welcome to Paris!
Yes, it's a wonderful city.
If only it weren't full of Parisians.
But wait.
So infamous are Parisians for rudeness and impatience that their reputation may at last be working in their favor.
Foreign tourists arrive here braced for the worst.
And when it doesn't happen, many are promptly won over.


Youth Says Officer Pushed Him Out Window
Repeating the story that brought unrest to a Washington Heights neighborhood Thursday night, the mother of a young man injured in a four-story fall said yesterday that her son insists he was pushed out the window by a police officer.
The police have vigorously disputed this account, saying the young man, Carlos Ariel Santos Ortega, 17, apparently fell while trying to climb through a window to an apartment below, after spotting an officer in the building, a known drug location.


Transfusions Help Mantle Fight Anemia
MICKEY MANTLE was stronger yesterday after blood transfusions helped him combat anemia, and the Hall of Famer is expected to go home tomorrow.
Mantle, 63, returned to Baylor University Medical Center on Friday for treatment of anemia brought on by his chemotherapy for lung cancer and remained in stable condition yesterday, his doctor said.
DR.
DANIEL DeMARCO, Mantle's gastroenterologist, said the former Yankee slugger's second hospital stay in a week was not a setback.


Melinda O. Kahle, Philip Constable
Melinda Oliver Kahle, the daughter of Melinda Jerauld of Boston and the late Julian L. Kahle and the stepdaughter of Anthony B. Jerauld, was married yesterday to Philip Sherburne Constable, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter D. Constable of Washington.
Rebecca Lohmann, a justice of the peace, performed the ceremony at the Jeraulds' house in Nantucket, Mass.
The bride teaches the third grade at the Brimmer and May School in Chestnut Hill, Mass.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University and received a master's degree in education from Lesley College and one in child study from Tufts University.
Her father was the executive vice president of Westwood Pharmaceuticals in Buffalo.
Her stepfather retired as the New England area sales manager, in Boston, for Sullivan Graphics, a commercial printing company.


Denver
Denver is maturing into a metropolis, although some dislike the growth, the California-class traffic and the loss of endearing rough edges.
The $4.8 billion Denver International Airport finally opened in February, its white tent roof riding the prairie like a line of Conestoga wagons.
Coors Field, the new major league ballpark, opened in April, while Elitch Gardens, the downtown amusement park that opened Memorial Day weekend, is giving riders a good scare on the nation's newest all-wood roller coaster.


Wheels, Deals, Half-Pipe Dreams
Kanaf Hagi lay in his cramped room in a Oneida County juvenile detention center on a warm July morning and imagined himself flying.
A hyper kid with trigger reflexes, Kanaf could feel his feet twist in phantom intimations of what they could do on wheels, and his mind spun with images of himself mid-sky, body stretched beyond the ground and way beyond the fences of juvenile hall.
Kanaf had just served a year-long sentence for beating a man with a pair of num-chuks while stoned.
Today he was leaving.
There was only one thing on his mind: getting back to the skate ramps of Mullaly Park.


It May Be the Next Best Thing to Climbing Into the Fridge
Through days of sweltering heat, Bonnie Sarnoff had driven with her two children from Ann Arbor, Mich., through Canada and down the Hudson Valley, and their next stop was the steamy streets of New York City.
But right now, just 60 miles northwest of Manhattan, the family stood on a wooden catwalk deep in a dripping crevice in a crumbling mountain of quartz, watching their breath turn to mist and staring at a heap of dirty snow that gleamed in the darkness below.


University Ponders Unabom Link
The search for a deadly serial bomber has crisscrossed the country for 16 years but it always seems to return to the sedate campus of Northwestern University here, the place where the manhunt began with questions about Dungeons and Dragons.
The F.B.I. started poking around Northwestern, just outside of Chicago, in 1979.
A simple bomb, rigged in a cigar box, exploded inside the school's technological institute on May 9 and a graduate student was slightly injured.


Why Trolleys, Not Buses Are Right for 42d Street
To the Editor:
In his July 23 letter ("What's Wrong With Idea of a Trolley on 42d Street") James McCown asserts that the bus is the "unsung workhorse of urban America." To be more accurate, buses have urbanites the world over singing the blues because of their exhaust fumes, noise, high operating cost, cramped seating and low public image.


Cheese With Melons or Berries, a Twist on a Summer Classic
WHAT could be more classic than fruit and cheese?
But the fruits most often served with cheese are pears, apples and grapes.
Summer's ripe soft fruits -- melons and berries -- are not the typical partners for cheese.
Yet watermelon with feta cheese is common in Egypt, where it is breakfast fare.
I can remember as a child being told that watermelon actually tastes sweeter with salt on it than without, trying it and finding it so.
The salty feta serves the same purpose.
And together they offer a nice change of pace as a cheese course, whether or not for breakfast.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday with an article about the Pammy Fund, a foundation established in the name of a victim of the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 in 1988, misidentified the woman standing at the right.
She was Ana Fuentes, the mother of a scholarship recipient, not Martha States of Planned Parenthood of Westchester/Rockland.


In the Region: Westchester; Creating a Two-County Multiple-Listing Service
AFTER years of false starts, the realty boards of Westchester and Putnam Counties announced last month their decision to merge their multiple-listing services.
This, in effect, turns the two counties, with a total of 450 real estate offices (some serving southern Dutchess County), into a single real estate entity.
Coincident with that development will be an upgrading of the joint venture's computer system, adding a vast amount of public-record information formerly stored in a multiplicity of town and village halls.


The Nation; Resurgent Nuclear Theory: More Fear, More Peace
FIFTY years after the nuclear age dawned with a blinding flash and a mushroom cloud over the ruins of Hiroshima, the debate persists: are nuclear weapons a deterrent to war or a mortal danger to mankind?
The issue was joined at the outset.
Just a few weeks after the bombing of Nagasaki vaporized huge swaths of a second Japanese city, the University of Chicago held a conference to weigh the consequences.
Only one of those who attended, an economist, believed the spread of nuclear weapons to more nations would make wars less likely.


Themes and Goals at Bard Festival
IN striking counterpoint to so many summer festivals, where familiarity, accessibility and audience entertainment are primary goals, the Bard Music Festival at Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y., marches to its own drummer, its selections guided by thematic concepts, its performances enhanced by pedagogical connections.
After five summers devoted to the lives and works of such romantic masters as Schumann, Brahms and Dvorak, the festival is focusing on one of the towering figures of 20th-century composition, Bela Bartok.
Opening night is Friday at 8, with other events next Saturday and Sunday and on Aug. 11, 12 and 13.


Miss Brown, Mr. Thompson
Lucia Claire Brown, a daughter of Louise and Dr.
Malcolm M. Brown of Sharon, Conn., was married there yesterday to Thaddeus Alonzo Graham Thompson, a son of Patricia and Calvin A. Thompson of Mount Kisco, N.Y.
The Rev.
R.
Alan Johnson performed the Congregational ceremony at the First Church of Christ.
Mrs.
Thompson, 24, is a legal assistant at the Boston law firm of Ropes &amp; Gray.
She graduated from Wesleyan University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is a partner in a pediatric medical group in Sharon.
Her mother is a partner in Gager &amp; Henry, a law firm in Sharon.


Labor Dept. Hears Tales of Abuses
A high-ranking official from the United States Department of Labor visited Chinatown for the first time last week to hear testimony from workers who pleaded for a crackdown on illegal labor practices in the garment and restaurant industries.
Maria Echaveste, administrator of the Wage and Hour Division and a presidential appointee, appeared at the behest of the Chinese Staff and Workers Association, which had been demanding greater government enforcement of unfair labor practices as it conducted a well-publicized four-month-long boycott of Jing Fong, a 1,500-seat restaurant at 18 Elizabeth Street.


PEOPLE
AIDS education in cyberspace is ADELE WEINER'S specialty.
The assistant dean of the Wurzweiler School of Social Work at Yeshiva University in New York City is the creator of a program that, among other things, lets people "walk" around an AIDS quilt on the Internet (or even add their own square for a loved one) and ask questions of a robot called Dr.
A.
"Students can ask questions that they'd be afraid to ask of a real person," Dr.
Weiner said.
The free program is operated through Diversity University, an international computer network.
There are 4,500 registered users, most of them in college, Dr.
Weiner says.
One of her goals has been to encourage health professionals and other AIDS educators to use the program to expand their outreach and simplify their research.


Caught Openeing a Hydrant? Arrested!
A team of undercover fire marshals is patrolling the streets of Bushwick, arresting residents who open fire hydrants and threatening to put them in jail.
Some marshals, in an unmarked van, stake out hydrants that have previously been vandalized.
The van is equipped with a video camera and a periscope.
Others drive around the neighborhood in a nondescript car, looking for hydrant crime.


Function vs. Fashion: Hooked on a Hat
ASK a skateboarding devotee about his headgear: it isn't entirely about the look.
Take the surge of fishing hats.
"They keep the sun out of your eyes," explained Pooky Fernandez, 21, a deejay who also works as a salesclerk at Supreme, a skate shop at 274 Lafayette Street, near Prince Street, in SoHo.


Jets' Plan Is Throw Short, Then Kick
To those who wondered how the Jets could possibly win without a go-to running back and an experienced wide receiver, the early news is that they have some other things going for them.
They opened their exhibition season against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers tonight with a reliance on tight ends, with a significant boost in special teams thanks to Nick Lowery's three field goals, and a good pressure defense.
All that helped generate a 9-3 victory in Coach Rich Kotite's first appearance as the Jets' head coach.


Sorcery in Fabric and Computers
THE REVOLUTIONARY Japanese weaver Junichi Arai produces gossamer scarves as detailed as spider webs.
His multilayered fabrics have surfaces of shimmering metals or different patterns on both sides.
He makes shirts and drawstring-bags that require no cutting or sewing and are ready to wear as they come off the loom.
And he accomplishes all of it by computer.
"Mr. Arai is the most creative weaver in the world," says Jack Lenor Larsen, a Manhattan producer of innovative textiles.
"The majority of his fabrics are programmed by computer. But each piece looks hand-loomed and one of a kind, which it is not."


The Bench May Be a Lawyer's Dream, but It Can Be an Actor's Nightmare
THOUGH he now has a new name Tim Nash -- and a new actor playing him -- Tom Selleck -- Atticus Finch has magically returned in 'Broken Trust," a made-for-television movie that has its premiere Sunday on TNT.
Nash, the latest in an ever-lengthening line of celluloid lawyers, has much in common with his illustrious predecessor in "To Kill a Mockingbird," traits only emphasized by the uncanny -- and perhaps calculated -- physical resemblance between Mr.
Selleck and the young Gregory Peck.
Both characters are, quite literally, tall, dark and handsome.
Both are plain-spoken, softspoken, earnest and old-fashioned, even fuddy-duddy.
Both are married to the law (neither has a wife), though both are also devoted, doting fathers.
Most important, both are legal beacons in seas of moral squalor.


Census Study Sees Ethnic Shifts
THE county's population will grow only slightly during the next 25 years, but there will be dramatic changes in the racial and ethnic makeup of Westchester, a new report on census trends shows.
By the year 2020, blacks, Asians and Hispanic residents living in Westchester will equal the number of whites living here, according to the study released late last month by the County Planning Department.
The latest census predictions have broad implications for many sectors of society -- including education, transportation, recreation, housing and public medicine -- and will no doubt bring about significant changes in the delivery of services, said the county's Planning Commissioner, P. Lynn Oliva.


THE DEADLIEST D.A.
I was saddened and alarmed by Tina Rosenberg's article on Lynne Abraham ("The Deadliest D.A.," July 16).
It has been said that, psychologically, there is a thin line between criminals and law enforcers.
Abraham seems to have crossed that line in savoring the opportunity to seek the death penalty and dismissing execution as a "nonevent."


Dr. Riggs-Bergesen and Mr. Ossola
Dr.
Catherine French Riggs-Bergesen, a clinical psychologist in New York, was married yesterday to Paul James Ossola, a musician.
The Rev.
L.
Denver Hart performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Bartholomew's Church in New York.
Dr.
Riggs-Bergesen, 38, is keeping her name.
She graduated from George Washington University and Hunter College and received a master's degree and a Ph.D. in clinical psychology from Yeshiva University.
The bride is also the owner of Other Worldly Waxes and Whatever, a candle and fragrance store in New York.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
On Central Park Pond, Miniature Sails in the Sunset While vacationing in Paris last year, Guy Kohn, a Manhattan architect and an avid sailor, strolled through the Luxembourg Gardens and noticed people renting miniature radio-controlled sailboats by a small pond.


SUNDAY, August 6, 1995; BODY WORK: Yemen's Painted Ladies
In Sana, Yemen, a city said to have been founded by Noah's son Shem, medieval Arab traditions of beauty thrive.
In private, elegant women have their bodies painted with a fragrant black dye made from berries called khithab.
The art form is medieval but the music is Prince and the conversation is modern.
"I fly to Rome tomorrow and want geometric florals to the ankles and elbows," says Maha Abdel-Aziz, a clothing designer and former model.
After the painting, petroleum jelly and flour are applied to the finished pattern, which is then wrapped in cotton cloth and covered with plastic wrap for several hours.
The pattern lasts for weeks and the erotic scent can linger for days.
Khithab is technically forbidden in Islam because it is not water soluble, so the religiously conservative use black hair dye.
With body painting, it is the more modern women of the Yemeni elite who prefer the more traditional.
"Khithab is better than a miniskirt," says Maha, "and more fun than crazy stockings."


Original Kiss
Filmed in Manhattan Henry Hathaway's "KISS OF DEATH" (1947) was the first departure from backlot depictions of New York.
Its tone is subdued, as a penitent crook and family man (Victor Mature -- David Caruso in the remake) named accomplices.
Classy and riveting, it features one of the screen's most chilling villains: Richard Widmark (In photo, left, with Mature) as a giggling psychopath.
Hair-raiser: Widmark shoves a wheelchair-bound woman down a tenement stairway -- WEDNESDAY at 2:30 P.M. on AMC.
Howard Thompson


Croissants? A Clam Bar? Is This the Port Authority Terminal?
In the 1980's, the Port Authority Bus Terminal was filled with homeless people and besieged by Times Square's tawdriness, the crack epidemic and street crime.
Scam artists lurked about its pay phones, "shoulder surfing" to steal credit card numbers.
Lindy's restaurant, with its coterie of male hustlers, was known as much for quick pickups as for short-order cooking.
"I don't think we could have gotten any lower," said the Port Authority's real estate manager, John F. Brendlen Jr.


Down on the Farm in the Big City
GOATS, sheep, pigs, chickens, roosters and a cow named Daisy are the stars of the Queens County Farm Museum.
You can spend a day on 47 acres of farmland, going on hay rides, buying home-grown fruits and vegetables, touring the farmhouse (which dates back to 1772), walking on nature trails and playing with the animals, all of it right on the border of Queens and Nassau County.


Michelle Coes, Jason Tiballi
Michelle Foskett Coes, a daughter of Linda and Rufus Coes Jr. of Small Point, Me., was married yesterday to Jason Robert Tiballi, a son of Katherine Scudder Tiballi of Burlington, Vt., and the late Robert D. Barnhill, and an adopted son of Frederick Primo Tiballi of Burlington.
The Rev.
Jill Small performed the ceremony at the Phippsburg (Me.) Congregational Church.
The bride and the bridegroom graduated from Bates College.


Vaughn and Red Sox Both Start Fast
Red Sox 9, Blue Jays 3
Mo Vaughn homered, doubled and drove in four runs in the first three innings as the Boston Red Sox scored five times in the first and cruised to an easy 9-3 victory over Toronto last night in the Skydome.


Word for Word / The McLibel Trial; Your Lordship, They Both Think They Have a Legitimate Beef
PITY America's court junkies: About the best they can hope for in juridical diversion is the mostly grim O.J. trial.
Britain, on the other hand, has the frequently farcical "McLibel" case -- the lawsuit filed by McDonald's against two vegetarian environmentalists on the unemployment dole who distributed a leaflet some years back implicating the American burger chain in a variety of greed-driven crimes against earth, humankind and beast.
While not televised, the libel proceedings offer, to those spectators willing to endure long bouts of tedious testimony, moments of high absurdity as world views collide: It's the (sometimes) bewigged lawyers and suited executives of McDonald's versus the defendants in jeans and sandals, who are representing themselves.
The defendants -- Dave Morris, 41, a former postal worker, and Helen Steel, 29, a gardener -- say they have succeeded in turning the tables on McDonald's in court by putting its practices on trial.
Many evidently agree: McDonald's stockholders have complained that the trial -- the longest libel trial in British history at 13 months and counting -- is a costly public-relations disaster, and the company has reportedly pursued a settlement.
Here are excerpts.
TOM KUNTZ


ON THE BORDER OF LIFE
As a college student, I have never been one to respond to magazine articles, but I was so touched by Darcy Frey's " 'Does Anyone Here Think This Baby Can Live?' " (July 9) that I was actually cheering (in the library!) whenever the baby made progress.
The story revealed to me how precious and fleeting life may be!
TAJA-NIA HENDERSON Hanover, N.H.


Krista L. Alber, Timothy Kelsay
Krista Lynn Alber, a daughter of Eleanore and George W. Alber Jr. of Berkeley Heights, N.J., was married yesterday to Timothy Matthew Kelsay, a son of Meri and L. William Kelsay, also of Berkeley Heights.
The Rev.
Arthur Colaiacovo officiated at the Church of St.
Vincent DePaul in Stirling, N.J.


A WAR IN THE FAMILY
PARIS ZECEVIC EASES HIS METALLIC GREEN FORD PROBE OFF THE FREEWAY AND PULLS UP outside the R. &amp; J. Barber Shop.
A wasteland surrounds him, of audio stores and eateries, auto dealerships and repair shops, reaching into the featureless distance.
Detroit.
America.
He yawns, stretches.
His hair is tied back in a ponytail; stubble darkens his face; a loose belly suggests a young man going to seed.
"I did not plan to grow a beard," he says, laughing.
"But I was too lazy to shave, just too lazy. I got tired of it." His grim laughter lingers, full of disdain, the snicker of an uprooted man whose education has been singularly violent.
Zecevic is a Bosnian Muslim refugee, one of the 2.7 million people displaced by the war.
He pulls on a cigarette, zips his leather jacket and strides into the dingy store.
"Can you shave me?" he asks.
"The only thing we shave here," declares the owner, "is necks." The tone is roughly that of a man saying, "The only thing we slit here is throats." The hairdresser shoots a glance at Zecevic in the mirror.
Then he returns to the hair he is cutting.


The Trophy In Eisner's Big Deal
WHEN he announced the $19 billion acquisition of Capital Cities/ABC last Monday, Michael D. Eisner, chairman of the Walt Disney Company, expressed boundless enthusiasm for his newest, globally popular attraction, an asset that he called "a magic name" comparable as a brand to Coca-Cola and Kodak: ESPN.
As he moved from the news conference announcing the stunning acquisition to interviews with newspapers, magazines, CNN's "Larry King Live" and ABC's "Nightline," Mr.
Eisner reserved most of his evident delight in the second largest takeover in United States history for the vast possibilities that he foresaw from the combination of "Disney imagineering" with the global brand identity of ESPN, the all-sports cable channel begun by Getty Oil in 1979.


BACKTALK: Ripken Should Keep Going and Going and. . .; Only in New York
The headline on Robert Lipsyte's column last week presented his point of view: "Baseball Needs Ripken to Take a Day Off." Letter writers overwhelmingly disagreed.
To the Sports Editor:
As a lifelong Orioles fan living in Yankeeland, I was waiting for a column to appear advocating that Baltimore shortstop Cal Ripken not break Lou Gehrig's consecutive game streak.
Shouldn't this column have been titled "Yankee Fans Need Ripken to Take a Day Off"?
I'm sure that fans of New York's American League club wish that their hero's longstanding record could remain intact forever, but life will go on.


Steinbeck's Look at a Man's Obsessive Need
IN Connecticut, three children are killed by adults presumed to be caring for them, 100 are removed from their parents' homes by state agencies and thousands more live under watch for signs of neglect or abuse, all in the last few months.
That was the stuff of a front page article last Sunday, a day after the one about the sentencing of Susan Smith for drowning her two sons in Union, S.C.
Suddenly, the previous week's report about a little girl falling out of a window in Harlem while her mother was in the hospital giving birth to another stung the memory.


Quebec's Cuisine: With a Lighter Ladle
OLD QUEBEC, with its clusters of lovingly restored buildings from the 17th and 18th centuries, horse-drawn carriages and streets lined with antique shops, is a city rooted in the past.
But increasingly its restaurants are thoroughly up to date, turning from traditional fare to accommodate contemporary tastes.
Often this has meant that popular places with tourist menus now feature lasagna and pizza along with bistro boilerplate like onion soup and coq au vin.
But there is cooking done with a lighter hand, too, with an emphasis on market-fresh ingredients, and sometimes even a stylish whiff of Asia on the plate.


Clams Getting the Spa Treatment, So Clammers Stay Closer to Home
For a decade, the men who harvested clams off Monmouth county had to do it twice: they dug them out of the polluted Sandy Hook Bay and transported them to Barnegat Bay, where the clams needed 45 days to purge themselves of contaminants before they could be recaptured and sold.
The opening of a new purification plant in Highlands last month means more clammers can reduce the process to one harvest.
The J. T. White Clam Depuration Plant in Highlands treats hard-shell clams -- cherrystones, little necks and chowders -- reducing the cleansing process to two days.


If You're Thinking of Living In: Chappaqua; A Hamlet That Cherishes Its Schools
CHAPPAQUA is a tiny hamlet, a post office address for 3,500-plus households nine miles north of White Plains in the Town of New Castle.
But the "real" Chappaqua meanders into six postal districts and two towns -- an educational state of mind for people sharing a common school district with a national reputation.
Residents willingly pay high taxes to send their children to the Chappaqua public schools, consistently ranked among the nation's top systems; last year Money magazine ranked it 12th nationwide.


A Class Becomes A Journey
I was driving past the red rocks that loomed over the empty expanses of the Navajo reservation, on my way to Shiprock, Ariz., and a continuing education class on Navajo culture.
As I drove, I remembered the time I heard Sherman Alexie, a writer from the Couer d'Alene tribe from Spokane, Wash. tell about children who look for the shattered chunks of windshield glass in wrecked cars on his reservation.
They try to sell it to tourists as "healing crystals." The story was a reminder of the pitfalls facing people who visit Indian reservations expecting to find spiritual enlightenment.
Soon I would be meeting the 17 students in the June continuing education course of the Native American Institute of the University of Northern Colorado at Greeley.
Prof.
Dan O'Connor, a Greeley sociology teacher who founded the institute four years ago, told me the class had met a few times on campus before leaving for its 11-day trip through Navajo and Hopi reservations.
The trip was part of Sociology 508, "Native American Education and Health Issues," a graduate class that cost students $1,000.
I came along because I knew the class would touch on a topic I am researching: the use and identification of medicinal plants.


The American Dream Glitters Still -- in Foreign Countries
IN 1991, John Connelly lost his job.
With more than a decade of experience as a materials supplier, Mr.
Connelly, now 45, hoped to find a new one quickly.
After eight months, though, he began to worry.
Finally, frustrated, he interviewed with Samarec, a Saudi Arabian oil company.
Within weeks, he was living in Jidda, making $55,000 a year and loving it.


Bosnian Serb Leader Demotes Commander
The leader of the Bosnian Serbs has sidelined his military commander, a move that appeared to show that their hierarchy is in disarray.
A statement today from Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, said he is assuming the position of supreme commander from Gen.
Ratko Mladic, who has been assigned to serve Dr.
Karadzic as an adviser.
General Mladic is held responsible by Western powers for the "ethnic cleansing" carried out by his soldiers in Bosnia.


Tools For Blind Students
WHEN Priscilla McKinley returned to the University of Iowa in 1990 to complete her B.A. after losing her vision because of complications from diabetes, she was scared.
Although she was raising her son and holding a job transcribing medical tapes, college seemed a daunting prospect -- all those books and assignments to read, those papers to write under deadlines, class notes to take, exams to complete and dozens of new people to meet.
"I was afraid to go back to school," recalled Ms.
McKinley, 33, who lives a few miles from campus in Iowa City with her 11-year-old son, John, and takes buses to her classes.


Gloria W. Landes, 69, Showgirl In Brief but Bold Broadway Run
Gloria Wills Landes, a former Broadway showgirl who capped a brief, effervescent career by founding and directing an acclaimed school for aspiring teen-age actors and playwrights, died on Friday at her home in Mamaroneck, N.Y.
She was 69.
Mrs.
Landes was the director of the SUNY Youth Theater in Purchase, N.Y., until she became ill last year.
She had breast cancer, her family said.


Through the Maze of Stock Options: One Woman's Story
WHEN it comes to Wall Street, I am a complete neophyte.
I haven't traded in stocks because I never know what company I may want to write about.
But I had to plunge into the market recently to exercise stock options I had earned at my previous employer, the McGraw-Hill Companies.
By July 30, I had to use them or lose them.
As simple as that little deal sounds, its execution taught me several lessons worth sharing with other option-holders.
We are becoming more numerous, as companies try both to reward employees and to align their interests with those of shareholders, but cashing out on grants is a new experience for many.


Ann M. Connors And R. J. Hess
Ann Marie Connors, a daughter of Evelyn Johnson Connors of Montvale, N.J., and the late John J. Connors, was married yesterday to Robert Joseph Hess, a son of Helen Bradford Hess of Kansas City, Mo., and the late Lieut.
Col.
Frederick W. Hess.
Msgr.
Anthony Dalla Villa performed the ceremony in the Lady Chapel of St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.
Mrs.
Hess is a director of compensation at Sony Music Entertainment in New York.
She graduated from Montclair State College.
Her father owned Connors Bar in New York.


L.I. Vines
Vin Rose Paumanok Vineyards, Aquebogue, Nonvintage. About $9


BACKTALK: Ripken Should Keep Going and Going and. . .; Not Forgotten
The headline on Robert Lipsyte's column last week presented his point of view: "Baseball Needs Ripken to Take a Day Off." Letter writers overwhelmingly disagreed.
To the Sports Editor:
Lipsyte makes an interesting case for Ripken to take a day off, but if he is out to protect the last remaining baseball icon, Ripken should keep stepping right up to the plate.


On 53d Street: Planters 1, Vendors 0
Food vendors have a new battlefront in their city turf wars, on 53d Street just west of the Avenue of the Americas.
And they complain that they are suffering from devastating new weaponry: planters.
For nearly two years, several carts have clustered along the curb on 53d, dispensing standard sidewalk snacks like hot dogs, pizza, gyros, pretzels and sodas to midtown's ambulatory lunch crowd.


Bed and Breakfast, Chilled


Absolutely No Tipping
Some hotel guests have a no-tipping policy.
Now, there is a hotel in San Francisco where such guests will actually be welcomed back.
Since June 1, the Inn at Union Square, a 30-room hotel at 440 Post Street, has banned gratuities.
No tip is factored into the bill, either, the hotel says; employees have received raises to compensate for lost tips.
For a reservation (or to ask the staff how big a "tipper" their boss has turned out to be), call (800) 288-4346 or fax (415) 989-0529.
JOSEPH SIANO


On Sunday; Character Is Making A Comeback
WHEN Gary L. Fitzherbert came to Connecticut 23 years ago to teach at a small school for emotionally disturbed children near here, he saw kids hit one another, as troubled kids will.
But then, by and large, the offenders felt bad about it afterward.
Through that window of guilt he saw a ray of hope: the sense of right and wrong was alive.
Gradually, to Mr.
Fitzherbert's growing dismay, the window began to close.
"I started seeing more and more kids who were physically aggressive and didn't see anything wrong with it," he said.


Jury Duty, Part One: The Fashion Statement
I WENT to wardrobe before I went to jury duty; everybody is expected to be camera-ready in the Age of O.J.
Not that I expected to be picked -- I rarely am -- but I wanted to give the lawyers pause, make it harder for them to bump me off a panel just because I looked too smart to  buy their numbing illogic, or to keep me on just because I looked so worn that I'd be sympathetic to human frailties.
I'm not the twelfth angry man, but I'm no demographic, either.
Jury duty is an honor and an obligation, which I happen to enjoy in theory, although I usually end up spending most of my tour reading lite books and eating Chinese food.
Also, I knew that this might be my last  hurrah as a juror for awhile; new state  legislation, if it works, will improve  conditions, raise per diem (it's $15 now)  and vastly increase the pool of potential  jurors by ending automatic exemptions to lawyers, undertakers, cops, firefighters, small-business owners and doctors (lots of luck).


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Education Life/Section 4A


Music Lovers
Central Park, July 31.


An Unbridged Gap Between Past and Present
WILLIAM T. WILLIAMS'S show at the Newark Museum seems a hasty improvisation, and it may be because the artist is not right for the format.
The exhibitions in the museum's Projects Series are hung in the relatively confined space of the North Wing Contemporary Artists Gallery, and they tend to be small.
Mr.
Williams's canvases are generally large and bright.
Then again, it may simply be ill advised to choose paintings to demonstrate that an artist in midlife is not what he was when he was young and "hot." For one thing, art is an occupation in which youth is not necessarily an asset; for another, age alone does not account for the changes in Mr.
Williams's art.


Paying Child Support
The New Jersey Supreme Court has rejected a divorced father's argument that his child-support payments be reduced so he could spend the money as he saw fit when he cared for his children.
Is this fair, or not?
Saving for the Future


A Political Dinner Without Politicians
The goal was to raise money for the fledgling Asian American Democratic Club of Queens and to endorse the State Supreme Court candidacy of Judge Dorothy Chin Brandt -- and perhaps to curry favor with dozens of invited local politicians.
Money was indeed raised, and Judge Brandt, a Civil Court judge assigned to Criminal Court, was duly honored.
But no favor was curried, since there were no local politicans with whom to trade chits during dinner chat.


Q and A
Paris on a Diet
Q.
Eating in Paris is always difficult for people on a low-fat, low-cholestrol diet, but especially so at the end of August, when I will be there.
Do you have any suggestions? -- P. Offricht, New York, N.Y.


Washington Unplugged
IF YOU HAVE TIME ON your hands and cash to spare, you can walk into the Patent and Trademark Office in Arlington, Va., sit down at a computer terminal and browse through the entire technological history of the United States, invention by invention: the drawings and descriptions of Morse, Whitney and Bell; the paper clip, the transistor and the accelerating rush of scientific creativity in modern times.
"We have basically all the images and text going back to 1790," says the commissioner, Bruce Lehman.
"That's unique in the world. This is a fabulous data base." It is a treasure trove for scientists, historians, students -- anyone who needs to see the art and thinking of the inventors who came before.


Surprise: Your Park Is Closed!
To the mothers and baby sitters who regularly take children to John Jay Park, it all happened overnight.
One day they were pushing the children on swings, and the next they were watching construction trucks roll by.
"There was no notice about the closing," said Faith Kinslow, whose two sons play and take swimming lessons in the park, at the east end of 77th Street.
"This is about the worst time to close a playground."


Are You Conscious?
To the Editor:
I admire Robert Wright, who is usually very lucid on difficult subjects.
But it strikes me that his interesting review of Paul M. Churchland's book on the physicality of the human psyche is unnecessarily abstruse when it comes to distinguishing between (for example) a computer and a brain.


Enola Gay and Little Boy, Exactly 50 Years Later
IT sits so quietly in gleaming splendor inside an exhibition hall near the Spirit of St.
Louis and the Apollo capsule that it hardly looks threatening, though it is so huge that the curators of the National Air and Space Museum had to leave the wings off.
After two years of unending controversy, the Enola Gay has finally arrived in downtown Washington, sitting atop a copy of Little Boy, the atomic bomb that destroyed Hiroshima 50 years ago today.
The bomb bay doors are still open, as if they never swung shut again that morning a half century ago.
But in many ways, Washington's most argued about, most crowded exhibit of the year is also the most diminished display in Smithsonian history, a testament to the emotional power the Enola Gay still conveys.
The protests by American veterans groups, who said the original plans for a vast exploration of the Hiroshima bombing portrayed the Japanese as victims and the Americans as aggressors, led the Smithsonian's leadership to back off from its grand plans and forced the resignation of the museum's director, Martin O. Harwit.
The result of the historical wrangling is a strikingly incomplete exhibition that leaves visitors totally in the dark about how a decision was reached to use the bomb, and the aftermath of the most militarily decisive and horrific mission in the history of air war.


Back Home: Neither Here Nor There
THE first day back from vacation feels like stepping outside after a long illness.
You feel fragile; a sensual fatigue lingers; you have the sense of having experienced something haunting that has permanently changed you, rendered you slightly separate from the others at the Stop &amp; Shop -- a feeling gone in two days.
This particular homecoming, from a week in the Dominican Republic, is especially dreamy: the night flight into Boston, the three-hour drive back to Connecticut, with stops for more Pepto-Bismol and gasoline, the sudden rainstorm that flings white needles at the Sbarro parking lot but leaves the highway dry two miles away, the hot smell of the shut house.
On the table are stacks of mail and newspapers, and the answering machine repeating over and over just three red blinks.


Hiroshima, 50 Years Later
Fifty years ago, the largest bomb ever used in warfare tore Hiroshima asunder.
It was followed on Aug. 9 by a second nuclear attack, on Nagasaki, which within a week caused Japan to surrender, ending World War II, but with reverberations that endure.
President Truman's approval of these two bombings was to be the most disputed military decision by any Allied leader in the long war against Germany and Japan.
It was not controversial on Aug. 6, 1945.
Most Americans rejoiced on learning that a miraculous new weapon had been used against a fierce and fanatic enemy.
It meant a swifter victory and the likely scrapping of a planned invasion of Japan with its incalculable loss of lives.


A Bosnian Tale: A Trail of Blood
Four years ago, the Zecevic family led a happy, middle-class life in Sarajevo.
Then the post-Communist upheaval brought Europe's worst conflict since World War II, the unrelenting Serbian siege and the collapse of the family.
One son, Muris, was killed by a Serbian shell in 1992.
Another son, Haris, slipped away and eventually reached Detroit.
He soon learned that his mother had been shot dead by the Serbs.
He is obsessed with extracting his father from Bosnia and by a desire for revenge, often directed toward his Bosnian Serb uncle.


You Opened A Hydrant? Arrested!
A team of undercover fire marshals is patrolling the streets of Bushwick, arresting residents who open fire hydrants and threatening to put them in jail.
Some marshals, in an unmarked van, stake out hydrants that have previously been vandalized.
The van is equipped with a video camera and a periscope.
Others drive around the neighborhood in a nondescript car, looking for hydrant crime.


Attacks Near Bar Raise Neo-Nazi Fears
The East Village, long one of the most diverse and democratic neighborhoods of the city, is also one that attracts disaffected young people from other areas.
Over time, that has meant anarchists and punks and, more recently, multiracial skinheads.
And, say the police and local residents, that helps explain two incidents near a working-class bar on Sixth Street, the Cherry Tavern, that landed two men in a hospital, one with a fractured skull, the other with a concussion.
But the incidents have started a storm of accusations that the Cherry Tavern is a hangout for neo-Nazis.


And This Little Piggy Stayed Off the Platter
Double Happiness  Sandra Oh, Alannah Ong, Stephen Chang, Frances You and Callum Rennie Directed by Mina Shum.
In English and Cantonese, with English subtitles.
PG-13 87 minutes


Strawberry's Three Hits Put Yankees Into Gear
Unbelievably, or maybe it should be believable in this surreal and strange season, Darryl Strawberry finally wandered into the clubhouse this weekend and the Yankees began chirping about continuity.
Huh?
Who is hiding the cue cards?
Did Buck Showalter write these scripts?
Actually, no cue cards or scripts were visible.
The lines might have been what Showalter has repeatedly told his players, but they sounded sincere.
Strawberry is here, and Luis Polonia and his loose lips have left, so welcome the new player and play reliable baseball.


Angry Debate On AIDS Center Splits W. Village
"The whole Village is polarized," exclaimed Arlene Koenig, president of the Greenwich Village Block Association.
Perhaps not the whole Village.
But Housing Works plan to open an AIDS adult day healthcare program in the genteel northwest Village has pitted neighbor against neighbor, shop owner against shop owner and a Catholic priest against some parents who send their children to his parish school.
Not to mention dividing Community Board 2, which on July 20 voted to support the project, to be housed at 320 West 13th Street, after two raucous hearings.
The vote: 34 to four, with four abstentions and one recusal.


The Code War
COMBINED FLEET DECODED  The Secret History of American Intelligence and the Japanese Navy in World War II.
By John Prados.
Illustrated. 832 pp.
New York: Random House.


Strip Civil Service Of Tenure Safeguards
Tenure is defined in the dictionary as the status of holding one's position on a permanent basis, granted to teachers civil service personnel, etc. on the fulfillment of specified requirements  [ "Dispute on Teacher Tenure May Widen," July 16 ] .
The Patchogue-Medford School Board would like to make changes in the state's tenure law including requiring renewal of tenure at five-year intervals.
In opposition, the teachers' union says that without tenure teachers would be stripped of protection against the whims and dictates of school boards.
The debate over tenure is just the tip of a simmering debate and argument over a system that gives job protection to certain groups that most workers do not have.
It goes deeper into the nation's psyche.
The idea of term limitations for elected officials is part of the movement to oust those who have occupied positions of power year after year and regard it as their fief, to be run as they choose and sometimes at their whim.


A Goodbye to a Group Home and Curfews
IT is unlikely that Amos Zereoue, the career rushing and scoring leader of Long Island from Mepham High School in Bellmore, shed any tears when he packed up his belongings and moved out of his house last week to attend West Virginia University in Morgantown.
"I'll never come back here again," he said.


July 30-Aug. 5: Sex Harassment, Part I; For Now at Least, Packwood Avoids a Harsh Spotlight . . .
Anyone watching Washington this summer might wonder why there seemed to be such little fuss over holding hearings into Waco and Whitewater and such opposition to holding them on allegations against Senator Bob Packwood.
For Senator Barbara Boxer, a Democrat from California, and some colleagues the difference is simple: The charges against Mr.
Packwood involve sexual misconduct, and the mostly male Senate is skittish at best about the subject.
Senator Packwood's defenders suggested that was not the reason at all.
They said the charges against him were old, that the ethics committee process should not be disrupted and that hearings were unnecessary because the committee had already gathered "encyclopedic" material on the case.


Celebrating Dr. Seuss
Before Horton ever heard a Who, Theodor Seuss Geisel grew up in Springfield, Mass.
So that city can take some credit for helping to shape the art of Dr.
Seuss.
From now through Jan. 28, 1996, the Connecticut Valley Historical Museum at the corner of State and Chestnut Streets in Springfield will be host to "And to Think That He Saw It in Springfield!"
The exhibit explores how the various buildings, parks and other aspects of Springfield life in the 1900's may have suggested illustrations in Dr.
Seuss' books (although it's unlikely anyone is taking credit for being the Grinch).
Photographs of Springfield from 1904 to 1923, when Geisel was growing up there, are matched with drawings from his books.


Corrections
A report in the Postings column last Sunday misstated the trade of the workers who assembled a large crane at the Brooklyn Navy Yard.
They are members of the Boilermakers union.


Vote for McDowell
To the Sports Editor:
The only thing for which to blame Jack McDowell is his brutal honesty.
His obscene gesture was only an articulation of what all Yankee players must feel when they hear the complete lack of support from their fair-weather fans.


Croat Offensive Eases Life in Sarajevo
Staff members at the Rasova public health clinic say that patients are starting to appear again in the clinic's waiting rooms after weeks of being too fearful of shelling to leave their homes.
Not that the clinic is as full as it used to be.
No one knows how long the lull in the shelling, which is at the lowest level in two months, will last.
But there are enough people coming to the clinic that patients now actually have to wait before being attended by the staff.


ON THE TOWNS
An opinionated guide to cultural and recreational goings-on around the state this week.
To submit items for consideration, write to On the Towns, Sunday New Jersey Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or send a fax to (212) 556-7219.
MUSIC ALBERT MUSIC HALL The Pinelands Cultural Society presents "Sounds of the Jersey Pines," a series of Saturday night concerts, through the end of the year.
The program features live presentations of bluegrass, country and Pinelands music.
Show time, 8 P.M.
Admission: $4, or $1 for children under 12. 139 Wells Mill Road (Route 532), Waretown. (609) 971-1593.
BELLA ITALIA FESTIVAL A bilingual Mass will be held today by the Italian Apostolate followed by a procession with music by Red Mike's Festival Band.
Later programs feature classical music by two orchestras.
Traditional Italian food will be on sale.
Mass begins at 11 A.M., with the procession at 12:30 P.M.
Orchestra performances are at 2:45 and 4:15 P.M.
Admission: $10 for adults, $8 for the elderly and $7 for children.
Waterloo Village, Stanhope. (201) 812-0433.


The Ground Beneath Our Feet
IN GOOD HANDS  The Keeping of a Family Farm.
By Charles Fish. 229 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $21.
HERE AND NOWHERE ELSE  Late Seasons of a Farm and Its Family.
By Jane Brox. 143 pp.
Boston: Beacon Press. $18.
EPITAPH FOR A PEACH  Four Seasons on My Family Farm.
By David Mas Masumoto. 233 pp.
San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco. $20.
MAPPING THE FARM  The Chronicle of a Family.
By John Hildebrand.
Illustrated. 252 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $23.


Benchmark
"HM?. . .What?. . .I'm sorry, were you talking to me?" asks Peter, the startled Central Park bench sitter in "Zoo Story," Edward Albee's 1959 play.
So powerful is the essential drama of breaking into someone's privacy on a park bench that Albee used it as the catalyst for a violent confrontation.
John Guare, in his 1966 play "The Loveliest Afternoon of the Year," used a young man approaching a lonely woman on a Central Park bench to portray quixotic romance -- and deadly jealousy.


QUICK BITES/Wallington; A Taste of Traditional Polish Kielbasa
I never realized how many people search for good kielbasa.
I just took it for granted, until I brought some in to work one Saturday as a snack.
Soon my co-workers were placing orders through me for kielbasa from Adam's Meat Market in Wallington, the town where I grew up.
Adam's recalls a time when butchers had wood shavings on the floor, and mixing the grinding meat to order was commonplace.


Correction
An article on July 23 about the choreographer Martha Clarke misidentified the author of an article in The New Republic that said her work "The Garden of Earthly Delights" transformed "our whole notion of theater." The writer was Robert Brustein, not Stanley Kauffmann.


'Outing' Some 'In' Composers
THE MARKETING PEOPLE AT BMG ARE obviously counting on the cover of their new CD, "Out Classics," to attract their target audience: gay men.
A black-and-white photo shows the naked upper torso of an impossibly hunky young man, his body glistening with droplets from a recent workout (or shower or sauna -- use your imagination).
Head bowed contemplatively, he surveys his own pectoral grandeur.
Lest the suggestive cover and the provocative title leave any doubt, a small label affixed to the cellophane packaging reads: "Seductive classics by the world's greatest gay composers." But on the back cover, the album's producers refer more skittishly to "eight of the world's greatest composers who just happen to be gay."


Pastrami and Rice?


Shorter Meeting at Saratoga?
Kenny Noe Jr., president of the New York Racing Association, said today that he was not impressed with either the handle or attendance so far at the 127th season of racing at Saratoga, and suggested he would recommend that next year's meeting be shortened.
"The overall betting may be up," Noe said, "but you're comparing it to last year, when we didn't sell our races to so many outlets in so many states. What happens when you run out of simulcast outlets? And I'm not happy with the way we're losing both spectators and handle on the track. The essence of horse racing is what happens on the track. Personally, I'd like to spend two months in beautiful Saratoga instead of five and a half weeks. But you have to worry that you might be diluting the product.'


BACKTALK: Ripken Should Keep Going and Going and. . .; Too Valuable to Sit
The headline on Robert Lipsyte's column last week presented his point of view: "Baseball Needs Ripken to Take a Day Off." Letter writers overwhelmingly disagreed.
To the Sports Editor:
Ripken is a great team player in a team sport.
His team is in an extremely tight battle for a playoff spot.
If Ripken removes himself before Sept. 6 for no reason other than to glorify himself as the man too unselfish to surpass a sick Gehrig, his team could lose that game and its chance at the World Series.
Baltimore's pitching is weak and needs all the defense it can get, particularly the glove of the league's best defensive shortstop.
JOHN E. HEANEY  Bethesda, Md.


Stuyvesant Students Waited Decades for a New Building
To the Editor:
In the July 30 Coping column, "On the Civic Side of the Profit Motive," a student at Washington Irving High School complains about the new Stuyvesant High School building down the street, "You don't care about us, now when there's an $8 million bridge for them." To which the subject of the column, Robert Walsh, adds, "What kind of a message is that?" As if Stuyvesant students have had all sorts of favors lavished upon them!


Correction
A brief article last Sunday with a list of Federal spending projects earmarked for the districts of various Congressmen misidentified a project alloted to Representative Jim Bunning, Republican of Kentucky.
It is a light-rail line, not a freeway.


Stuyvesant Students Waited Decades for a New Building
To the Editor:
In the July 30 Coping column, "On the Civic Side of the Profit Motive," a student at Washington Irving High School complains about the new Stuyvesant High School building down the street, "You don't care about us, now when there's an $8 million bridge for them." To which the subject of the column, Robert Walsh, adds, "What kind of a message is that?" As if Stuyvesant students have had all sorts of favors lavished upon them!


Margaret Sullivan and Bryan Finley
Margaret Mary Sullivan, a daughter of Ruth Ann Bleeker of Irving, Tex., and John F. Sullivan of Dallas, was married yesterday to Bryan Andrew Finley, a son of Jeanne Mullett of Hilton Head, S.C., and the late James Robert Finley.
The Rev.
Walter F. Modrys performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
Mrs.
Finley, 27, is the administrator of the New York City Ballet Guild in New York.
She graduated from Southern Methodist University and received a master's degree in performing-arts administration from New York University.


Brown Puts Entire Focus On Getting Things Right
There have been times during the short walk from his dormitory to the cafeteria that Giants quarterback Dave Brown looks as if he is dreading something.
"It's the food," he joked.


Labor Dept. Hears Tales of Sweatshops, Restaurants, and Fear
A high-ranking official from the United States Department of Labor visited Chinatown for the first time last week to hear testimony from workers who pleaded for a crackdown on illegal labor practices in the garment and restaurant industries.
Maria Echaveste, administrator of the Wage and Hour Division and a presidential appointee, appeared at the behest of the Chinese Staff and Workers Association, which had been demanding greater government enforcement of unfair labor practices as it conducted a well-publicized four-month-long boycott of Jing Fong, a 1,500-seat restaurant at 18 Elizabeth Street.


Justified Bombings? A Survivor's Reply
His ears are missing, his fingers are deformed and he is weakened by chronic illness, making Akihiro Takahashi a living testimonial to the horrific results of the atomic bomb that exploded over Hiroshima half a century ago.
Mr.
Takahashi, who was 14 at the time, became director of the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum and a campaigner against nuclear weapons.
Like many Japanese, Mr.
Takahashi argues that the United States broke international law and all principles of humanity by using nuclear weapons.


MOVIES THIS WEEK
A humdinger mystery, a picaresque comedy, a Freudian western and a ripe, thumping DeMille spectacle head up a colorful mix on the film roster this week.
A huge close-up of a killer's eye (peering from a closet) in Robert Siodmak's brilliantly directed SPIRAL STAIRCASE (1946) will freeze your gills.
Watch for the stunned surprise of Dorothy McGuire (in photography with George Brent), as a stalked, mute servant, when she faces the culprit.
Ethel Barrymore, George Brent and Kent Smith add flavor to this first-rate thriller of the long-skirt era, the kind they don't make any more -- Sundy at noon on Cinemax.


Greatness Achieved
To the Editor:
I cannot believe Norman Rose's "Churchill" is truly so wrongheaded as to deserve Henry Kissinger's vitriol.
Instead, I assume Mr.
Rose is merely a convenient foil for Mr.
Kissinger's muse.


Most Russians Suffer a Decline in Health; Can't Happen Here?
To the Editor:
The usual explanation for the decline in life expectancy in Russia (front page, Aug. 2) is to attribute these changes to environmental and health policies of the previous government or the dislocations caused by the transformation to a market economy.
A deeper, more generalizable lesson is that deterioration in the living standards of a population leads to declines in public health.


Good Reason for Insomnia


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: August 6, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
7
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Bantam, $6.99.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
2
6
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $7.50.) Jack Ryan and the C.I.A. vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
3
13
THE STONE DIARIES, by Carol Shields. (Penguin, $10.95.) The journey of a woman from childhood to motherhood through old age.
4
1
THE BODY FARM, by Patricia Cornwell. (Berkley, $6.99.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates the murder of a small North Carolina girl.
5
2
REMEMBRANCE, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $6.99.) A writer who was jilted finds consolation when she travels back to Edwardian England.
6
19
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $7.50.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing.
7
2
BORN IN ICE, by Nora Roberts. (Jove, $5.99.) An Irishwoman who owns a bed-and-breakfast plays host to a mystery writer from America.
8*
2
EVERYTHING TO GAIN, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) An act of violence destroys a woman's family life.
9
3
WHITE SHARK, by Peter Benchley. (St. Martin's, $6.50.) A marine biologist battles a mysterious underwater monster.
10
13
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.99.) After an estranged couple reunite, they are haunted by a mysterious force.
11
2
THE FIST OF GOD, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $6.99.) Spies, traitors and brave warriors at work during the Persian Gulf war.
12
1
THE HOMING, by John Saul. (Fawcett, $6.99.) The daughters of a young widow are stalked by an evil force.
13
5
FIRST OFFENSE, by Nancy Taylor Rosenberg. (Signet, $6.99.) A probation officer whose husband is missing finds her life threatened.
14*
30
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $6.50.) The coming of age of women in Ireland.
15
1
THE 13TH JUROR, by John T. Lescroart. (Island/Dell, $6.50.) A lawyer undertakes the defense of a woman accused of murdering two husbands and her young son.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
3
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Anchor/Doubleday, $6.99.) The discovery of the deadly Ebola virus in Virginia and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
2
6
APOLLO 13, by Jim Lovell and Jeffrey Kluger. (Pocket, $6.50.) The 1970 moon mission during which an oxygen tank exploded.
3
82
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
4
19
REVIVING OPHELIA, by Mary Pipher. (Ballantine, $12.50.) The dangers that beset teen-age girls.
5
613
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
6
46
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
7
125
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
8*
13
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Delta, $12.95.) The experiences of women after the deaths of their mothers.
9*
45
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters reflect on their lives.
10
47
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
11
34
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships.
12
3
THE PRIVATE DIARY OF AN O.J.
JUROR, by Michael Knox with Mike Walker. (Dove, $5.99.) The recollections of a man who was discharged from the jury during the trial of O.J.
Simpson.
13*
4
THE CATCHER WAS A SPY, by Nicholas Dawidoff. (Vintage, $13.) The life of Moe Berg, big-league catcher, O.S.S. agent and lady's man.
14
7
THE KENNEDY WOMEN, by Laurence Leamer. (Ivy, $7.99.) Five generations of an American family.
15*
1
OKLAHOMA RESCUE, by Jon Hansen. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City, as perceived by the city's assistant fire chief.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
45
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
2
6
TEN STUPID THINGS WOMEN DO TO MESS UP THEIR LIVES, by Laura C. Schlessinger. (Harper Perennial, $10.) Counsel by a therapist.
3
14
A 2ND HELPING OF CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) One hundred more stories.
4
223
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 22, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Nicole B. Delz, E. J. Lynch 2d
Nicole Babette Delz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William R. Delz of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to Edward James Lynch 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lynch of Garden City, L.I.
William Johnston, a town justice of Harrison, N.Y., officiated at the Larchmont (N.Y.) Yacht Club.
Mrs.
Lynch is a director of corporate finance for the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation in New York.
She graduated from Boston College, and she received an M.B.A. from Fordham University, as did Mr.
Lynch.
Her father is the chief financial officer of J &amp; W Management, a real estate company in New York.


ON THE BORDER OF LIFE
I feel tremendous sympathy for the DeCostas.
They lost their baby boy, Dylan.
But ultimately, everything that was done for him was right because the parents were allowed to make informed decisions on his behalf, with the help of the medical staff.
The decisions were not made by their insurance company or Medicaid or the Government.
SUZANNE N. PATNAUDE Upper Montclair, N.J.


Insects to Blame for Odd but Harmless Deformities
THOSE curious caps on oak leaves are harmless.
They are merely deformities caused by a tiny insect called the gall wasp; there is no reason to worry that the tree is ailing.
On some oak trees, larger galls can be seen, and these are called oak apples.
The apple is simply a leaf deformed by the feeding of tiny wasps.
Adults emerge from the gall and mate.
Females then lay their eggs near the root system; the eggs winter over, and the whole cycle begins again the next spring.


The Student's Guide To Smarter Spending
STUDENTS en route to college have long had to endure stern and earnest lectures from parents and counselors on the temptations that await them.
It's not too often that a new vice comes along.
But these days, in addition to being warned about, say, the evils of getting high, more and more students are being warned about the dangers of getting "maxed."


July 30-Aug. 5: Veto Threatened; The House Passes A Far-Reaching Overhaul Of Communications Law
The last vote the House of Representatives took last week before leaving for a month-long summer recess was one of its most far-reaching.
On Friday, by a count of 303 to 117, it approved a wholesale deregulation of the nation's communications laws.
The bill would allow local telephone companies to offer long-distance service, long-distance carriers to get into local telephone, and cable operators to raise their rates for basic service.


Attitude Inc.: Why Corporate Sponsors Love the New York Style
RAWLINSON RIVERA used to pitch.
A lanky youth who grew early, he was throwing 85 miles an hour and being scouted by the Yankees before his 17th birthday.
Then he started to do in-line skating.
Now, he pitches in a different way.
As one of the most talented aggressive skaters in New York, he has been recruited by five separate companies to skate with their equipment, compete with their teams and talk up their products.
In return, they give him a little money, lots of clothing and free trips to competitions and exhibitions.
His summer job is to skate and talk.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Packwood: Vote on a proposal to hold public hearings into accusations of misconduct against Senator Bob Packwood, Republican of Oregon.
Rejected 52 to 48, Aug. 2.
2.
Packwood: Vote on a proposal to allow the Select Committee on Ethics to finish its work and recommend a punishment for Mr.
Packwood.
Approved 62 to 38, Aug. 2.
3.
Missile Defense: Vote to kill an amendment to a $264.7 billion defense budget bill for fiscal year 1996 that would eliminate $300 million the Senate Armed Services Committee added to the bill to accelerate work on a national missile defense program.
Approved 51 to 48, Aug. 3.
4.
Missile Defense: Vote to kill an amendment to a $264.7 billion defense budget bill for the fiscal year 1996 that would delete language from the bill calling for the United States to set up a limited missile defense system and unilaterally seek changes in the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty.
Approved 51 to 49, Aug. 3.
Connecticut  Dodd (D) . . .
Lieberman (D) . . .
New Jersey  Bradley (D) . . .
New Jersey (cont'd)  Lautenberg (D) . . .
New York  D'Amato (R) . . .
Moynihan (D) . . .
KEY: Yea; Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present. House
1.
Environmental Protection Agency: Second vote on an amendment to an appropriation bill to finance environmental, housing, veterans and space programs beginning Oct. 1 that would remove 17 provisions that limit the Environmental Protection Agency's ability to enforce laws like the Clean Water Act and Clean Air Act.
Failed, with 210 in favor and 210 opposed (a majority was needed to sustain the vote), July 31.
2.
Bosnia: Vote on a bill that calls for the end of United States participation in the arms embargo on Bosnia after a withdrawal of United Nations troops from Bosnia or 12 weeks from the date of a request by the Bosnian Government for a pullout of forces.
Approved 298 to 128, Aug. 1.
3.
Family Planning: Vote on an amendment to a spending bill for Federal labor, health and education programs that would kill the Government's 25-year-old family planning program known as Title X.  Rejected 221 to 207, Aug. 2.
4.
Medicaid: Vote on an amendment to a spending bill for Federal labor, health and education programs that would delete a provision that would allow the states to bar the use of Federal Medicaid money to pay for abortions in cases of rape or incest.
Rejected 215 to 206, Aug. 3.
5.
Spending: Vote on a bill that would provide $560 billion to the Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services and Education for the fiscal year that begins Oct. 1 and that proposes $9.1 billion in savings.
Approved 219 to 208, Aug. 3.
6.
Telecommunications: Vote on an amendment to a sweeping telecommunications bill that would require makers of television sets to install a computer chip that would let parents prevent their children from watching violent programs.
Approved 224 to 199, Aug. 4.
7.
Telecommunications: Vote on a bill broadly intended to deregulate the telephone, cable television and broadcasting industries.
Approved 305 to 117, Aug. 4.
Connecticut  1.
Kennelly (D) . . .
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
4. Shays (R) . . .
5. Franks (R) . . .
6. Johnson (R) . . .
New Jersey  1. Andrews (D) . . .  A A A A A 2. LoBiondo (R) . . .
3. Saxton (R) . . .
4. Smith (R) . . .
5. Roukema (R) . . .
6. Pallone (D) . . .
7. Franks (R) . . .
8. Martini (R) . . .
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
10. Payne (D) . . .
11. Frelinghuysen . . .
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
13. Menendez (D) . . .
New York  1. Forbes (R) . . .
2. Lazio (R) . . .
3. King (R) . . .
4. Frisa (R) . . .
5. Ackerman (D) . . .
6. Flake (D) . . .  A
7. Manton (D) . . .
8. Nadler (D) . . .
9. Schumer (D) . . .
10. Towns (D) . . .
A
11. Owens (D) . . .
12. Velazquez (D) . . .
13. Molinari (R) . . .
14. Maloney (D) . . .
15. Rangel (D) . . .
16. Serrano (D) . . .
17. Engel (D) . . .
18. Lowey (D) . . .
19. Kelly (R) . . .
20. Gilman (R) . . .
21. McNulty (D) . . .
22. Solomon (R) . . .
23. Boehlert (R) . . .
24. McHugh (R) . . .
25. Walsh (R) . . .
26. Hinchey (D) . . .
27. Paxon (R) . . .
28. Slaughter (D) . . .
29. LaFalce (D) . . .
30. Quinn (R) . . .
A A 31. Houghton (R) . . .
KEY: Yea; Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Knish or Kimchi: Last Kosher Deli Shuts on Union Street
There was no going-out-of-business sale of pastrami and pickles, no sign in the window or on the wall.
The demise of Flushing's last kosher delicatessen came quietly.
The restaurant, Flushing Delight, at 29-20 Union Street, shut and locked its metal gates one night last month for the last time.
It became another lost remnant of a fading community.


10 Days to Takeoff for a New Airline and a Dormant Airport
The sign outside the Trenton-Mercer Airport building says "Airport Terminal." It might as well say "Grand Opening."
On Aug. 16, Eastwind Airlines is to become the first commercial jet carrier to call Trenton home and New Jersey's first new airline since Kiwi International Air Lines started in Newark in September 1992.


Dawn of an Age: An On-Line History
Articles and photos from The Times on the dropping of the atomic bomb on Hiroshima and Nagasaki and the end of World War II are available on line from @times, The Times's service on America Online.
Software and information: (800) 548-5201.


Sitting Tight Abroad Despite Weak Returns
MUTUAL fund investors who own foreign funds remain committed to their holdings despite weak performances over the last 12 months, according to a recent survey by the Gallup organization for Scudder, Stevens &amp; Clark Inc.
For the 12 months ended July 19, foreign stock funds gained a paltry 2 percent, while Pacific stock funds lost just under 1 percent and Europe stock funds gained 14 percent, reported Morningstar Inc., the fund researchers.
Although the figure for Europe is far from bad, it pales next to the 24 percent gain for United States diversified stock funds in the period.


BEST SELLERS: August 6, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
2
MEMNOCH THE DEVIL, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The vampire Lestat is snatched from the world by a mysterious adversary who claims to be the Devil.
2
2
4
BEACH MUSIC, by Pat Conroy. (Talese/Doubleday, $27.50.) An American living in Rome returns to South Carolina and tries to cope with his troubled past.
3
3
2
LIGHTNING, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $24.95.) The happy marriage of a lawyer and her husband is suddenly changed after she gets a routine checkup.
4
6
15
THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's multibillion-dollar scam.
5
4
156
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
6
5
6
ROSE MADDER, by Stephen King. (Viking, $25.95.) Fleeing an abusive husband, a woman seeks happiness in a strange city by creating her own myth.
7
7
75
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
8
8
6
THE WITNESS, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $21.95.) A public defender who seems happy in her work and her marriage is plunged into a morass of bigotry and hate.
9
9
4
DISNEY'S POCAHONTAS. (Mouse Works, $6.98.) The romance of an American Indian princess and an Englishman, told in words and pictures.
10
12
2
DANGEROUS TO KNOW, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (HarperCollins, $24.) A journalist investigates the death of her former husband, a philanthropist.
11
10
13
LET ME CALL YOU SWEETHEART, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) An unusual murder case haunts a prosecutor's career and her private life.
12
13
59
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
13
11
10
THE APOCALYPSE WATCH, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $24.95.) Tracking a neo-Nazi movement with designs on American and European officials.
14
15
12
ONCE UPON A MORE ENLIGHTENED TIME, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $9.95.) Eight more "politically correct bedtime stories."
15
14
15
LADDER OF YEARS, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $24.) At 40, a woman leaves her physician husband and children to start a new life in a strange town.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
4
TO RENEW AMERICA, by Newt Gingrich. (HarperCollins, $24.) The Speaker of the House describes his solutions to the country's problems.
2
2
7
NEW PASSAGES, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $25.) How changing social conditions and longer life expectancies are affecting our lives.
3
3
74
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
4
5
7
A GOOD WALK SPOILED, by John Feinstein. (Little, Brown, $23.95.) The P.G.A.
Tour in 1993 and 1994.
5
4
10
SPONTANEOUS HEALING, by Andrew Weil. (Knopf, $23.) The ways in which the body heals itself.
6
6
32
SISTERS.
Essays by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters.
7
14
2
SLEEPERS, by Lorenzo Carcaterra. (Ballantine, $23.) The true story, the narrator claims, of four boys in a reformatory and the revenge they later take.
8*
7
10
DAVE BARRY'S COMPLETE GUIDE TO GUYS, by Dave Barry. (Random House, $21.) A humorist explains the strange ways of a species of males called "guys."
9
10
25
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) Governmental regulations.
10
12
4
WHEN ELEPHANTS WEEP, by Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson and Susan McCarthy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The emotional lives of animals.
11
11
2
THE EAGLE AND THE ROSE, by Rosemary Altea. (Warner, $19.95.) An English psychic tells of her struggle to come to terms with who she really is.
12
1
THE LANGUAGE OF LIFE, by Bill Moyers.
Edited by James Haba. (Doubleday, $29.95.) Conversations with 34 American poets about their lives and work.
13
9
10
PAULA, by Isabel Allende. (HarperCollins, $24.) The novelist tells stories of her family's life as she tends her fatally ill daughter.
14*
13
85
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories.
15
8
8
SLEEPING AT THE STARLITE MOTEL, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley, $20.) A Georgia schoolteacher tells about her adventures while traveling and at home.
16*
1
THE LIARS' CLUB, by Mary Karr. (Viking, $22.95.) A poet recalls her childhood as a member of a troubled family in East Texas during the early 1960's.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
115
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
2
2
20
THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra. (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $14.) How to "generate wealth in all its forms."
3
3
12
HOW TO ARGUE AND WIN EVERY TIME, by Gerry Spence. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) A lawyer describes ways to win arguments at home and at work.
4
4
12
MARS AND VENUS IN THE BEDROOM, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $22.) Maintaining passion.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 22, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) BEHIND THE WHEEL AT CHRYSLER: The Iacocca Legacy, by Doron P. Levin. (Harcourt Brace, $25.) A Detroit reporter interprets Chrysler under Lee Iacocca's management as a company far better at making sales and deals than cars.
DARK SUN: The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb, by Richard Rhodes. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $32.50.) Mr.
Rhodes's lucid exposition of technical issues combines fruitfully with his sharp eye for character, anecdote and political context in this history of the creation of the biggest bomb ever.
THE ENGINE OF REASON, THE SEAT OF THE SOUL: A Philosophical Journey Into the Brain, by Paul M. Churchland. (Bradford/MIT, $29.95.) A philosopher's argument, clear, witty and scientifically up-to-date, that all of human mental life, however subjective it feels, is reducible to material activity taking place in the brain.
GALATEA 2.2, by Richard Powers. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $23.) Ingenious, ambitious and cerebral, this novel concerns a novelist (same name as the author's) who works to perfect a machine intelligence that can learn literature and sustain belief in purpose and meaning.
HANGING UP, by Delia Ephron. (Putnam, $23.95.) A compassionate, funny, satisfying first novel whose heroine and narrator can cope with anything but her awful father, who's an alcoholic, a manic-depressive and not very nice besides.
JOHN SLOAN: Painter and Rebel, by John Loughery. (John Macrae/Holt, $37.50.) A thoughtful, absorbing life of an illustrious member of "The Eight," artists who rebelled against the stodgy academic standards of American art at the beginning of this century.
MOVING VIOLATIONS: War Zones, Wheelchairs, and Declarations of Independence, by John Hockenberry. (Hyperion, $24.95.) Swaggering in a wheelchair isn't easy, but this candidly aggressive National Public Radio correspondent is up to the job (or any other).
MY OLD MAN AND THE SEA: A Father and Son Sail Around Cape Horn, by David Hays and Daniel Hays. (Algonquin, $19.95.) And so they do, round trip from New London, Conn., becoming better, wiser and more loving people en route but never overloading a marvelous sailing yarn.
SECRET LIFE: An Autobiography, by Michael Ryan. (Pantheon, $25.) The biggest secret was Mr.
Ryan's sex addiction, from which he says he is recovering; this disturbing, amazingly risky work of self-exposure by an accomplished poet is a portrait of the artist as a young misfit.
SKINNED ALIVE: Stories, by Edmund White. (Knopf, $23.) Lovely, casually unfolding stories, edited from fugitive memories pulled together under the author's sense of mortality and of gay relationships as inherently impermanent.
THERAPY, by David Lodge. (Viking, $22.95.) An exceedingly funny novel (the author's 10th) of midlife crisis, whose 58-year-old hero, Tubby, is an awfully nice guy but unhappy in a vague way that none of his many therapies seem to help.


July 29-Aug. 5; When Scholars Dig Not Only Tassels but Sequins
IF Elvis Presley's hips could rattle American society in the 50's, can his spirit shake up the world of academia in the 90's?
That's the question being asked this week at the University of Mississippi at Oxford, which is host to the First Annual International Conference on Elvis Presley.
In these days of merger mania, the conference is seeking a new kind of synergy, between education and entertainment.
The six-day event will feature concerts by top gospel and blues performers.
There will be a "Sermon on Elvis," field trips to Tupelo, Miss., where Elvis was born, and Graceland, where Elvis died.
Elvis mugs, caps and posters will be readily available.


Lisbeth Pifko, Brett A. Burns
Lisbeth Pifko, a daughter of Judith and Frank Pifko of Trumbull, Conn., was married yesterday to Brett Augustine Burns, a son of Sheila Burns of Fairfield, Conn., and Thomas Burns of Southport, Conn.
The Rev.
Charles Allen performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Theresa Church in Trumbull.


IN SHORT: FICTION
WHERE THE HEART IS  By Billie Letts. Warner, $17.95.


Attacks Near Bar Raise Neo-Nazi Fears
The East Village, long one of the most diverse and democratic neighborhoods of the city, is also one that attracts disaffected young people from other areas.
Over time, that has meant anarchists and punks and, more recently, multiracial skinheads.
And, say the police and local residents, that helps explain two incidents near a working-class bar on Sixth Street, the Cherry Tavern, that landed two men in a hospital, one with a fractured skull, the other with a concussion.
But the incidents have started a storm of accusations that the Cherry Tavern is a hangout for neo-Nazis.


Gig Harbor Journal; Inmates Find Personal Freedom in Dance Program
Behind the barbed wire fences and the steel prison gates of Washington Correctional Center, this state's maximum security prison for women, a group of inmates are rebelliously screaming: "We don't want to be here! We want out!"
Any other day, their outbursts would be punished by extra work duties or solitary confinement.
But it's Tuesday night, and for the past six months, the prison guards have grown accustomed to the shouting, dancing and thumping of Rap music crackling from loud speakers in a gymnasium.


Jennifer M. Barz, Jeffrey P. Snell
Jennifer Merrill Barz, a daughter of Dierdre and Edward Barz of Newburyport, Mass., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Philip Snell, the son of Dr.
Philip Snell of Greer, S.C., and Joycelyn Snell of Boston.
The Rev.
Pamela M. Barz, a Unitarian Universalist minister who is the bride's sister, performed the ceremony at King's Chapel in Boston.
The bride, 30, graduated from Hobart and William Smith Colleges and is a candidate for a master's degree in social work at Simmons College.
Her father is the executive vice president of Simmons Market Research Bureau in New York.
Her mother retired as a partner in Siegel &amp; Barz, a law firm in Montclair, N.J.


CROAT ARMY TAKES REBEL STRONGHOLD IN RAPID ADVANCE
Croatian Government forces routed rebel Serbs today from Knin, the 13th-century fortress that had served as the insurgents' headquarters for four years.
The Serbs gave up the town without much of a fight on the second day of a Croatian offensive to retake a swath of Serb-held territory that the rebels call Krajina, and the Serbian political leaders there have fled, Croatian and United Nations officials said.


The Great Pragmatist
JOHN DEWEY  And the High Tide of American Liberalism.
By Alan Ryan. 414 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $30.


SUNDAY, August 6, 1995; SALESMANSHIP: Pushing The Right Buttons
Quorum International is a marketing company based in Phoenix that says it has at least 20,000 salespeople peddling personal, home and car alarms to their family and friends.
When Quorum reps drop into your living room, the pins on their lapels ask: "Are You Alarmed?" Then they give you a pamphlet that warns "a violent crime involving a personal assault occurs every 19 seconds" and they start pushing products like My Paal (shown above), a personal security alarm geared for the teen-age market.
For a warning blast, push the button; to activate a 103-decibel continuous alarm, pull the pin.


At 21, This Show Must Be Doing Something Right
DURING ITS MARATHON 21-year run, the musical revue "Beach Blanket Babylon," a frenetic spoof of American politics, culture and ethnic life, has become a San Francisco institution.
More than three million Bay Area residents and tourists have squeezed in to see it at the 400-seat Club Fugazi in the city's North Beach neighborhood.
Hotel concierges recommend it for what The Los Angeles Times has called its "pure fun, the epitome of the San Francisco experience."
Many fans see it more than once.
The department store tycoon Cyril Magnin came back 464 times.
But in June, the man who could probably top that figure, Steve Silver, the show's creator, producer and driving spirit, died of AIDS at the age of 51.
"The little show that could," as the local newspaper columnist Herb Caen called it, now faces the future on its own.


Study Misused
To the Sports Editor:
In Mariah Burton Nelson's "When Athletes Abuse, They Will Lose" (The Times, July 30), she identifies the Center for the Study of Sport in Society as having authored a study that found that "football and baseball players are more likely than other college men to commit rape or gang rape." Not only has the center never published such a finding, but it has never even completed a study remotely related to athletes and sexual violence.


When Disbanding Is the Only Logical Step
Ralph Lemon's career as a modern dance choreographer took off in 1990, a decade after he created his first pieces.
He was internationally acknowledged as a leading member of his generation in American dance.
He had established a small but highly respected company of dancers attuned to the demands of his bold, complex style of choreography.
And he was passionate about his work.
"I love the edge of it, the challenge," he told an interviewer the following year.
"I love the fight. Not the struggle, but the challenge of solving problems I pick out of the air."
Yet Mr.
Lemon had started to feel a sense of foreboding about the field in general.
"Everything started to get like a roller coaster," he said in a recent interview.
"We'd have a good year touring, then the next year work would be cut in half. And I was one of the fortunate ones."


Or What?
"PORK RINDS AND PERRIER," muses a redneck in a TV commercial for 7-Eleven stores, "is this heaven or what?"
On the ABC sitcom "Family Matters," a teen-age girl tentatively challenges a boy: "Do you want to go to the dance with me or what?" Viewers recall a daughter on "The Cosby Show" a decade ago defying her parents with "Is this America or what?"


Cruise Ships: A Rough Season
THESE are parlous times for cruises.
On June 10, the Royal Majesty of Majesty Cruise Line ran aground off Nantucket, stranding 989 passengers.
On June 12, Cunard's Sagafjord, suffering engine problems on its way to Alaska, reached Vancouver, British Columbia, two days late with 461 passengers.
She was taken out of service for a week, resulting in the cancellation of an 11-night Vancouver-Anchorage cruise.
On June 18, a fire disabled Carnival Cruise Line's Celebration, leaving 1,760 passengers adrift in the Bahamas for two days without air conditioning, elevators or hot food.
On the same day the Delta Steamboat Company's new American Queen, on a promotional trip with 285 people aboard, got stuck for a day in the Ohio River mud.
On June 23, the Star Princess of Princess Cruises, with 1,500 passengers, hit a rock outside Juneau, Alaska, putting it out of service for the month of July; it is due back tomorrow.
On July 22 fire broke out in the engine room of Regency Cruises' Regent Star, carrying 858 passengers, putting an end on the second day to a seven-day cruise from Seward, Alaska, to Vancouver.
In all these mishaps, there were no reports of deaths or serious injuries.
None seems to be a harbinger of worse to come.
But cascading schedule alterations had their impact, and by cruise line estimates, 25,500 passengers' vacation plans were disrupted.
One reader whose Alaska cruise was canceled two days before sailing wrote:


VIRTUAL VIRTUOSO
IT'S A LOVELY SATURDAY EVENING IN THE Haight-Ashbury district of San Francisco, and Joe Sparks is sipping pear cider at a local cafe, doing his best to enjoy the view from atop his admittedly nervous world.
Squat but handsome, with sharp eyes, heavy brows, late-Elvis sideburns and kinky black hair pulled back in a ponytail, Sparks is, at age 30, one of the computer industry's best-known CD-ROM designers.
Granted, he has only one product with his name on it: Spaceship Warlock, an on-screen "space opera" that effectively inaugurated the era of full-color CD-ROM games when it was released in 1991.
Since then, he has been sequestered in the basement studio of his cozy Victorian flat in the Upper Haight, working furiously to finish a new epic, Total Distortion.
Described by Sparks as "a music-video adventure game," Total Distortion is a veritable encyclopedia of multimedia design: a wild, sprawling ride through a richly animated and deeply engrossing science fiction universe, complete with monsters, books, homemade music, characters that sing and dance, puzzles within puzzles and everything else Sparks's fervent imagination managed to throw into the mix.
Hailed as a landmark ever since Sparks offered preliminary demonstrations of it three years ago, but long delayed by his ceaseless tinkering, Total Distortion is finally set for release next month.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


One Way to College: Buy Now, Learn Later
AS one of five children of a working-class Ohio family, David Sweet financed college the hard way, with loans that he is still toiling to pay off at the age of 34.
So when his son, Paul, was born five years ago, Mr.
Sweet was determined not to weigh him down with the same millstone.
Mr.
Sweet and his wife, Cindy, became two of the hundreds of thousands of participants in a novel college-financing venture that is catching fire around the country.
They enrolled in a state-operated plan that allows them to prepay up to four years of tuition at an Ohio state college at a locked-in price -- roughly $15,000 at today's rates.
No matter what the caprices of tuition, inflation or politics during the next dozen years, Paul will be able to start state college as a freshman with much of his tuition paid off.


Michelle Pfeiffer, Sensuous to Sensible
MORNING ON SUNSET BOULEVARD FINDS THE Homeless practicing the work ethic, producers plotting to ruin another good book and Michelle Pfeiffer puzzling over an onion slice in her yogurt and strawberries.
Note to epicurean trendmeisters: She eats it, pronounces it not bad, then continues with the self-torture of talking about herself, her 22 films, her three Academy Award nominations and her new film opening on Friday.
Gone is the self-editing, the elliptical responses that made profiling her the journalistic equivalent of covering, say, geology as it happens.
Even the Scandinavian gloom, a reserve of melancholy that the actress called on for such films as "The Russia House" and "Frankie and Johnny," seems as distant as a winter night in the far north.


Can the Garment District Refashion Itself?
BUD KONHEIM is the fourth-generation of his family to make a living in the city's garment trade.
But not long after the industry began its long, slow decline, Mr.
Konheim was on the front lines of the exodus of manufacturers from the Garment District to foreign factories where labor was much cheaper.
"We were one of the first ones to go to Hong Kong in the 70's," said Mr.
Konheim, then managing director at P. J. Walsh, the predecessor to Nicole Miller Ltd., the women's high-end apparel company where he is chief executive officer.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 The dynamics of the park bench, or how strangers share a few feet of space and never say a word to each other.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 After years of decline, the Garment District -- uh, Fashion Center -- shows signs of life.
MOVIE CLOCK 11 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 12 What's going on at the Queens County Farm Museum; showcasing Harlem for a 19-Day Harlem Week.
GOOD EATING 12 A tour of Chelsea; the diverting ambiance of Claire; the clamorous space of Frank's; the surprising Bright Food Shop.
SOAPBOX 13 The new Queens College president lays out his agenda.
And letters.


Courtney Birnbaum, Mark Kronfeld
Courtney Lizabeth Birnbaum, a daughter of Michele and Dr.
Stanley Birnbaum of New York, is to be married today to Mark P. Kronfeld, a son of Bella and Arie Kronfeld of Brooklyn.
Justice Louis I. Kaplan of State Supreme Court in the Bronx is to officiate at the Plaza in New York.
The bride, 23, graduated from Case Western Reserve University and received a master's degree in international finance from American University.
This month she is to start attending the New England School of Law in Boston.
Her father is the vice chairman of the department of obstetrics and gynecology at New York Hospital and a professor emeritus at Cornell University Medical College, both in New York.
Her mother owns an art gallery in New York.


INSIDE
Welfare Bill Ballet
The White House has listed its objections to a welfare bill pushed by Senate Republican leaders and has proposed changes to make it acceptable to the Administration.
Page 24.
The Clintons' Taxes
Newly released documents raise questions about President and Mrs.
Clinton's tax deductions as they related to the Whitewater Development Corporation.
Page 20.
No Bombing Conspiracy
With an indictment deadline near, prosecutors are viewing the Oklahoma City bombing as the work of a few, not a conspiracy.
Page 28.


Transplanted New Yorker Is Nostalgic for Austin St.
To the Editor:
Even though I live so far away, I was pleased to receive a copy of your June 25 Shoptalk article "Mom and Pop Hang Tough on Austin St." from my sister Rita Belletti in Forest Hills.


BACKTALK: Ripken Should Keep Going and Going and. . .; Unfair to Ripken
The headline on Robert Lipsyte's column last week presented his point of view: "Baseball Needs Ripken to Take a Day Off." Letter writers overwhelmingly disagreed.
To the Sports Editor:
Lipsyte's suggestion that Ripken sit out a game before breaking Gehrig's consecutive-games-played streak shatters any sense of reason.
Such an act of self-deprecation would be grossly unfair to demand of the man who has brought so much grace and humility to the game.


In Looking at Gingrich, a Freshman Sees Himself
Of course the Republican freshman from Florida paid attention when his mother telephoned to question his vote in one of Congress's late-night abortion fracases this week.
But, heartfelt as the moment was, it was nowhere as commanding as the sudden floor appearance of his leader, Speaker Newt Gingrich, when a big appropriations bill seemed to be in trouble.


Toys 'R' Us Settles Labor Dispute That Made Headlines in Sweden
Can you say "collective agreement" in Swedish?
Toys "R" Us employees in Sweden can, now that the Paramus-based company has reached an agreement with the Swedish retail-store employees' union to end a three-month strike, pending the approval of the Toys "R" Us executive committee next Friday.


Benchmark
"HM?. . .What?. . .I'm sorry, were you talking to me?" asks Peter, the startled Central Park bench sitter in "Zoo Story," Edward Albee's 1959 play.
So powerful is the essential drama of breaking into someone's privacy on a park bench that Albee used it as the catalyst for a violent confrontation.
John Guare, in his 1966 play "The Loveliest Afternoon of the Year," used a young man approaching a lonely woman on a Central Park bench to portray quixotic romance -- and deadly jealousy.


Stuyvesant Students Waited Decades for a New Building
To the Editor:
In the July 30 Coping column, "On the Civic Side of the Profit Motive," a student at Washington Irving High School complains about the new Stuyvesant High School building down the street, "You don't care about us, now when there's an $8 million bridge for them." To which the subject of the column, Robert Walsh, adds, "What kind of a message is that?" As if Stuyvesant students have had all sorts of favors lavished upon them!


Media Misery
To the Sports Editor:
Dave Anderson errs in "Add Straw, but Trade McDowell," (The Times, July 20.) Jack McDowell gave the proper signal when leaving the game on July 18.
It was his aim that was wrong.


Quiet Charm, And Solid Fare
BRIGHT FOOD SHOP ++  (212) 243-4433; 216 Eighth Avenue, at 21st Street; $; no credit cards


Death Row Writer's Case Tests U.S. Justice
To the Editor:
Your July 30 news article on the plight of the black journalist Mumia Abu-Jamal reminds us that a dual system of justice can and does flourish in this country.


Most Russians Suffer a Decline in Health
To the Editor:
Those who are puzzled by the decline of life expectancy in Russia (front page, Aug. 2) are not taking account of an accompanying general decline in well-being and health care.


July 30-Aug. 5: Sex Harassment, Part II; . . . But No Such Luck For This Executive
As 15 traumatized former secretaries tell it, Dan K. Wassong, president of Del Laboratories, was the boss from hell.
He degraded them, they said, bullied them, touched a secretary's breast or buttocks on several occasions, suggested one would get ahead if she gave him oral sex.
Last week, Government anti-discrimination officials announced that Del Labs, a Farmingdale, L.I., cosmetics maker, had agreed to the largest settlement the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission had ever obtained in a sexual harassment suit -- $1,185,000.


Navigating The Risks of Estrogen Therapy
JUST one month after a much publicized study proclaimed that women who had hormone-replacement therapy faced an increased incidence of breast cancer came more front-page news -- this time a new study that revealed no such effect.
The conflicting reports only added to women's uncertainty and anxiety as they confronted what medical intervention, if any, they should pursue in their menopausal and post-menopausal years.
Estrogen has been much heralded as an elixir of youth that slows the ravages of aging among women.
Not only does the hormone decrease menopausal symptoms but it also reduces osteoporosis (bone loss) and lessens the risk of heart disease.
But the study connecting estrogen and breast cancer was not the first to associate the hormone with the risk of other illnesses.
Other medical reports have shown a link between use of estrogen and escalated growth of fibroid tumors in the uterus, abnormal blood clots and an increased incidence of uterine cancer.


Recycling Banks: Some Debits, Some Dividends
REMEMBER banks -- those imposing marble Greek Revival-style temples found in every downtown, usually not far from a similarly solid and conservative structure called City Hall?
How about bank branches or savings and loan offices -- those modest, modernist buildings that often dispensed money like Big Macs at drive-up windows?
Slowly, almost imperceptibly, banks seem to be vanishing from the American architectural landscape, both in cities and in the suburbs.
No, they aren't disappearing as fast as old-fashioned movie theaters, department stores or other soon-to-be relics of 20th century commercial real estate.
They are, though, frequently being shut down, sold, subleased, re-leased or remodeled for new uses, ranging from the merely unusual (restaurants and rug stores) to the highky unlikely (houses of worship and wine cellars.)


Why Trolleys, Not Buses Are Right for 42d Street
To the Editor:
In his July 23 letter ("What's Wrong With Idea of a Trolley on 42d Street") James McCown asserts that the bus is the "unsung workhorse of urban America." To be more accurate, buses have urbanites the world over singing the blues because of their exhaust fumes, noise, high operating cost, cramped seating and low public image.


Phylilis Trevor, Richard Higgerson
Phyllis Rhobie Gillespie Trevor, a daughter of Marguerite Slocum Quinn of Washington and John B. Trevor 3d of Lake Placid, N.Y., was married yesterday to Richard McIntyre Higgerson, the son of Nancy and Richard Higgerson of Blaricum, the Netherlands.
The Rev.
Roy Green performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Church in Newport, R.I.
Mrs.
Higgerson, 26, is the assistant to the executive chef at Dean &amp; Deluca in Washington, the specialty food retailer.
Her husband, 29, was until recently the manager of the company's cafes there. .
The bride graduated from Mount Vernon College.
Her father, who retired as the president of Coldspring Instruments, an electronics company formerly in Phoenix, is a trustee of the Hudson River Museum in Yonkers.
Her mother is a portrait painter in Washington.


Battling Andrea Dworkin
To the Editor:
I feel compelled to respond to Andrea Dworkin's letter of July 23, in which she misstates what she claims to be my views on spousal battery.
If Ms.
Dworkin had read "A Man's World" carefully, she would realize that I do not equate a woman's pushing a man away with a man's pushing a woman down a flight of stairs -- as she implies.
No rational person would deem those two acts to be equivalent.
Nor do I argue, as she suggests, that men and women are equally deadly.
I make just the opposite case, while pointing out that violence is not always a one-way street.
The relevant paragraph from my book follows:


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
HARLEM  A 19-Day Week Of Celebration
It started 21 years ago as a one-day celebration of Harlem.
This year, Harlem Week is running for 19 days with concerts, films, basketball competitions, a carnival and a conference on economic development.
The activities, most of which are free, will be held throughout the sprawling, diverse community.
"This is our festival to showcase Harlem in a positive light," said Marko Nobles, a spokesman for the event.
"The mood of Harlem changes during this time."
Through Aug. 27, the Museum of African-American History and Arts will show films daily as part of the 1995 Harlem Week Black Film Festival in the art gallery of the Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
State Building, 163 West 125th Street, at Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard.
The Harlem Carnival will take place Thursday at noon at 123d Street and Morningside Avenue.
Harlem Week; for more information and a schedule of events: (212) 427-3315.
VAN CORTLANDT PARK  A Musical Mosaic: Rag, Pops and Bach
The Bronx Arts Ensemble's Summermusic concert series continues Sundays through Aug. 27.
The ensemble is made up of a core group of about 15 freelance musicians playing the flute, oboe, clarinet, bassoon, horn, violin, viola, cello and bass.
On Sundays the group plays outdoors at 2 P.M. at the Rockwood Drive Circle in Van Cortlandt Park (near Mosholu Parkway and Broadway) and then again indoors at 4 P.M. at McGinley Center at Fordham University, Bronx Rose Hill Campus at Southern Boulevard.
Concerts, different each weekend, include the Brass Pops today, Ragtime Favorites on Aug. 13, Latin American Celebration on Aug. 20 and Bach Festival on Aug. 27.
Bronx Arts Ensemble; for information and directions call (718) 601-7399.
FLUSHING  Call: Save Qu Yuan!
Response: What, Again?
The dragons are coming back to the lake in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park today with the fifth annual Hong Kong Dragon Boat Festival.
The boats, which are 39 feet long, have dragon heads at the prow and tails at the stern.
Each is powered by a team of 20.
The race is based on an ancient Asian legend, said Melinda Parsons of the Hong Kong Government office in New York.
Around 400 B.C., Qu Yuan, a court minister who was loved by the people but not by the king, was banished.
For a time, he wandered about the countryside, writing poetry, but he eventually decided to drown himself in a river.
Local fishermen raced to save him, but in vain.
Their rescue dash is re-enacted in the dragon boat race.
Six boats will race today, and the championship will be decided next Sunday.
Hong Kong Boat Festival, Meadow Lake in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park; today, 1 P.M. to 4 P.M., and next Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; free; (212) 629-0370.
ALSO AROUND TOWN CHILL OUT Central Park Wildlife Center, Fifth Avenue at 64th Street; weekend-long event focusing on polar bears and penguins; games and crafts; $2.50 for adults, 50 cents for children 3 to 12, $1.25 for the elderly; (212) 861-6030.
HEALTH FAIR Diagnostic screenings, demonstrations by the Fire and Police Departments, massages and information on subjects like baby care, victim counseling and services for the elderly; Wednesday; Townsend Avenue between Mount Eden and East 174th Street; food, entertainment; (718) 716-8000.
HIROSHIMA A silent peace walk in remembrance of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki 50 years ago will start at the New York Buddhist Church on Riverside Drive between 105th and 106th Streets and continue north to Riverside Church at 122d Street; today, 1 P.M. to 4 P.M.; (212) 678-0305.
MONIQUE P. YAZIGI


Liberties; Doing The Packwood
Senator Packwood should not be a scandal. He should be a dance.
Following in the great tradition of 40's dances like the Shag and the Peabody, it will be called the Packwood.
The dance steps can be found in the May report of the Senate Select Committee on Ethics:


F.Y.I.
Room With a View Q.  Why do the old, circular elevator windows have chicken wire in them?
A.
In the dark days before shatterproof glass, the chicken wire was used to keep the glass from spraying all over when the windows broke, said Dennis Barrow, historical archivist for the Otis Elevator Co., one of the nation's oldest, biggest up-and-down companies.


Plant a Radish, Get a Radish
Keep planting autumn crops like lettuce, spinach, kale, Chinese broccoli, mustard greens, arugula, beets, carrots and radishes.
Fertilize chrysanthemums every week until the buds start to show color.


Renewal and the Cyber Nation
THE business best-seller list provides yet more evidence, if it is needed, that all's right with these United States.
Newt Gingrich and "To Renew America" opened at the top of the chart, showing every likelihood of renewing either his bank account or the conservative foundations to which he may donate the proceeds.
The good news is that "The Seven Spritual Laws of Success" is now eating Newt's dust in second place.
With an exception or three, the top 15 on the list are about equally divided between "let's make America great again" books and "computer digital revolution information superhighway" books.
Mr.
Gingrich could have bridged the two niches if he had included more of his thinking on technology in "To Renew America," which is no more than a text of the pronouncements that became familiar after last fall's elections.


Darryl Towns and Karen Boykin
Karen Denise Boykin, a deputy director of the New York State Senate in Albany and Manhattan, was married on Thursday to State Assemblyman Darryl C. Towns, a Democrat from the 54th District in Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Dr.
James A. Forbes Jr., an uncle of the bridegroom and the senior minister of the Riverside Church in New York, performed the ceremony at the church.
Mrs.
Towns, 29, graduated cum laude from the College of Mount St.
Vincent and received an M.B.A. from Baruch College.
She is the daughter of Betty Thomas Foster of New York and the late James Boykin.
The bride's father was a vice president of Local 1199 of the National Health and Human Services Employees Union in New York.
Her mother is a nurse's aide at the Terence Cardinal Cooke Center in New York.


Kei Sochi, Albert E. Floyd
Kei Sochi, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kazuo Sochi of Centerport, L.I., was married yesterday to Albert Edwin Floyd, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Edwin Floyd of Pittsburgh.
The Rev.
Susan A. Minasian, a minister of the United Church of Christ, performed the ceremony at the Princeton University Chapel in Princeton, N.J.
The bride and bridegroom, both 27, graduated from Princeton, she summa cum laude and he cum laude.
They are both working on Ph.D.'s, she in sociology at the University of Pennsylvania and he in ecology at Pennsylvania State University.
In September, he is to become an assistant professor of biology at Williams College.


Liability Fears Scuttle Deals
To the Editor:
Your article on the effect environmental contamination is having on real estate transactions ("Fears of Future Liability Scuttle Many a Deal," July 2) is unfortunately true.


In Hoboken, Drinking Gets (a Little Bit) Quieter
It's 1:02 on Saturday morning in the land of the Jell-O shot, and all is, if not exactly quiet, at least manageable.
The lines to get into the Cadillac Bar and Texas Arizona are relatively short and relatively orderly.
Few men and women appear to be relieving themselves between parked cars.
And so far, only one brawl has been serious enough to draw a crowd.
In its continuing war on public drunkenness, New Jersey's bar capital seems to be making progress.


Susan K. Foster, Steven R. Cohen
Susan Kathleen Foster, a daughter of Robert Foster of Bend, Ore., and Fran Aceti of Eugene, Ore., was married yesterday to Steven Raphael Cohen, the son of Robert and Vivienne Cohen of Springfield, N.J.
Judy Collett, a clerk of Lane County, Ore., officiated at the Secret House Vineyards in Veneta, Ore.
Mrs.
Cohen, 35, graduated from the University of Oregon.
She is a vocational rehabilitation counselor in Eugene, where Mr.
Cohen, 39, is a maintenance technician in the city's Public Works Department.
He graduated from South Dakota State University.


Cup Reunion For Turner
Ted Turner, the cable television mogul, plans a reunion today with his America's Cup sailing crew during Save the Bay's 25th Anniversary 12-Meter Regatta in Newport, R.I.
Save the Bay is an environmental group concerned about Narragansett Bay.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Sluman Ahead by 1
Jeff Sluman rolled in a 15-foot putt on the 18th hole for a 67 and a one-stroke lead over Tom Byrum yesterday after three rounds of the Buick Open in Grand Blanc, Mich.
Sluman completed three rounds at 16-under-par 200 to hold off Byrum, who was at 201 after a 65.


Ideas &amp; Trends: Fantasyland; Whose Family Values Are They, Anyway?
WHEN the Walt Disney Company announced its acquisition of Capital Cities/ABC last week in New York, executives from both companies congratulated themselves on the synergy between the two "family-oriented" entertainment giants.
Media analysts similarly gushed about the fit between the companies' "family-friendly" styles, and even members of the Federal Communications Commission could be heard praising the deal as a boon to families.
Meanwhile, in Washington, "pro-family" groups had other concerns on their mind.
The Senate was wrangling over welfare reform, and conservative, "pro-family" organizations, including the Christian Coalition and the Family Research Council, argued that the proposal put forward by Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole would not do enough to discourage out-of-wedlock births and promote "traditional families."


New Offense and New Life for Cunningham
Randall Cunningham is convinced that last season, in which the Eagles started 7-2 and then lost their last seven games -- with him on the bench for the final two -- was a personal test from God.
"Whenever God sees you working hard, He's going to allow you to go through a little adversity," Cunningham said.
"But that's because He wants to see how you react to different situations. There are negative ways to react and positive ways to react. He wants to see the positive reaction. When He sees the faith, that's how He determines what's going to happen in your life."


George A. Kraus, Maria de Manuel
Maria Dolores Luz de Manuel, a daughter of Dr.
Mita Luz de Manuel and Jose M. V. de Manuel of Scarborough, Ontario, is to be married today to George Anthony Kraus Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kraus Sr. of West Hempstead, L.I.
The Rev.
T.
Patrick Lynch is to perform the ceremony at St.
Catherine of Sienna Roman Catholic Church in Franklin Square, L.I.
The bride, 35, will be known as Dr. de Manuel-Kraus.
She is an assistant professor of English at Manhattan College in Riverdale, the Bronx.
She graduated from St.
Paul College of Manila and received a master's degree in literature from Ateneo de Manila University.
She received a Ph.D. in English literature from Fordham University.


New Anti-Vendor Weaponry: Planters


They Only Answered To Themselves
To the Editor:
Your article about investment newsletters ("Compromising Positions?" Investing It, July 23) was right on.
But you left out one other very common problem with which these so-called financial gurus should be confronted.


Sales on a Seesaw: Retail Picture Mixed
A REPORT on retail trade in Westchester, based on the the 1992 Economic Census, shows gains in some areas and losses in others.
Gross retail sales in the county grew at a modest 10 percent from 1987 to 1992, lagging behind the state's retail growth of 15.2 percent.


F.Y.I.
Room With a View Q.  Why do the old, circular elevator windows have chicken wire in them?
A.
In the dark days before shatterproof glass, the chicken wire was used to keep the glass from spraying all over when the windows broke, said Dennis Barrow, historical archivist for the Otis Elevator Co., one of the nation's oldest, biggest up-and-down companies.


Unpaid, Social Workers Worked
The mission of the Lower East Side Family Union is to keep families together and prevent unnecessary foster care placement.
That puts its social workers on the front lines of urban desperation.
One client has a multiple personality and an autistic son.
She drops in when she feels like it.
Another is out of jail and trying to be a good mother to her four children and needs checking up on.
She had hired a hit man to kill her abusive husband; the hit man turned out to be an undercover cop.
There's a young girl dying of AIDS whose mother died five years ago.
Her grandmother needs all the moral support she can get.


A Solid Bet or Just the Current Fashion Fad?
COOL sunglasses, hot stock: that's the hoped-for equation at Oakley Inc., a California manufacturer that is likely to go public this week.
And while there is always risk in fashion -- remember when Ray Bans were the rage -- this company may well satisfy both the hip and the profit-hungry.
Oakley, whose stock is expected to sell for $18 to $20 a share, makes high-performance sunglasses and goggles favored by athletes like Bonnie Blair, the Olympic gold medalist in speed skating.
But the products, which sell for $40 to $225 under brand names like Blades, e Wires and M frames, are also proving popular well beyond the sports arena.
For the 12 months ended in June, sales of the stylish shades sprinted by more than a third, to $146.1 million, compared with the year earlier.
In fact, Oakley's plant cannot keep up with current demand and has $9.9 million in back orders.


Few Role Models
To the Sports Editor:
O.K., kids!
Just make it to the major leagues.
Baseball, football, hockey, basketball -- sign the contract and the fun begins.
It's a free ride.
Do drugs.
Carry a gun.
Beat up women.
Rape.
Indecent exposure.
Certainly don't pay your income tax.
All is forgiven.
You get a second chance, a third chance, just keep showing remorse.
Your friendly George Steinbrenners are waiting with open arms to cash in on your proven failures.


Caught Openeing a Hydrant? Arrested!
A team of undercover fire marshals is patrolling the streets of Bushwick, arresting residents who open fire hydrants and threatening to put them in jail.
Some marshals, in an unmarked van, stake out hydrants that have previously been vandalized.
The van is equipped with a video camera and a periscope.
Others drive around the neighborhood in a nondescript car, looking for hydrant crime.


Once-Tough Chief of Affirmative-Action Agency Is Forced to Change Tack
When Shirley J. Wilcher took over the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs in February 1994, she quickly let people know that she would not allow business as usual at the agency.
She made it clear that, after 12 years of lax Republican enforcement of Federal rules requiring Government contractors to develop affirmative action programs, she would ride herd over businesses to make sure opportunities for minorities and women were expanded.
"I believe in enforcement, and I believe in sanctions," Ms.
Wilcher said in a speech to contractors two weeks after her confirmation as head of the agency, which is part of the Labor Department.
"I also believe in streamlining procedures and in making your jobs easier. But, in return, I do expect results."


Volunteer Group Works to Lift Spirits Inside Sing Sing
ENID CRUZ knows an angel of mercy when she sees one.
On the hottest day of the summer, Mrs.
Cruz traveled for two hours from the Bushwick section of Brooklyn to visit her husband, an inmate at the Sing Sing Correctional Facility here.
The five young Cruz children, ranging from 2 to 12 years old, came with their mother on the long, exhausting trip.
All of them woke at 5 A.M., caught a taxicab, two subways and a train to reach Ossining by 8 A.M.
The children helped carry packages of food and clothing for their father.


Performing Art Is Always Theater
A PLAY IS A PLAY, A POEM IS A poem, a dance is a dance (ballet if it's on point, modern or jazz if it's not) and this or that song can be clearly, irrevocably categorized as an art song or a popular song.
But what do you call it when a composer lectures from a podium while, simultaneously, a musician plays the piano, a poet seated in the audience starts to talk and laugh at odd, carefully cued intervals, a painter plays a windup Victrola and a choreographer dances?
When all of this took place at Black Mountain College in 1952 (the participants were John Cage, David Tudor, Charles Olson, Robert Rauschenberg and Merce Cunningham), it was called a happening.
Twenty some years later, when a plainly dressed man named Spalding Gray pulled a chair up to a table, sat down and began reading from his diaries, or stood up, walked into the audience and began interviewing people, it was called performance art.
And when, at about the same time, a group of women in theaters off and on Broadway recited poems and danced, alone or together, to its rhythms as well as to a jazz score, the author of the work, Ntozake Shange, did not call it a play.
She called it a choreopoem.


A Sitcom Master Makes Peace With the Medium
UBU THE DOG HAS BEEN DEAD for 11 years now.
It has been nearly six years since "Family Ties," one of the definitive domestic sitcoms of the 1980's, went off the air in a cloud of awards, tributes and syndication money.
In 1991, Gary David Goldberg, Ubu's old master and the creator of "Family Ties," chose to leave the rocking chair on the front porch of his 300-acre Vermont retreat and create the critically praised and fatally low-rated series "Brooklyn Bridge." It was an experience so aggravating and disappointing that he vowed never to produce a network series again.


Attitude Inc.: Why Corporate Sponsors Love the New York Style
RAWLINSON RIVERA used to pitch.
A lanky youth who grew early, he was throwing 85 miles an hour and being scouted by the Yankees before his 17th birthday.
Then he started to do in-line skating.
Now, he pitches in a different way.
As one of the most talented aggressive skaters in New York, he has been recruited by five separate companies to skate with their equipment, compete with their teams and talk up their products.
In return, they give him a little money, lots of clothing and free trips to competitions and exhibitions.
His summer job is to skate and talk.


Agha Hasan Abedi, 74, Dies In the Shadow of a Vast Fraud
Agha Hasan Abedi, the shadowy Pakistani businessman who founded the infamous Bank of Commerce and Credit International, which cheated depositors in more than 70 countries out of $15 billion, died yesterday at the Aga Khan Hospital in Karachi.
He was 74 and had been in ill health since heart attacks forced him to withdraw from the bank in 1988.
Starting in 1972 with a $2.5 million investment by the ruler of Abu Dhabi, Mr.
Abedi built B.C.C.I. into an international financial force.
At its peak in the 1980's, the bank had 14,000 employees, 400 offices in 72 countries, 1.3 million depositors and more than $20 billion in assets, at least on paper.


False Passports
In my long and ongoing search for a home -- not a physical haven but a moral and philosophical one, in the company of kindred spirits -- I have packaged myself at various stages as a hippie, an uptown preppy, a downtown artist, a Left Bank intellectual.
There was some truth to all of these impersonations -- some part of me that identified with people of a certain kind and wanted to be accepted by them.
I studied the nuances of their style, the signals by which they recognized each other as one of their own.
In a process that was more unconscious than calculated, I found myself dressing more and more in the manner of the people whose company I was keeping at the time, whoever they happened to be.
And so I mastered the way the Park Avenue Republicans tied their scarves.
Or I wore mismatched clothes I'd found at the thrift shop.
Or, sitting at a cafe in Paris, I applied my lipstick the way the student at the table next to mine had applied hers.
Eventually, the members of the particular club to which I aspired took me in, if only on a trial basis.
My clothes professed my solidarity: I subscribed to their politics, their ethics, their esthetics.
But it was just a matter of time before it became apparent to them and to me that there was something disingenuous about my appearance, that I was not the person I purported to be -- that I was in fact a chronic misfit in disguise.
Along with the clothes, I was trying on an identity, neither of which suited me in the long run.


Work at Home? Secret Vices?
From Mallomars to reruns of M*A*S*H, home has distractions for workers that the office-bound cannot conceive.
If you work at home and have hidden workday pastimes or habits, send your story to On the Job, Money and Business, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Or by E-mail to onthejob@nytimes.com.
Include your phone number.
All submissions become the property of The Times and may be republished in any medium.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
STORIES AT SUNNYSIDE
Kenneth Little Hawk, an Indian of Mohawk and Micmac descent, and Motoko, a mime and storyteller with a repertoire of Asian folk tales, will be among the entertainers at today's storytelling festival at Sunnyside.
Honoring Washington Irving -- no slouch at storytelling himself -- this is the fifth such gathering at his historic home in Tarrytown.
From 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M., a new entertainer will appear every half-hour somewhere on the grounds.
Many will be familiar to visitors who attended previous festivals.
Linda Russell recounts true stories of 19th-century women, Jonathan Kruk is well known for his Hudson River Valley folk tales, and Marianne McShane brings a Gaelic lilt to her recitations.


And This Little Piggy Stayed Off the Platter
Babe  James Cromwell and the voices of Christine Cavanaugh, Miriam Margolyes, Danny Mann and Miriam Flynn Directed by Chris Noonan G 91 minutes


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a table last Sunday with an article about mutual funds that try to take advantage of corporate mergers misstated the period for which the returns were calculated.
It was the 12 months ended July 26, not from the beginning of 1995.


Seat Belts Go On When the States Crack Down
ONLY about 66 percent of Americans in cars use seat belts, but the National Transportation Safety Board says there is a simple way to increase compliance: Just tell people they must, forcefully.
Although 48 states already do so (every state but Maine and New Hampshire), enforcement of seat belt laws differs.
Only 9 states have a "primary" seat belt law, meaning that the police will pull over a driver because someone in the car was unbelted; 39 others have "secondary" laws, meaning that officers will issue a ticket only if they stop the car for some other violation.


Senate Limits Federal Funds For Abortions
In its first direct action on abortion this year, the Senate voted today to bar the use of Government money to pay for most abortions for Federal workers, but it rejected a stricter measure that the House had adopted.
Meeting in a rare Saturday session, senators approved by a 50-to-44 vote an amendment to a spending bill that lets Federal health insurance cover abortions only in cases of rape or incest or when the woman's life is in danger.


Democrats Dispute Nassau Executive's Budget
The Nassau County Executive, Thomas S. Gulotta, proposed a $2.1 billion budget last week that he said would cut property taxes while maintaining essential services.
But Democratic members of the County Board of Supervisors have charged that Mr.
Gulotta over-estimated projected revenues and other funds by more than $100 million.


On 53d Street: Planters 1, Vendors 0
Food vendors have a new battlefront in their city turf wars, on 53d Street just west of the Avenue of the Americas.
And they complain that they are suffering from devastating new weaponry: planters.
For nearly two years, several carts have clustered along the curb on 53d, dispensing standard sidewalk snacks like hot dogs, pizza, gyros, pretzels and sodas to midtown's ambulatory lunch crowd.


Introduction to the World of Peeping Toms, Binoculars and Headset Included
The politely grinning Chinese diplomat peered mesmerized through his binoculars at a couple writhing on a bed next to a window of the Radisson Empire Hotel on Lincoln Square.
So did two middle-aged women, one of whom nudged the other and exclaimed, "Oh my goodness! Do you see what I see?"


Connecticut Gives Raises to Two Coaches
Big seasons on the basketball court have resulted in big pay raises for the Connecticut coaches JIM CALHOUN and GENO AURIEMMA.
The university's board of trustees Friday approved a four-year contract for Auriemma, coach of the national champion women's team, that will boost his annual compensation from $96,236 to $170,000.


Attacks Near Bar Raise Neo-Nazi Fears
The East Village, long one of the most diverse and democratic neighborhoods of the city, is also one that attracts disaffected young people from other areas.
Over time, that has meant anarchists and punks and, more recently, multiracial skinheads.
And, say the police and local residents, that helps explain two incidents near a working-class bar on Sixth Street, the Cherry Tavern, that landed two men in a hospital, one with a fractured skull, the other with a concussion.
But the incidents have started a storm of accusations that the Cherry Tavern is a hangout for neo-Nazis.


Japanese Leaders Call for Bans on Nuclear Arms and Tests
On a still, peaceful morning like the one 50 years ago when this city was obliterated, tens of thousands of Japanese gathered near the epicenter of the atomic bombing to remember the dead and call for bans on nuclear testing and nuclear weapons.
"As the only country in the history of humankind to experience the devastation of atomic bombing, Japan has held a firm determination that the tragedies of Hiroshima and Nagasaki never happen again," Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama declared to those gathered for the ceremony, including many graying survivors with faces still scarred by the bombing.


Credit Is Due The Treasury
To the Editor:
After nearly 30 years of scholarship in the field of government patronage of the arts, it is disconcerting to find an old misconception, that the WPA Federal Arts Project was responsible for murals in post offices, appearing in a page-one article of the Arts and Leisure section  [ "When the Art Is Public, the Making Is, Too," July 23 ] .
It was a point that marred Robert Atkins's otherwise fascinating and timely account of the creation of Judy Pfaff's sculpture "cirque, Cirque" at the Pennsylvania Convention Center in Philadelphia.


QUIZ
Fifty years after the end of World War II, these illustrations remain enduring images of that great conflict.
Test your knowledge of some major events and symbols of the war by placing the number of the item(s) on the list beneath the appropriate illustrations.  1.
Omaha Beach
2. Warsaw Ghetto
3. Yalta
4. Manhattan Project
5. "Kilroy Was Here"
6. "Sieg Heil"
7. Tuskegee Airmen
8. Day of Infamy
9. Normandy
10. Oahu
11. Enola Gay
12. Auschwitz
13. G.I. "signature"
14. Victory
15. "Fight for the Right to Fight"
16. General Dwight D. Eisenhower
17. Nagasaki
18. Final Solution
19. Crimea
20. The U.S.S. Missouri
21. "Making History, Working for Victory"
22. J. Robert Oppenheimer
23. U.S. Marines
24. Mein Kampf
25. Operation Overlord
26. Dec. 7, 1941
27. National Socialism
28. Sept. 2, 1945
29. Allied Powers
30. The U.S.S. Arizona
31. Rosie
32. Kristallnacht
33. Hiroshima
34. June 6, 1944
35.
Mount Suribachi Quiz Answers  A. (D-Day invasion of Normandy): 1, 9, 16, 25, 34.
B. (Marines raising American flag at Iwo Jima): 23, 35.
C. (The Japanese surrender): 20, 28.
D. (One of America's women wartime workers, symbolized by the fictional "Rosie the Riveter"): 21, 31.
E. (Graffiti drawn by G.I.'s all over WWII war zones): 5, 13.
F. (Mushroom cloud formed by atomic bomb explosion): 4, 11, 17, 22, 33.
G. (Nazi salute): 6, 24, 27.
H. (Star of David worn by Jews in Nazi-occupied Europe): 2, 12, 18, 32.
I. (Franklin D. Roosevelt, Winston Churchill and Stalin at Yalta): 3, 19, 29.
J. (Aftermath of Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor): 8, 10, 26, 30.
K. (The Allied sign for victory): 14.
L. (Tuskegee airmen, the nation's first all-black fighter pilot unit): 7, 15.


Old, Outmoded or Decrepit, Schools Statewide Are Desperate for Renewal
In August, the silence that pervades this town's musty schools makes their problems more obvious.
At one middle school, a restroom floor is sagging.
In a high school cafeteria, an ominous crack is creeping across the wall.
Another high school's ceiling is riddled with leaks.


In the Pines, Tradition Still Calls the Tune
THEY seem to be headed slowly toward extinction," John McPhee wrote in "The Pine Barrens," his 1967 elegy on the million-acre sprawl of gnarled pitch-pine forest, cedar lakes, meandering rivers and coastal wetlands that sit incongruously in the middle of the Eastern Seaboard megalopolis.
Today, the Jersey Pines continue their slow retreat, nuzzled by bulldozers, gnawed by politically savvy developers.
The Pine roads resound with the inexorable march of the convenience stores.


ON THE BORDER OF LIFE
Frey's revealing look at neonatology illustrates the irrationality of a society and a health care system that glorifies technological marvels without regard for the future quality of the lives saved.
To leave a decision about the viability of such a premature infant to parents under stress, without informing them of the long-term implications of raising a severely handicapped child, is immoral.
I was struck by the absence of mental health professionals and medical ethicists to advise the parents and staff.
LAWRENCE PERLMAN New York


Junk Bondage
PAYBACK  The Conspiracy to Destroy Michael Milken and His Financial Revolution.
By Daniel Fischel. 332 pp.
New York: Harper Business. $25.


The Antidote Is Civilization
We were driving north from an ancient farmhouse in Tuscany where, for two weeks, life had been as untamed as an Italian hillside.
The three of us were headed to the south of France, headed away from anarchy toward order.
Our American friend in Mougins had a baronial estate, and his fastidious nature was right at home in France, with its meticulous social order and intractable customs.
Whatever anxiety each of us felt about moving in this direction, we kept to ourselves.
Before the Fiat had even lurched up the road toward the highway, we'd agreed on where to stop for lunch and dinner, planning to use whatever roads happened to connect the spots.


State Can Charge Companies To Monitor Their Waste Cleanups
General Electric and Du Pont may not have asked the State Department of Environmental Protection to monitor their hazardous waste cleanups, but they have to pay for the service anyway, a state appeals panel ruled on Tuesday.


Top Chefs Assembling For 2 Major Tastings For Charitable Causes
PARTY foods were once incidental at Hamptons galas.
Now food parties are among the main events.
Two big ones are on the August agenda.
The Taste of the Hamptons, a pioneer of the genre, in its seventh year as a benefit for the Family Service League, will be held on Saturday from 5:30 to 8 P.M. at the estate of Walter and Molly Channing in Bridgehampton.
On Aug. 26 the James Beard Foundation will be the host of Chefs and Champagne from 5 to 8 P.M. at the Mark Humphrey estate in Water Mill, overlooking Mecox Bay.


Far From Awful
To the Editor:
Bernard Holland's essay "Hero to the Bad and Truly Awful"  [ July 23 ]  strains the bounds of fairness the way Stefan Zucker strains his voice as the "world's highest tenor."


IN SHORT: FICTION
HIGHWAYS TO A WAR  By Christopher J. Koch. Viking, $23.95.


From an Oyster Nook, Right Price and Taste
EIGHT oysters on the half shell ordered at a new Hamptons spot cost $23, or nearly $3 each.
A few days later eight oysters of the same quality, size and type ordered at the Oyster Bay Clam Bar cost $4.80, or 60 cents each.
Few dishes are as consistently overpriced as fresh, simply prepared seafood like oysters and clams on the half shell and steamers.
They do not require the skill of a Cordon Bleu chef in designer whites.
They do not taste any better at an expensive, palatial restaurant than they do at a tiny, rustic spot like the Oyster Bay Clam Bar, 105 Route 106 (922-9795).


What Colleges Should Really Teach
In "College Defends Sex Education Materials"  [ July 16 ] , Dr.
Sean Fanelli states, "The last time an external group imposed a curriculum was in Germany in 1938." He undoubtedly lived through -- or slept through -- the United States student movement of the late 60's.
At that time the universities failed to resist the popular movements that affected their curriculum, which apparently plagues Nassau Community College's curriculum today.


Knish or Kimchi: Last Kosher Deli Shuts on Union Street
There was no going-out-of-business sale of pastrami and pickles, no sign in the window or on the wall.
The demise of Flushing's last kosher delicatessen came quietly.
The restaurant, Flushing Delight, at 29-20 Union Street, shut and locked its metal gates one night last month for the last time.
It became another lost remnant of a fading community.


SUNDAY, August 6, 1995; A QUESTION FOR: The Ramones
Q: What do you think you'll be doing 20 years from now?
A, Joey: Pursuing a solo career.
Some jazz greats are creeping into their 90's and still going.
They have, like, this gift coagulated in their guts.
They have to play, and I'm just the same way.
Johnny: Hopefully just sitting around.
I've never had any big aspirations and I've traveled enough for one lifetime.
The only nice place I've never visited is Hong Kong.
I like the movies they have there.
All I want to do, really, is work on my baseball collection.
I collect 8-by-10 glossies, and I write players, asking, "Will you sign this photo of yourself for my baseball collection?" I got the biggest collection in the country -- 4,250 players.
I got some guys with just one game, no at-bats.
But, hey, they played Major League ball.
If you do one memorable thing in your life, you're doing pretty good.


I Got the Horse Right Here
THE early-morning sun burned, and a gentle breeze from the Atlantic was just beginning to kick in at Monmouth Park race track.
No question, it was a great day to watch Grandson Johnny get a lip tattoo.
Pressed against the paddock rail, a crowd of apprehensive parents and truly curious youngsters watched as Johnny, a mild-mannered 2-year-old bay, submitted to a fearsome-looking clamp that turned up his upper lip and exposed the inside skin.
Denny Mace, the track's horse identifier, went to work with inked metal stamps, pressing in a code letter to indicate Johnny's year of birth, then four numbers, registered with the Jockey Club, that constitute a kind of horse license plate.
The job done, Johnny gave a nice "cheese" for a flash camera held right up to his muzzle.
The show was over, and the audience of about 50 broke into applause.


Corrections
The article on July 16 about District Attorney Lynne Abraham of Philadelphia referred incorrectly to Judge Albert F. Sabo.
He still sits on the Common Pleas Court in Philadelphia, and is not retired.


IN SHORT: FICTION
TOPPING FROM BELOW  By Laura Reese. St. Martin's, $22.95.


July 30-Aug. 5: Sex Harassment, Part III; A 'White Problem' Comes to Zimbabwe's Fair
Robert Mugabe, the President of Zimbabwe, has long had a distaste for homosexuality.
Some years ago, when he was asked about the debate in the United States over whether to let gays serve in the military, he dismissed homosexuality as "a white problem."
Now he has made gay rights his own problem.
As he had threatened, he barred a gay and lesbian contingent from opening a booth at the Zimbabwe International Book Fair last week, and said in his speech opening the event that it was "extremely outrageous and repugnant" that homosexuals, whom he called "perverts and sodomites," had any supporters at all.


Clench Fist, Say No To Watching Tyson
Mike Tyson finally gets to stick his big, bad face back in harm's way for pay in 13 days, but that's not going to solve our Tyson problem.
"Should we root for Mike Tyson?" asked the thoughtful Sports Illustrated cover story last month, and then answered, thoughtfully: Well, yes and no.
But the question is on the money; it is ultimately up to us, not Tyson, to answer the moral bell.
Iron Mike is fighting because we want him to; we really want to see him drive a nose bone into a brain pan.
We'll blame him for it afterward, and act a little ashamed.


BACKTALK: Ripken Should Keep Going and Going and. . .; A Better Streak
The headline on Robert Lipsyte's column last week presented his point of view: "Baseball Needs Ripken to Take a Day Off." Letter writers overwhelmingly disagreed.
To the Sports Editor:
Lipsyte's piece is a little hard to respond to because it doesn't advance an argument, or even any reasons, why Ripken should disappear.
Apparently it has something to do with the fact that the challenger doesn't suffer from a degenerative disease.
Perhaps the best response is to show why Ripken's achievement, assuming he avoids injury, will exceed Gehrig's.


Big-City Drama, A Window At a Time
A new performance piece gives many voyeurs a license to look, Aug. 3.


Wendy Slaughter, Paul Curran Jr.
Wendy Wells Slaughter, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Terry W. Slaughter of Salinas, Calif., was married yesterday to Paul Jerome Curran Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Curran of New York.
The Rev.
Edward F. Maloney, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony in the Rosary Chapel at the Santa Catalina School in Monterey, Calif.
The bride, 28, and the bridegroom, 27, are advertising account executives based in San Francisco.
She works for United Television Sales and he for Blair Television.
Mrs.
Curran graduated from Santa Catalina and the University of Colorado at Boulder.
Mr.
Curran graduated from Georgetown University.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
ONCE UPON A TIME: A Floating Opera By John Barth.
Back Bay/Little, Brown, $12.95.
The hero of the author's 11th work of fiction has his creator's name and many of his identifying characteristics.
But nothing else -- including the flow of time itself -- occurs in the expected manner.
This autobiography-cum-novel "is brilliantly conceived, elegantly written, bursting with life," R. H. W. Dillard said here last year.
THE STRUGGLE FOR RUSSIA By Boris Yeltsin.
Translated by Catherine A.  Fitzpatrick.
Times Books/Random House, $14.
This memoir by a man who is his country's first freely elected leader has been reissued with an index (the hard-cover edition lacked one) and a new preface that refers to the events in Chechnya.
But here, as in the rest of his book, Mr.
Yeltsin makes a plea for popular support for a reformed but unified nation.
As a member of Stalin's security forces, Pavel Sudoplatov participated in numerous murders and oversaw atomic espionage in Britain and the United States.
Although last year our reviewer, Adam B. Ulam, cautioned against taking Mr.
Sudoplatov's statements at face value, he found "Special Tasks" "a valuable document and very readable." MR.
VERTIGO By Paul Auster.
Penguin, $10.95.
This novel concerns the career of a St.
Louis orphan named Walt, who is plucked from the streets in 1924 by a charismatic sage named Master Yehudi.
Yehudi gets both Walt and the story off the ground by teaching the boy to fly.
The tale "is witty, inventive in its language and invitingly playful with its metaphors," Jay Cantor wrote in the Book Review last year.
THE DUKE ELLINGTON READER Edited by Mark Tucker.
Oxford University, $15.95.
No one, it seems, had a halfhearted opinion either about jazz or about the man who created some of its most famous compositions.
This collection includes praise, criticism and even some of Ellington's own words.
It "is full of excellent writing," our reviewer, Peter Keepnews, said in 1993.
Oxford is also the publisher of JAZZ: The American Theme Song, by James Lincoln Collier ($12.95), which seeks to subvert some time-honored dogmas concerning the music's roots.
In doing so Mr.
Collier "mounts an impressive examination of Creole culture," Russell Davies wrote in these pages in 1993.
THE PRINCE OF WEST END AVENUE By Alan Isler.
Penguin, $9.95.
Otto Korner, Holocaust survivor and published poet, is the resident of a Manhattan retirement home that is mounting a production of "Hamlet." As Otto explores the theatrical milieu of his present, he is drawn into the dark world of his Auschwitz past in a story that "is able to haunt us," Bette Pesetsky said here last year.
LOOKING AT THE SUN: The Rise of the New East Asian Economic and Political System By James Fallows.
Vintage, $14.
The author analyzes the strength of Japanese industrial policies, arguing that the Asian tendency to ignore standard laissez-faire doctrine should be a cautionary lesson to the West.
Last year our reviewer, F. M. Scherer, said he "provides fascinating insights."  I AM SNOWING: The Confessions of a Woman of Prague By Pavel Kohout.
Translated by Neil Bermel.
Harvest/ Harcourt Brace, $13.
Written by a Czech author once exiled as a dissident, this novel is narrated by Petra Marova, who is confused by the conflicting claims of her lovers and by the new choices of capitalism.
It "is undeniably impressive," John Bayley said in the Book Review last year.
The same publisher has also reissued a novella by another dissident author, the Chilean Luis Sepulveda.
THE OLD MAN WHO READ LOVE STORIES, ($8), centers on an elderly settler in the Amazon who is asked to lead an expedition to track an ocelot that has been killing white prospectors.
"Readers will be enchanted by this finely wrought tale," David Unger wrote here in 1994.
ABDUCTION: Human Encounters With Aliens By John Mack.
Ballantine, $6.99.
Including a new preface in which the author, a Harvard psychiatrist, addresses his critics, this book explains his research into the experiences of people who claim to have been contacted by extraterrestrials.
Last year our reviewer, James S. Gordon, felt that Dr.
Mack's investigations, while not entirely convincing, were still "fascinating, suggestive and even inspiring."  AVA By Carole Maso.
Dalkey Archive, $12.95.
Written in staccato sentences that reveal the second-by-second images traversing a woman's mind, this novel unfolds on a single day in the life of a college professor stricken with cancer -- her last.
It "uses repetition and thematic layering to create a shimmering, impressionistic portrait that eschews linear narrative," Wendy Smith said in the Book Review in 1993.
UN-AMERICAN ACTIVITIES: A Memoir of the Fifties.
By Sally Belfrage.
Harper Perennial, $13.
The author tried hard to be the pert blond cheerleader the era demanded, but even in high school she had too much baggage: her British parents were former Communists and ultimately deported.
She "is a sharp, unsentimental observer," Elinor Langer wrote here in 1994.
LAUREL GRAEBER


Ellen Horan, L. E. Playford
Ellen Margaret Horan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred R. Horan of New York, was married yesterday to Lawrence Edward Playford, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence E. Playford of Westfield, N.J.
Msgr.
Joseph P. Bynon performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
Mrs.
Playford, 26, is the assistant controller at the Lighthouse, a rehabilitation agency for the blind in New York.
She graduated from Skidmore College.
Her father retired as the special-events coordinator for the Salvation Army of Nassau County, in Mineola, L.I.


Brooklyn Friends: Still Keeping the Precepts
Every Wednesday afternoon, a handful of the 200 or so active members of the Brooklyn Monthly Meeting, the local Quaker congregation, gather silently outside the State Supreme Court Building to protest the recently enacted death penalty.
It is not the Quakers' only quarrel with a court in Brooklyn.
For 138 years, Quakers have worshiped in the Friends Meeting House, a simple red-brick Greek Revival building on Schermerhorn Street at Boerum Place.
Now, they fear that a plan for a 12-story annex to the Brooklyn Criminal Court building two doors down will block light that streams through the Meeting House's 16-foot windows.
They are also concerned that noise from the annex will interrupt silent services they hold on Tuesdays and Sundays, and that a larger court will draw even more traffic to the neighborhood's crowded streets.


Angry Bomber Or Shy Youth: Two Portraits
In the two and a half years since the bombing of the World Trade Center, Eyad Ismail had led a seemingly mundane existence at his family's stone house in northern Jordan, where he was glued to American situation comedies on television, adopted stray cats and talked about parlaying a future computer degree into the good life the family had lost.
Relatives depict him as placid and apolitical, displaying a temper only when he lashed out at anyone who disturbed the calm with a yell or other loud noise.
"He would always say to us, 'You have to be quiet, don't be speaking in a loud voice,' " his sister Feryal said.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
HARLEM  A 19-Day Week Of Celebration
It started 21 years ago as a one-day celebration of Harlem.
This year, Harlem Week is running for 19 days with concerts, films, basketball competitions, a carnival and a conference on economic development.
The activities, most of which are free, will be held throughout the sprawling, diverse community.
"This is our festival to showcase Harlem in a positive light," said Marko Nobles, a spokesman for the event.
"The mood of Harlem changes during this time."
Through Aug. 27, the Museum of African-American History and Arts will show films daily as part of the 1995 Harlem Week Black Film Festival in the art gallery of the Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
State Building, 163 West 125th Street, at Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard.
The Harlem Carnival will take place Thursday at noon at 123d Street and Morningside Avenue.
Harlem Week; for more information and a schedule of events: (212) 427-3315.
VAN CORTLANDT PARK  A Musical Mosaic: Rag, Pops and Bach
The Bronx Arts Ensemble's Summermusic concert series continues Sundays through Aug. 27.
The ensemble is made up of a core group of about 15 freelance musicians playing the flute, oboe, clarinet, bassoon, horn, violin, viola, cello and bass.
On Sundays the group plays outdoors at 2 P.M. at the Rockwood Drive Circle in Van Cortlandt Park (near Mosholu Parkway and Broadway) and then again indoors at 4 P.M. at McGinley Center at Fordham University, Bronx Rose Hill Campus at Southern Boulevard.
Concerts, different each weekend, include the Brass Pops today, Ragtime Favorites on Aug. 13, Latin American Celebration on Aug. 20 and Bach Festival on Aug. 27.
Bronx Arts Ensemble; for information and directions call (718) 601-7399.
FLUSHING  Call: Save Qu Yuan!
Response: What, Again?
The dragons are coming back to the lake in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park today with the fifth annual Hong Kong Dragon Boat Festival.
The boats, which are 39 feet long, have dragon heads at the prow and tails at the stern.
Each is powered by a team of 20.
The race is based on an ancient Asian legend, said Melinda Parsons of the Hong Kong Government office in New York.
Around 400 B.C., Qu Yuan, a court minister who was loved by the people but not by the king, was banished.
For a time, he wandered about the countryside, writing poetry, but he eventually decided to drown himself in a river.
Local fishermen raced to save him, but in vain.
Their rescue dash is re-enacted in the dragon boat race.
Six boats will race today, and the championship will be decided next Sunday.
Hong Kong Boat Festival, Meadow Lake in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park; today, 1 P.M. to 4 P.M., and next Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; free; (212) 629-0370.
ALSO AROUND TOWN CHILL OUT Central Park Wildlife Center, Fifth Avenue at 64th Street; weekend-long event focusing on polar bears and penguins; games and crafts; $2.50 for adults, 50 cents for children 3 to 12, $1.25 for the elderly; (212) 861-6030.
HEALTH FAIR Diagnostic screenings, demonstrations by the Fire and Police Departments, massages and information on subjects like baby care, victim counseling and services for the elderly; Wednesday; Townsend Avenue between Mount Eden and East 174th Street; food, entertainment; (718) 716-8000.
HIROSHIMA A silent peace walk in remembrance of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki 50 years ago will start at the New York Buddhist Church on Riverside Drive between 105th and 106th Streets and continue north to Riverside Church at 122d Street; today, 1 P.M. to 4 P.M.; (212) 678-0305.
MONIQUE P. YAZIGI


DIARY
Media And Then There Was One It was a truly unbelievable week.
The Walt Disney Company surprised everybody by announcing on Monday that it would buy Capital Cities/ABC for $19 billion, in what would be the second-largest takeover ever.
Then on Tuesday, in a deal that surprised almost no one, Westinghouse said it would buy CBS for $5.4 billion.
Of course, all eyes then turned to NBC, like, "Isn't it your turn on Wednesday?" NBC's president, Robert C. Wright, jokingly said, "We're the small guy just trying to make it in the business," but then acknowledged that he received "a lot of phone calls this week" from interested companies.
As they say in the television business, stay tuned.
Technology Is This Goodbye to OS/2?
There is MS-DOS, there is Microsoft Windows.
There is even the Apple Macintosh operating system.
But of the software that runs personal computers, there had barely been I.B.M.'s OS/2.
While Microsoft's operating system software controlled about 76 percent of the market in 1994 and the Macintosh 12 percent, I.B.M.'s OS/2 had 5 percent.
Analysts have been predicting that I.B.M. would stop development of the software in January.
Louis V. Gerstner, I.B.M.'s chief executive, didn't confirm that last week, but appeared to concede the battle to Microsoft.
Obsessing about operating systems, he told a meeting of analysts, is "fighting the last war," adding later, that it is "too late to go after the desktop." A fact that was probably obvious to most of the analysts in the audience years ago.
Trade O.K., Stop All This 'Nice' Talk Sometimes speaking sensibly doesn't pay.
Jeffrey E. Garten, the Under Secretary of Commerce for International Trade, learned that last week after he made a speech in Tokyo calling for the United States and Japan to basically be nicer to each other in trade negotiations.
"A relationship between the world's two biggest trading nations that is characterized by one trade confrontation after another seems as anachronistic as the old gunboat diplomacy," he said.
The Japanese reacted cautiously, saying, "I don't think this is official U.S. policy." Good call.
The next day, Commerce Secretary Ron Brown said his aide was not speaking for the Administration.
"All of us at the Commerce Department, Jeff included," Mr.
Brown said, "ought to have absolutely unassailable credibility on the Japan issue; we were the tough guys." Sounds like the days of "Speak softly and carry a big stick" are over.
Currency A Boost for the Dollar At least the Americans and the Japanese are doing something together.
On Wednesday, they jointly sold about $1 billion worth of yen in an attempt to strengthen the dollar.
The Japanese also moved to change the rules on overseas investments that will make it easier for institutions to invest abroad.
All this action sent the dollar up 3.3 percent, pushing it above 90 yen for the first time in more than four months.
And Administration officials did nothing to discourage traders from speculating that the United States would intervene again.
As Mr.
Garten was trying to say, a little cooperation goes a long way.
Airlines F.A.A.
Grounds an Airline You don't have to sit around a campfire at midnight to hear scary stories.
The F.A.A. last week grounded Markair, a small airline in Denver that serves such cities as Chicago, New York, and Los Angeles.
It carries about 4,000 passengers a day.
At least it used to.
The F.A.A. claims that the airline left several key positions vacant, including its manager of maintenance control, manager of maintenance and chief inspector.
The company's vice president of operations is also serving as vice president of maintenance, "a split of duties which does not permit him to devote adequate attention to the responsibilities of the latter position." The F.A.A. also said the company "failed to track and act upon information pertaining to the mechanical performance of its aircraft, engines and aircraft components." Scared yet?
The F.A.A. obviously was.
Telecommunications Earnings Up, Employees Down Your company has just reported that its quarterly earnings jumped 21 percent.
The growth in sales of its main product outpaced any of its rivals.
Life is good.
Not at MCI, where they want life to get much better.
Along with all that good news, the long-distance telephone company on Wednesday also announced a major restructuring.
It will dismiss 2,500 to 3,000 employees by the end of the year, write off obsolete assets and possibly issue special classes of stock tied to parts of its business.
Analysts said MCI wanted to make its stock more attractive.
It rose 62.5 cents on Wednesday, but then fell 50 cents on Thursday and barely moved on Friday.
Wonder what the company has up its sleeve next?
Corporations Why Not White Plains?
Prodigy Services was all set to move its headquarters from relatively quiet White Plains to hip Manhattan.
Then on Wednesday, the on-line computer services company said it would remain in White Plains, but would open a 50-person office in Manhattan.
Why?
The company says the larger move would have been disruptive.
Analysts had a more intriguing reason.
They said there was a struggle between longtime executives who are wary of radical change and newer executives who see a Manhattan move as a way to help the company appeal to a younger crowd.
The New York office was seen as a compromise.
Prodigy is owned by Sears and I.B.M.
Sears moved most of its employees out of bustling downtown Chicago a few years ago and set them up in a nearby suburb out on the prairie.
I.B.M. is headquartered in Armonk.
Looks like those youngsters at Prodigy better get used to White Plains.
Appliances If I Only Had a Brain Just what we need, a refrigerator that's smarter than we are.
Refrigerators have had a reputation for being dumb.
Electronically, even a doorbell is considered smarter, which in the world of appliances must be the ultimate put-down.
The Whirlpool Corporation and Amana Refrigeration are now making refrigerators equipped with microprocessors that tell these former dumb boxes when to defrost.
Another company is also coming out with a computerized timer that will shift the defrosting to nighttime when electric rates are cheaper.
It'll almost be as if they had brains.
Maybe now they'll be able to answer the puzzling refrigerator question: "Is it cold in here or is it just me?"


Letter: On Municipal Unions; New York Achieves Labor Savings
To the Editor:
Your July 25 news article and July 30 editorial on Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's labor policy, while acknowledging "significant accomplishments," nonetheless overlook other achievements of this policy, as well as labor's contributions:


Here's a Cushion for a Bumpy Ride
THE stock market continues to soar.
It also continues to dip, most recently two-and-a-half weeks ago, when the Dow Jones industrial average fell 132 points in the course of a day's trading.
How can investors handle a market that travels fast -- in either direction?


Shelley's Heart
To the Editor:
I read with interest Robert McCrum's review of "Shelley's Heart," by Charles McCarry (June 25).
I agree with Mr.
McCrum's statement that the novel's title demands explanation, but he neglected to mention the well-documented story of Percy Bysshe Shelley's actual heart.


The Devolution Revolution
A considerable debate has commenced in the Senate, but it is not, as commonly portrayed, about welfare.
The subject, rather, is the devolution -- "causing to descend" -- of social welfare programs from the Federal Government to the states.
This takes the form of block grants.
It may well prove the next stage in the long, alternating history of federalism.
At issue is the political economy of the New Deal, or at least a goodly portion of it.
As a matter of policy, the New Deal brought about a great shift in resources from the North to the South and West.
At the same time, New Deal policies brought a great measure of support for the dependent poor, not least in New York State (which, adjusting the cost of living, now has the sixth highest poverty rate in the nation.) Devolution might ease the former problem while hugely worsening the latter.


When Health Care And Self-Interest Collide
To the Editor:
I hope that doctors, hospital administrators and health care policy makers will take note of the fact that 60 percent of baby boomers "believe they deserve an inheritance" ("Of Inheritance and Ruptured Relations: A Final Accounting," Spending It, July 9).


Can the Garment District Refashion Itself?
BUD KONHEIM is the fourth-generation of his family to make a living in the city's garment trade.
But not long after the industry began its long, slow decline, Mr.
Konheim was on the front lines of the exodus of manufacturers from the Garment District to foreign factories where labor was much cheaper.
"We were one of the first ones to go to Hong Kong in the 70's," said Mr.
Konheim, then managing director at P. J. Walsh, the predecessor to Nicole Miller Ltd., the women's high-end apparel company where he is chief executive officer.


Tyson &amp; Co. Get Back to the Basics
Mike Tyson had a private life: prison.
All the reading turned him near-sighted.
All the bland food left him gaunt.
All the down time healed his knuckles.
He had no calendar at his disposal, but a 90-year-old woman and her sidekick knocked on his glass window every Thanksgiving and every birthday -- like clockwork -- and promised his room would still be there when the three years were up.
When the warden unlatched the front gate this March, Mike Tyson remembered.
He dropped off his books and toothbrush at his Ohio mansion, then headed for the hills.
By the time he reached the Catskills, it was midafternoon and the Hudson River was tranquil, and Camille D'Amato wrapped her frail arms around him.


Relay Could Be Johnson's 4th Gold at Championships
The legend of Michael Johnson continued to grow today when he volunteered to run a leg on the United States 400-meter relay team that was devastated by an injury to Dennis Mitchell, who had been scheduled to run the anchor leg next Sunday.
Already, Johnson is attempting an unprecedented double victory at 200 and 400 meters at the world championships.
He is also scheduled to run the 1,600-meter relay final on Aug. 13.
Now he may enter a fourth race.
Mitchell suffered a cramped quadriceps muscle in the first round of the 100 meters today and withdrew after 30 meters, aggravating a training injury suffered five days ago in Monaco.


Most Russians Suffer a Decline in Health; Rampant Drug Abuse
To the Editor:
Re "Plunging Life Expectancy Puzzles Russia" (front page, Aug. 1): In June, I participated in a symposium in Moscow sponsored by the Narcological Association of the Russian Federation.
Experts reported sharply rising rates of alcohol-related oncology due to toxins in many alcohol products, and 54,000 deaths in 1994 due to alcohol poisonings.


Making Peace With the Small Screen
To Woody Allen fans, it might seem a sacrilege.
But once, a television network tried to censor one of the funniest lines in one of the funniest films Mr.
Allen has ever made.
The bit was in "Annie Hall," in a scene in which a child watches as his buffoonish uncle slaps a nickel onto his forehead.
Appalled, the boy, wise beyond his years, turns to the camera and utters a mild expletive describing his foolish relative to a T.


A RESCUE WITHOUT CHEERS
I'm sure that Peter Kramer's About Men column "A Rescue Without Cheers" (July 16) rang true for a lot of frustrated white people.
Most won't have experienced anything as powerful as Kramer's story of reviving a drowning, black teen-ager only to have his efforts rewarded with hostility and suspicion.
But getting a cold stare from black parents on the subway -- making it clear that you are not welcome to interact with their playful child -- is enough to leave you feeling unwelcome.


Grass-Roots Banking Also Works at Home
To the Editor:
"Global Grass-Roots Banking" (editorial, July 27) describes the success of the Grameen Bank in Bangladesh in providing loans for as little as $100 at low interest rates with no collateral required except the borrower's word, with a repayment record of 97 percent.


Not to Be Seen
To the Sports Editor:
I was saddened by the death of Fabio Casartelli and was stunned at the huge photo of the cyclist -- shown on the ground, dying shortly after the crash -- that ran in the July 19 sports pages.


Pulsipher Gets a Loss And Learns A Lesson
Before arriving at Shea Stadium on Friday night for the start of a four-game series with the Mets, the Florida Marlins slugger Jeff Conine had missed a week's worth of games with a sprained left shoulder.
Common sense might suggest he could have some trouble with his swing.
Guess again.
Conine powered a three-run homer in the eighth inning off Bill Pulsipher last night to ignite Florida to a 6-3 victory over the Mets and extend both teams' respective streaks.
It was a franchise-record eighth straight victory for the suddenly unbeatable Marlins and fifth straight loss for the when-will-it-end Mets.


On 53d Street: Planters 1, Vendors 0
Food vendors have a new battlefront in their city turf wars, on 53d Street just west of the Avenue of the Americas.
And they complain that they are suffering from devastating new weaponry: planters.
For nearly two years, several carts have clustered along the curb on 53d, dispensing standard sidewalk snacks like hot dogs, pizza, gyros, pretzels and sodas to midtown's ambulatory lunch crowd.


Carol Pfeiffer, Barry Doyle
Carol Ann Pfeiffer, the daughter of Genevieve and Robert Pfeiffer of Caldwell, N.J., was married there yesterday to Edmund Barry Doyle Jr., a son of Angela and Edmund Doyle of Litchfield, Conn.
The Rev.
John J. Laferrera performed the ceremony at St.
Aloysius Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Doyle, 38, is a managing director of Fitch Investors Service, a bond rating agency in New York.
She graduated from Bucknell University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father retired as an environmental engineer for the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
Her mother retired as a tax preparer for H &amp; R Block in West Caldwell, N.J.


Widows' Lives, Letting Go and Moving On
IN this state, "The Cemetery Club" has come full circle, from play in progress to its predetermined fate in summer stock.
En route, Ivan Menchell's comedy about three Jewish widows who visit their husbands' graves once a month, made it to Broadway and to Hollywood, without making a mark.
Now, fortified by three actresses and a director reconnecting -- to the play, to Fairfield County or to one another -- the Westport Country Playhouse production that opens tomorrow could well be the play's definitive rendering.


Black Cowboys Share Their Art With Urban Children
"I didn't know black people could do this," said Justin Pringle, a 14-year-old from Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn.
"I never knew until now how the West was born and that black people had a part in it and and could be cowboys."
Along with many of the other 120 campers at Camp Pioneer, a Fresh Air Fund camp here for boys 12 to 15, Justin was astonished to meet members of the Federation of Black Cowboys, who were here to demonstrate riding, roping and racing techniques as well as to introduce the youngsters to a little-known piece of American history.


DREAM FACTGORY OF THE 90's; Three Stories Of Junior College Second Chances
Gerald Eacker, Dontae Jones and Terrance Springer are talented basketball players with forgettable pasts but potential-laden futures that have top colleges lining up to put them in the big time.
The question is, do they belong there?


Linda Curchin, C. H. Montgomery
Linda Marie Curchin, a daughter of Thelma and Kenneth Curchin of Fair Haven, N.J., was married yesterday to Charles Hope Montgomery, a son of Margaret and Judge Seth Montgomery of Santa Fe, N.M.
The Rev.
Dr.
Webster Kitchell performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Church of Santa Fe.
The bride, 31, graduated from Harvard University and received a master's degree in city and regional planning from Cornell University.
She is to enter Jefferson Medical College in the fall.
Her father owned Curchin's Barbershop, which was in Red Bank, N.J.
Her mother was a Defense Department computer technician in Fort Monmouth, N.J.


INSIDE
INVESTING IT /Page 4  Oakley, maker of Blades and M frames, hopes the rage for its sunglasses translates to its stock.
At the Gate, by Reed Abelson.
MUTUAL FUNDS /Page 5  Sure Harbor Capital sold its Capital Cities stock long before last week's Disney deal.
But that's only part of the story.
By Timothy Middleton.
SPENDING IT /Page 8  Tired of dealing with travel agents?
Now you can book your trip yourself.
By Jane L. Levere.
SPENDING IT /Page 9  Of touters and doubters and Mr.
Gingrich.
Off the Shelf, by Barbara Presley Noble.


Self-Help For Students
The one question left after reading "Smart Start: Answers to Questions Asked by First Year College Students" is: Did college students really ask these questions?
The 94-page book, written by eight Vanderbilt University professors, covers topics from dorm life to diet and advertises a sense of humor.
But questions like "I really want to remain a virgin until married. Do I have a chance?" and "How accurate is the portrayal of fraternities in the movie 'Animal House?' " will surely produce laughs the authors didn't intend.
The book is divided into topics in an easy-to-browse question-and-answer format.


Christie Is Out to Prove Age Isn't a Distraction
Linford Christie of Britain is the Olympic champion at 100 meters, but he is also a grandfather, which is exactly what he seemed to be today, stumbling out of the blocks in the first round of the world track and field championships.
"What was all that dipping?" the American sprinter Jon Drummond ribbed his British friend in a dressing area under Ullevi Stadium.
"Your ankles aren't strong enough? Your shoes untied?"


Why Trolleys, Not Buses Are Right for 42d Street
To the Editor:
In his July 23 letter ("What's Wrong With Idea of a Trolley on 42d Street") James McCown asserts that the bus is the "unsung workhorse of urban America." To be more accurate, buses have urbanites the world over singing the blues because of their exhaust fumes, noise, high operating cost, cramped seating and low public image.


July 30-Aug. 5; E-Mail
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review@nytimes.com


Jury Duty, Part One: The Fashion Statement
I WENT to wardrobe before I went to jury duty; everybody is expected to be camera-ready in the Age of O.J.
Not that I expected to be picked -- I rarely am -- but I wanted to give the lawyers pause, make it harder for them to bump me off a panel just because I looked too smart to  buy their numbing illogic, or to keep me on just because I looked so worn that I'd be sympathetic to human frailties.
I'm not the twelfth angry man, but I'm no demographic, either.
Jury duty is an honor and an obligation, which I happen to enjoy in theory, although I usually end up spending most of my tour reading lite books and eating Chinese food.
Also, I knew that this might be my last  hurrah as a juror for awhile; new state  legislation, if it works, will improve  conditions, raise per diem (it's $15 now)  and vastly increase the pool of potential  jurors by ending automatic exemptions to lawyers, undertakers, cops, firefighters, small-business owners and doctors (lots of luck).


White House Seeks Areas of Welfare Accord With G.O.P.
Clinton Administration officials today itemized their objections to the welfare bill backed by Senate Republican leaders and proposed changes to make the bill more palatable to President Clinton.
Mr.
Clinton, who promised in the 1992 campaign to "end welfare as we know it," said he opposed the Republican bill in its current form and preferred an alternative devised by the Senate Democratic leader, Tom Daschle of South Dakota.


India's Classical Dance Casts Allure on Class
STUDENTS at the Westchester Ballet Center here are offered a full array of ballet classes, as well as tap, jazz and modern dance.
More exotic, perhaps, is classical Indian dance, which is taught by Ranjana Rao.
Ms.
Rao, a resident of Cortlandt Manor, performs professionally the dance form she began studying at age 6 in her native India.


July 30-Aug. 5; Not More Beirut Residential Architecture


Now Boarding Passengers At Newark Internation


Jury Duty, Part One: The Fashion Statement
I WENT to wardrobe before I went to jury duty; everybody is expected to be camera-ready in the Age of O.J.
Not that I expected to be picked -- I rarely am -- but I wanted to give the lawyers pause, make it harder for them to bump me off a panel just because I looked too smart to  buy their numbing illogic, or to keep me on just because I looked so worn that I'd be sympathetic to human frailties.
I'm not the twelfth angry man, but I'm no demographic, either.
Jury duty is an honor and an obligation, which I happen to enjoy in theory, although I usually end up spending most of my tour reading lite books and eating Chinese food.
Also, I knew that this might be my last  hurrah as a juror for awhile; new state  legislation, if it works, will improve  conditions, raise per diem (it's $15 now)  and vastly increase the pool of potential  jurors by ending automatic exemptions to lawyers, undertakers, cops, firefighters, small-business owners and doctors (lots of luck).


A Brilliant Student, A Path of Obsession. Inside the Mind Of a Stalker
FROM the beginning, there was no question that Daniel Price was very smart, and for a long time that was his most distinguishing characteristic.
He read widely.
His I.Q. was measured at 152.
He wrote a book of philosophy when he was 13.
After graduating with honors from Dartmouth College, he won a Fulbright Fellowship to study in Germany.
His life story might have been one of an estimable scholar at an elite university.
Read him on Mann.
Listen to him on Nietzsche.
But that doesn't happen to be it.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Carriages, but No Horses
IMAGINE a baseball museum without bats.
That is kind of how it is at the Carriage Museum in Stony Brook.
Plenty of carriages are on display, but no horses."
"Horses are very risky," the curator, Merri Ferrell, said, "especially if you are trying to preserve a collection into perpetuity." You hitch a horse to a carriage, she said, and faster than you can say, "Whoa!" there is wear and tear on the carriage.
"It's not ethical to use the carriages anyway," Ms.
Ferrell added.
Would the Baseball Hall of Fame allow people to play with Babe Ruth's mitt?


An International Steak Chain Arrives
IN 1965, Ruth Fertel bought Chris's Steak House in New Orleans, giving birth to the almost unpronounceable Ruth's Chris Steak Houses.
The newest outpost, on the edge of Roosevelt Field in Garden City, is No. 49 in the highly successful international chain.
The menu announces that it is the home of serious steaks, and indeed it is.
Diners who rank a steakhouse solely on the quality of meat will give Ruth's Chris high marks.
Those who think that a meal is more than meat will be less impressed.


Domino Real-Estate Deal Cleared
A final obstacle has been removed to a complex deal to relocate both the City University Graduate Center and the State University College of Optometry in a $173 million project involving the old B. Altman department store and two other sites.
In a three-year process, the college will move from 315 Park Avenue South at 24th Street to CUNY's building at 33 West 42d.
CUNY will move to the Altman building, on Fifth Avenue at 34th.
To allow the deal, Gov.
George E. Pataki signed a special law cutting off state funds for the optometry college's $7 million annual rent, breaking its lease without penalty or compensation to the landlord.
Mr.
Pataki's press office did not respond to a reporter's inquiries.


Thrill-Ride Inspections in New York Are Faulted
The people responsible for making sure amusement park rides are safe in New York City are elevator inspectors who have no specialized training in how the thrill rides work.
And, unlike many ride inspection programs around the country, New York City's does not require operators to test their rides for metal fatigue, which caused the crash of the Hell Hole ride on Coney Island on July 29.
"If we can't see it, there's not much we can do about it," said Norman Holl, the chief inspector of the city's Buildings Department.


Attitude Inc.: Why Corporate Sponsors Love the New York Style
RAWLINSON RIVERA used to pitch.
A lanky youth who grew early, he was throwing 85 miles an hour and being scouted by the Yankees before his 17th birthday.
Then he started to do in-line skating.
Now, he pitches in a different way.
As one of the most talented aggressive skaters in New York, he has been recruited by five separate companies to skate with their equipment, compete with their teams and talk up their products.
In return, they give him a little money, lots of clothing and free trips to competitions and exhibitions.
His summer job is to skate and talk.


Blatant Bias in Spending On Public Transportation
To the Editor:
Your July 30 Road and Rail articles on the various projects under way to reduce commuting time between northern New Jersey communities and New York reveal the blatant bias in the allocation of public transportation funds in this state.
While you detail more than $2.4 billion worth of these projects for those fortunate enough to live in the favored land north of Trenton, you do not mention that those of us who live in the rest of New Jersey have no public transportation beyond buses and the high-speed line that runs from Lindenwold to Philadelphia.


Jessica Cail And Eliot Sirota
Jessica Elizabeth Cail, the daughter of Christine Re of Freedom, Me., and Gary Cail of Jacksonville, Fla., was married last evening to Eliot Sirota, the son of Theodora and Dr.
David K. Sirota of Alpine, N.J.
Stephen Gordet, a lawyer who is a friend of the bridegroom's family, officiated at the Omni Parker House Hotel in Boston.
Mrs.
Cail-Sirota, 24, graduated from Boston University, from which she also received a master's degree in psychology and where she is a candidate for a Ph.D. in physiological psychology.
She is also a research assistant at the Army Research Institute of Environmental Medicine in Natick, Mass.
Her mother teaches special education at the China (Me.) Middle School.
Her father is a surveyor in Jacksonville.


Hiking Together Is Safer and Pleasanter
If you are interested in making hiking more enjoyable, I would suggest you look into joining a hiking club  [ "Walking Is a Gentle Exercise," July 16 ] .
Hiking alone can be dangerous.
Hiking with a small group is safer and pleasanter.
Fellow hikers not only make good companions, but come to each others' aid, as well as share information about map and compass readings, tips on how much water to bring on a hot day, how to dress sensibly, etc.


Homey Hungarian, Crepes and Paprikash
HUNGARIAN cuisine is badly underrepresented on the Connecticut dining scene, which is surprising for two reasons: many Hungarian emigrants have made Connecticut their home, and theirs is a cuisine that may well be the most intriguing and sophisticated in Eastern Europe.
Now Pearl of Budapest in Fairfield has joined the sparse field, which also includes two outposts in Danbury.
The new restaurant, which quietly exudes ethnic charm, is a family affair, under the cheerful management of Eva Hlacs and her nephew Emery Vajda, who is the chef; various other family members are on the staff.


Good Neighbor?
To the Editor:
Herbert Muschamp should have read those West Siders' letters more carefully before he tossed them aside  [ "On to an Age Where Rational Doesn't Make Sense," July 23 ] .
He might have then learned that while the proposed height of the Millennium, the residential high-rise on Broadway between 67th and 68th Streets, displeased many, it was its bulk and the harmful effect that this enormous, crowd-creating structure would have on traffic and the neighborhood transportation facilities that troubled most critics.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LETTERS FROM LONDON  By Julian Barnes. Vintage International, paper, $13.


Baseball's Obsolete Privilege
Just as the pennant races are getting interesting, we find ourselves little more than a week away from the first anniversary of the longest, nastiest strike in sports history.
Thursday's vote by the Senate Judiciary Committee to lift Major League Baseball's exemption from antitrust laws should serve as a reminder to baseball and its fans that there is still no contract between players and owners.
It is also a reminder that despite platitudes about "working together to win back the fans," there is little cause for optimism that the two sides, left to their own devices, will prevent a repeat of what happened last year.
Lifting the antitrust exemption, however, is likely to insure against another strike.
The owners and their apologists argue that repealing the exemption will not end hostilities between management and labor.
They are right.
But that is not the issue.
Stripping the owners of their exemption would take away their power to impose conditions on the players when negotiations break down.
The quarreling would go on, but so would the game, and that is why fans everywhere should be petitioning Congress for the repeal.


Are You Conscious?
To the Editor:
Robert Wright's review of Paul M. Churchland's new book, "The Engine of Reason, the Seat of the Soul" (July 9), addresses the question of whether consciousness is an illusion resulting from purely biological processes.
Though Mr.
Wright states that the psychological-materialist view "is the most plausible and fruitful foundation for behavioral science I can imagine," he goes on to rally for an appreciation of consciousness as an independent, more mysterious entity.


Enola Gay's Crew Recalls The Flight Into a New Era
When talk turns to the atomic bombing of Hiroshima, people tend to ask Theodore J. (Dutch) van Kirk one question: "What did you see?"
That would be natural, since Mr. van Kirk had an extraordinary vantage point from which to witness the dawn of atomic warfare.
As the navigator aboard the Enola Gay, the B-29 that dropped the bomb, he was five miles up, over southeastern Japan, with a clear view of the mushroom cloud.


Surprise: Your Park Is Closed!
To the mothers and baby sitters who regularly take children to John Jay Park, it all happened overnight.
One day they were pushing the children on swings, and the next they were watching construction trucks roll by.
"There was no notice about the closing," said Faith Kinslow, whose two sons play and take swimming lessons in the park, at the east end of 77th Street.
"This is about the worst time to close a playground."


A Political Dinner Without Politicians
The goal was to raise money for the fledgling Asian American Democratic Club of Queens and to endorse the State Supreme Court candidacy of Judge Dorothy Chin Brandt -- and perhaps to curry favor with dozens of invited local politicians.
Money was indeed raised, and Judge Brandt, a Civil Court judge assigned to Criminal Court, was duly honored.
But no favor was curried, since there were no local politicans with whom to trade chits during dinner chat.


Knishes or Kimchi: Last Kosher Deli Closes on Union Street
There was no going-out-of-business sale of pastrami and pickles, no sign in the window or on the wall.
The demise of Flushing's last kosher delicatessen came quietly.
The restaurant, Flushing Delight, at 29-20 Union Street, shut and locked its metal gates one night last month for the last time.
It became another lost remnant of a fading community.


Sports of The Times; Stern Got Stripped Of the Ball
IF David Stern were a player, who would he be?
My guess is a very dependable point guard, heady but not big-headed, a pass-first guy who could stick the jumper, make the big play in a 1-point game.
Cooperative in the locker room, disinclined to controversy but eager to step up for the good of his team.
John Stockton.
That's who Stern would have been.
Uncharismatic wheeler and dealer, all-time leader in career assists.


Cheese With Melons or Berries, a Twist on a Summer Classic
WHAT could be more classic than fruit and cheese?
But the fruits most often served with cheese are pears, apples and grapes.
Summer's ripe soft fruits -- melons and berries -- are not the typical partners for cheese.
Yet watermelon with feta cheese is common in Egypt, where it is breakfast fare.
I can remember as a child being told that watermelon actually tastes sweeter with salt on it than without, trying it and finding it so.
The salty feta serves the same purpose.
And together they offer a nice change of pace as a cheese course, whether or not for breakfast.


Laos Capital Defies Time And Change
A teen-age girl grinned gleefully at a foreigner as she caught up with the chicken that had got away on the muddy street in front of the National Bank and the local office of the International Monetary Fund.
Scolding the fowl, she clutched it to her chest.
Laos has gone through many changes -- from a civil war with foreign interference, through years of rigorous Communism, to its current, largely benign dictatorship with a market economy and a large foreign business presence.


Foreigners Are Made, Not Born
AN ITALIAN EDUCATION  The Further Adventures of an Expatriate in Verona.
By Tim Parks. 338 pp.
New York.
Grove Press. $22.


Obsession With Immortality
IN Connecticut, three children are killed by adults presumed to be caring for them, 100 are removed from their parents' homes by state agencies and thousands more live under watch for signs of neglect or abuse, all in the last few months.
That was the stuff of a front page article last Sunday, a day after the one about the sentencing of Susan Smith for drowning her two sons in Union, S.C.
Suddenly, the previous week's report about a little girl falling out of a window in Harlem while her mother was in the hospital giving birth to another child stung the memory.


Angry Debate On AIDS Center Splits W. Village
"The whole Village is polarized," exclaimed Arlene Koenig, president of the Greenwich Village Block Association.
Perhaps not the whole Village.
But Housing Works plan to open an AIDS adult day healthcare program in the genteel northwest Village has pitted neighbor against neighbor, shop owner against shop owner and a Catholic priest against some parents who send their children to his parish school.
Not to mention dividing Community Board 2, which on July 20 voted to support the project, to be housed at 320 West 13th Street, after two raucous hearings.
The vote: 34 to four, with four abstentions and one recusal.


Investors Love Loans to Deadbeats
Carl H. Westcott is a car dealer who is now rich.
That is due in part to his decision to start a new business a couple of years ago.
But mostly it is because Wall Street has fallen in love with Mr.
Westcott's dream and made it into a hot stock.
This story is not, as you might expect, about technology.
It is not about some clever software or a new design in semiconductors.


Bittersweet Harvest
Anthony Quinn, left, and Keanu Reeves are in "A Walk in the Clouds," about a World War II veteran who unexpectedly falls in love with the daughter of a Mexican vineyard owner in California.
Directed by Alfonso Arau, the film also stars Giancarlo Giannini and Aitana Sanchez-Gijon.
It opens on Friday.


The Sounds Of Cultures Clashing
I HAVE TRAVELED ON AWFUL ROADS, IN terrible carriages," Bartok wrote from a small village in 1914, chronicling his search for old Hungarian folk melodies, which he coaxed and bribed out of reluctant peasants in muddy huts. "The earth here is like a sponge soaked with water."
Conditions were not much better in another village a few years later.
"While we were there, people kept touching their legs and their waists," he wrote.
"Since then, we have been catching fleas all the time; I, for one, had a booty of 20 a day for three days, and they are still not completely gone."


July 30-Aug. 5; The Old Man
When teenage girls have babies, about 40 percent of the birth certificates are missing the father's age.
To get a better picture of whom the fathers are, the Alan Guttmacher Institute analyzed a Federal survey of women who gave birth in 1988, and released its findings last week.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


The Pilot Made a Sharp Turn Near the Building
To the Editor:
Your July 28 news article on the 50th anniversary of an airplane's hitting the Empire State Building contains two coincidences.


2 plans for watermarks, which can bind proof of authorship to electronic works.
WATERMARKS in paper stock, visible when held up to the light, have been used for centuries to thwart counterfeiters and help prove the authenticity of documents and currency.
In recent years, some cable channels and networks, like Comedy Central and CNN, have been stamping their programs with a video version of the watermark.
These video watermarks, which appear in a corner of the television screen, identify the channel for browsing viewers and, cable executives hope, scare off a few video pirates.


Yanks Can Also Lose Together
Not every sunny afternoon produces crisp baseball.
Not every trip to Tiger Stadium is a treat.
Not every day in the soap opera world of the Yankees ends happily.
Adept at sidestepping distractions during their impressive dance into the pennant race, the Yankees could not overcome the mistakes they created today with surprisingly shabby play.
Perhaps the Yankees were due for a forgettable performance or perhaps they were gazing ahead at their daunting upcoming schedule, but they made three errors and John Wetteland and Bob Wickman were ineffective from the bullpen.
The resilient Yankees looked like impostors as they mishandled a four-run lead and then a one-run edge in the ninth in succumbing to the terrible Tigers, 6-5, in 12 frustrating innings.


In America; A Lesson In Blood
There are 20,000 hemophiliacs in the United States.
Ten thousand of them are infected with H.I.V.
Many of those infections could and should have been prevented.
In the early 1980's, the nation's public health system had strong evidence the blood supply was contaminated with the virus that causes AIDS.
It didn't have absolute proof, but by 1983 the warnings were as loud and intense as screams.
And yet little action was taken.
Blood donors were not properly screened.
Patients were not warned about the risks.
New steps to improve the safety of the blood supply were not taken.


METRO DIGEST
IMMIGRANTS CHALLENGE L.I. SCHOOL RULES
Thirteen years after the Supreme Court ruled that immigrant children are entitled to a free public education, Daniel Amaya plays on the hard concrete stoop of a garden apartment, a few skips from a school that will not enroll him.
At age 9, he is far too young to question why a school would bar him from the third grade or refuse him a desk in the crowded fall class of fourth graders in the Hempstead, L.I., public schools.  [ Page A1. ] NEW YORK CITY THRILLING TO A DISMAL DAY
It was a gray, gloomy, drizzly and breezy day, dismal weather for a summer Sunday -- and New Yorkers were thrilled.
After 16 days of 90-degrees-plus in the last five weeks, a day that was mostly 70 and below had people reveling.
Diane Bishop celebrated by doing her laundry and cooking.
For the first time in many days, she had the desire to eat something besides sandwiches and ice pops.
"I could open the windows today," said Ms.
Bishop, an elementary school teacher from Ridgewood, Queens.  [ B4. ]
UNEQUAL BURDEN FOR STRAPHANGERS
To cope with rising costs and falling government subsidies, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority wants its riders to bear a larger share of the costs for the region's public transportation.
In recent interviews, one thing united several users of public transportation: an angry sense that they were being asked to shoulder an unfair burden, and a weary belief that this was about what could be expected from government.
The largest proportional increase, 20 percent, would be borne by straphangers, who would have to pay $1.50 instead of $1.25 for a subway token.  [ B3. ]
PAYING A STEEP PRICE FOR CANDOR
About two weeks ago, Manny and Peter Zanikos began preparing for the 6 o'clock rush at Michelle's, their coffee shop on the corner of Second Avenue and 20th Street.
They filled pitchers with ice water, got out the special dinner menus, checked the silverware, folded the napkins.
And then -- nothing.
Nobody came.
The restaurant, usually packed after the Police Academy around the corner lets out at 6, was empty.
And it has been ever since because Michelle's is the target of a boycott by police officers and recruits because Peter Zanikos said something a while back that rankled some in the police union.
Metro Matters by Joyce Purnick.  [ B3. ]
MANY VIE TO BE THE SCHOOLS CHANCELLOR
The initial list of candidates to be the next New York City Schools Chancellor includes several formidable contenders, like the three finalists in the 1993 search.
Others are decided long shots, like a conservative professor who is a perennial candidate for public office, and a former New Jersey principal who patrolled school hallways with a baseball bat.
But Colin Powell, the only person to receive a public, albeit tongue-in-cheek, endorsement from both Mayor Giuliani and the Board of Education president, Carol A. Gresser, has officially quelled speculation about his candidacy.  [ B4. ] REGION A MODERATE ON A TIGHTROPE
Life can be awkward these days for Representative Sherwood Boehlert, a seven-term Republican from Utica who has become a standard bearer for the nettlesome minority of moderate Republicans within Newt Gingrich's conservative majority.
As he works the House floor, Mr.
Boehlert has become accustomed to greetings of "Hiya, greenie" and "How you doing, tree-hugger?" Behind his back, the ribbing sometimes gives way to invective: Several House aides described Mr.
Boehlert as "sanctimonious," and one derided the multicolored, multicultural Save the Children tie he wore to a committee meeting.  [ B5. ]
A SUSPECT'S FAMILY LIVES IN SUSPENSE
Eyad Ismail's college notebooks are still stacked on his desk in his family's house in Jerash, Jordan.
Except for an occasional visit by concerned relatives and friends, there is dead silence around the house.
But inside, Mr.
Ismail's family is in turmoil, still trying to make sense of his sudden arrest and extradition to the United States on suspicion of driving a van laden with explosives into the garage under the World Trade Center.
At an arraignment on Thursday in New York, he pleaded not guilty to charges of bombing and conspiracy.  [ B2. ] Chronicle B2


Long-Awaited Cool Front Lifts Spirits of New Yorkers
Diane Bishop celebrated yesterday by doing her laundry and cooking.
For the first time in many days, she had the desire to eat something besides sandwiches and ice pops, and she fairly exulted in the absence of cockroaches clinging lethargically to the walls of her Ridgewood, Queens, apartment.
"I could open the windows today," said Ms.
Bishop, 33, an elementary school teacher who survived the steamy heat of the last two weeks without an air-conditioner.
"I moved boxes and cleaned the house. I did the laundry and put on a pair of long pants. It's the first time I've worn jeans since June."


An Unfinished Cantata Evoking Eleanor Roosevelt
If one of the goals of Lincoln Center's "Out of Doors" festival is to present free early-evening concerts conducive to casual listening, then the music of Libby Larsen performed on Thursday evening fit the bill.
The 45-year-old Ms.
Larsen, one of the more prominent American composers of her generation, has roamed over a wide stylistic terrain.
But if this concert was indicative, she is settling into an accessible tonal style that is pleasant though not particularly striking.
It is easy to understand why Judith Clurman, the music director of the New York Concert Singers, has been drawn to Ms.
Larsen's choral works.
Ms.
Larsen knows how to write effectively for the voice.
Her a cappella "Alleluia" is a meditative, modal work that bows to the beloved "Alleluia" of Randall Thompson.
Ms.
Clurman and her able eight-member chamber chorus clearly relished singing it.


Walking the Tightrope
A Republican from Utica has become a standard-bearer for the moderates within Newt Gingrich's conservative majority.
Page B5.


Floating in a Brazilian Broth
Boca Livre, from Brazil, is just the thing for a musical sweet tooth.
Its four members all sing, and its songs bask in harmony.
At any moment a song might unfurl angelic chords above a gentle melody, crisscrossing counterpoint, quick but perfectly enunciated verses with a new chord on every note or a gliding falsetto lead above a cushion of low voices, all in a gleaming webwork of guitars.
Boca Livre makes the likes of Crosby, Stills and Nash sound primitive.


Mets Trade Bad Memories for a Victory
Maybe now the Mets can start to forget about Bobby Bonilla and Bret Saberhagen.
Maybe now they can stop bemoaning their past and start believing in their future.
For the first time since they've been without both their best hitter and best pitcher, the Mets tasted success by beating the Florida Marlins, 7-3, yesterday afternoon at windy Shea Stadium.


Marine Research Center Planned
The Institute of Marine and Coastal Sciences of Rutgers University will build a $7 million research center in Lower Township near the Cape May Canal to experiment with raising as many as 100 species of fish and shellfish for commercial use.


Mayor Defends Way Rides Are Inspected
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani defended the way amusement park rides are inspected in New York City yesterday, but he said his administration was open to changes in the system of using elevator inspectors to conduct those reviews.
Speaking to reporters at the end of the Ecuadorean Independence Day Parade in Queens yesterday, Mr.
Giuliani said that despite the metal fatigue that caused the July 29 crash of the Hell Hole ride in Coney Island in which 13 people were injured, "the inspections have been the way they are for a number of years, and the record has been a good one of safety compared to a lot of other places."


The Black Bear Rebounds
The black bear seems to be making a comeback in New Jersey.
Naturalists say there are now at least 375 black bears in the state, and possibly as many as 600, the Associated Press reported.
New Jersey's bear population had dwindled to fewer than 50 in the early 1970's.


Minivans Could Be the New Checker Cabs
To the Editor:
"Hey, they shrank the back seat."
Such laments of discomfort may be heard increasingly from cramped taxi riders if the Ford and Chevrolet standard sedans under test become New York City's newest cabs.


Plan Links Child Support To Licenses
New York State will begin suspending the driver's licenses of parents who fall more than four months behind in their child-support payments, Gov.
George E. Pataki said today.
The new policy, similar to ones tried in a small but growing number of states, is designed to put some sting into an arsenal of child-support collection programs that have proved to be largely ineffective.
State officials also hope that it will reduce welfare costs by pulling some families out of poverty.


A New Role for the Go-Between at Capital Cities
Robert A. Iger, the 44-year-old president of Capital Cities/ABC Inc., is known in the television industry as a deft handler of business relationships.
His firsthand attention has been crucial to many programming deals for ABC, including ones with the Beatles and with the author Stephen King.
Mr.
Iger has shown himself willing to go to some lengths, even attending minor-league baseball games in Maine with Mr.
King, an ardent supporter of the Portland Sea Dogs.


Agha Hasan Abedi Dies at 74 In the Shadow of a Vast Fraud
Agha Hasan Abedi, the shadowy Pakistani businessman who founded the infamous Bank of Commerce and Credit International, which cheated depositors in more than 70 countries out of $12 billion, died on Saturday at the Aga Khan Hospital in Karachi.
He was 74 and had been in ill health since heart attacks forced him to withdraw from the bank in 1988.
He lived in Karachi.
Starting in 1972 with a $2.5 million investment by the ruler of Abu Dhabi, Mr.
Abedi built B.C.C.I. into an international financial force.
At its peak in the 1980's, the bank had 14,000 employees, 400 offices in 72 countries, 1.3 million depositors and more than $20 billion in assets, at least on paper.


Quarterly Treasury Refunding This Week
In addition to today's regular weekly auction of 3- and 6-month bills, the Treasury's schedule of financings this week includes its quarterly refunding.
The Treasury will auction 3-year notes tomorrow, 10-year notes on Wednesday and 30-year bonds on Thursday.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding 3-month bill was 5.39 percent and the 6-month bill was at 5.39 percent.
In when-issued trading late Friday afternoon, a 3-year note was being offered at rate to yield 6.05 percent; a 10-year note at a rate to yield 6.48 percent, and a 30-year bond at a rate to yield 6.86 percent.


Animal Advocates Protest Plans for a Primate Lab
For the 225 chimpanzees at the New York University Medical Center's primate laboratory here, the routine varies from fun and games to medical tests that could mean the difference between life and death for members of another primate species, human beings.
On this morning, while five diaper-clad baby chimps tumbled or napped amid a collection of stuffed toys and a pair of 3-year-olds watched "The Wizard of Oz" on television, in other buildings dozens of adult chimpanzees infected with the AIDS virus or hepatitis were taking part in vaccine studies.


Patents; An electronic device could measure animals' labor contractions, bringing help when it is needed.
ELECTRONIC equipment for monitoring the contractions of women in labor has been popular since the 1970's.
But until recently, no one thought to use this technology on thoroughbred horses and other valuable animals.
Now two obstetrical nurses from Denver who share a love of horses have figured out how to do just that.
"We were sitting around talking one day and we said, 'Why don't we apply this to thoroughbreds, which are worth millions of dollars?' " said Cheri C. Yoches, one of the nurses.
"So we decided to take a lot of things that have been used in human medicine and apply them to veterinary medicine."


CHRONICLE
MARYLOU WHITNEY managed to hang on to her jewelry at this year's edition of her fabled theme parties, which she has traditionally held every year on the eve of the Whitney Stakes at Saratoga Race Course and which is considered the social event of the season at Saratoga.
About 300 people gathered outside the Canfield Casino on Friday to watch Mrs.
Whitney, a former actress and the widow of Cornelius Vanderbilt Whitney, make her grand entrance.
Guests inside included ROBIN LEACH and the jockeys JULIE KRONE and JERRY BAILEY.


How We Make Judgments on People Who Kill; Trial by Opinion Poll
To the Editor:
I read of the Newsweek poll that found 63 percent of Americans favored the death penalty for Susan Smith, convicted for the murder of her two young sons (news article, July 30).


Most Wanted; Of Merger Mania And Summer Reruns
Capital Cities/ABC Inc. may have had the most publicized stock increase last week.
But the biggest percentage gainer was the stock of another media player, the Learning Company, a producer of educational software, which agreed to a $440 million acquisition by the Broderbund Software Company.
Meanwhile, CBS Inc., which the Westinghouse Electric Corporation agreed to buy for $5.4 billion, had three prime-time programs -- all reruns -- among the top 10 for the first time all summer.
Some weeks, CBS hasn't even made the list.


Youth Drops Accusation About Police
A 17-year-old youth whose claim that a police officer pushed him off the fourth floor of an apartment building ignited unrest in Washington Heights last week has recanted his story, a friend of the family and the police said last night.
On Friday night, a day after the incident, Ariel Santos stuck to the story that he had been pushed when his mother, Elvira Santos Rosarios, and the family friend, Adery Cardona, visited him at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, where he is in stable condition.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Global Media Powers Stir Some Local Fears  The globalization of the entertainment business is seen by many people as a threat to independent television stations, which can tailor programming to local tastes.
That worry helped move 60 Republicans to join 168 Democrats last week in voting to retain stricter limits on media ownership.
The vote scaled back a House bill that clears away regulations in every other corner of the communications industry.
For their part, media executives say they have little choice but to consolidate into giant companies that produce and distribute programming.  [ Page A1. ] ABC Leader Sees Strengths  Known in the television industry as a deft handler of business relationships, Robert A. Iger, the president of Capital Cities/ABC, faces a new challenge in his new, mercurial boss, Michael D. Eisner, the chairman of Disney.
But Mr.
Iger seems to be focusing on areas in which the combined companies can do better than they could have as separate entities, like international expansion and joint programming.
Mr.
Iger also hopes that ABC can tap Disney's expertise in areas like theme parks, stores and toys.
As an example, he might seek to build ESPN network virtual-reality theaters to give audiences the sense that they are on the field.  [ D6. ] Disney Purchase Inspires Fear  Disney's purchase of ABC has major movie studios and other producers of prime-time television programs shaking.
Will access to ABC -- a vital route to the lucrative syndication of a show -- be sharply cut for non-Disney productions?
Will studios be forced to focus on distribution as much as content?
Disney has moved to quell some fears, but skeptics abound.  [ D6. ] CBS Deal's Unusual Terms  CBS could accept another bidder without having to pay Westinghouse a $150 million breakup fee, according to terms of the deal disclosed on Friday.
The technology, which combines headsets, gloves and other equipment with computer programs, allows users to feel as if they are inside a computer-generated landscape.
So far, nearly all the store's sales have been of low-price accessories like magazines and T-shirts.
But some analysts calculate that the virtual-reality market -- now estimated at less than $90 million a year in consumer sales -- will explode into a $6 billion business by the end of the century.
And chain stores like Incredible Universe and Comp USA are stocking virtual-reality games and accessories in preparation.  [ D5. ] Powerful 'Soul Train'  Just as it did when Afro hair styles and platform shoes ruled in the 1970's, "Soul Train" continues to pull its weight.
The last remaining dance show on broadcast television is about to enter its 25th season, making it the longest-lasting program now in first-run syndication.
And it remains under the direction of its creator, Don Cornelius.  [ D7. ] Microsoft's Other System  Windows 95 is getting all the attention, but the big winner at Microsoft could be Windows NT, which is used on corporate computer networks.
The company is hoping that Windows 95 will lure customers and software developers to its corporate system, a market in which Microsoft has been trailing.  [ D5. ]


A Visit by Ripken to Gehrig's Old Place
When Cal Ripken takes his shortstop position tonight in his 2,102d consecutive game for the Baltimore Orioles, he will be doing so at the House That Ruth Built.
However, it is also the stadium whose pillars were also very much crafted by Lou Gehrig, the Iron Horse whom Ripken is chasing.
Gehrig's legendary consecutive-games record of 2,130, once considered impregnable, now looks extremely vulnerable.
After tonight's game and 15 years of trying, Ripken needs to play 29 more to break it.
That Nos. 2,102-2,104 will come at Yankee Stadium is not lost on a player who grew up in baseball with an appreciation of its history.


Recluse to Showman, With a Look Backward
In his book "X-Ray," an autobiography told as a partly fictional, futuristic tale (to be published by Overlook Press in September), Ray Davies of the Kinks portrays himself as an old, bitter, eccentric recluse, out of touch with the world and its conventions.
But on Tuesday night at the Westbury Music Fair, in the last show on a short tour by the Kinks, one of the most important British bands of the 60's, Mr.
Davies came on as more of a showman than a shut-in.
Though "X-Ray" is ample evidence that Mr.
Davies is still a first-class writer, he performed no new songs, perhaps because the Kinks do not have a recording contract in America.
Instead, he slyly acknowledged that he was leading an oldies tour, congratulating the crowd when it sang the correct lyrics to songs, making fun of an audience member wearing earplugs and introducing the band as the Ravens, the name it briefly used in the early 60's.


How We Make Judgments on People Who Kill
To the Editor:
The statistic that Paul Mones cites in "Life and Death and Susan Smith" (Op-Ed, July 28) that people like Mrs.
Smith who kill their own children are the least likely group of defendants to receive the death penalty is interesting.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.


A.F.L.-C.I.O. Candidates Prod Each Other to Move Unions Toward Change
Suddenly the A.F.L.-C.I.O., awakening to danger, is trying to train and ship out hundreds of new union organizers.
Never mind the cost.
And the two men vying to lead the federation show up at every sore spot for workers, hoping to awaken in ordinary non-union Americans a new feeling that unions can help them.
Nearly two months into their election campaign, the candidates, Thomas R. Donahue and John J. Sweeney, keep upping the ante, turning initially vague platforms into ever more specific promises and even some action.
Prodding each other, they are making a huge commitment: That organized labor will become a social movement, engaged in raising the living standards of all American workers, as it was in the 1930's, and not a collection of unions concerned mainly with trying to preserve the jobs and wages of those who are already members.


Where the Harvest Isn't Just Corn
The secret in Jim Witter's cornfield is starting to get out.
"There's been an increase in airplane traffic," said Tim Costanza, who lives about half a mile from the Witter farm and, as the Mayor, is one of those in the know.
"So it's been spotted from above."


Owner Says, 'Houston, We Have a Problem'
The 1997 season will be the last one the Houston Oilers play in the Astrodome, according to the team owner, Bud Adams.
Adams said he is not threatening to take the Oilers out of town if he does not get a new stadium when the current lease ends.
But he did not say he will stay in Houston, either.


Disney's Rival Studios Face Longer Competitive Odds
To understand why the Walt Disney Company's deal to acquire Capital Cities/ ABC sent waves through the television production industry, imagine you are a manufacturer of toothpaste and soap and you just heard that Procter &amp; Gamble had bought Wal-Mart.
Do you think you might now have a hard time getting enough attractive shelf space at Wal-Mart for your products?


Why Applaud an Increase in Unemployment?
To the Editor:
"More From Labor in New York," your July 30 editorial encouraging the Mayor to seek "more concessions" from city workers, is based on distortions and myths.
The most disturbing is the idea that eliminating tens of thousands of jobs is a positive step, as if the people who lose these jobs (or new workers who won't be able to get those jobs) simply disappear or magically find employment elsewhere.


Robin Clark, Reporter, 40
Robin Clark, a correspondent for The Philadelphia Inquirer, was killed on Friday in a traffic accident near Los Angeles, where he had been based since 1993.
He was 40.
The Inquirer said the Santa Monica police reported that Mr.
Clark -- who had been covering the O. J. Simpson trial -- and a cousin, Nicole Weaver of New York, and her friend Melissa Penn of Scarborough, Me., were driving in his 30-year-old Volkswagen bus on the Pacific Coast Highway, when the van was clipped by a car changing lanes.
The van skidded into oncoming traffic and was hit by another car.
It was not clear who was driving the van.


Affirmative Action, on the Merit System
For years Americans have complained about government programs for the disadvantaged that do not work.
Now, however, we are on the verge of dismantling affirmative action, the one policy that, for all its imperfections, has made a major difference in the lives of women and minority groups and has helped us achieve the constitutional commitment to the ideal of equality and fairness.
In utilitarian terms, it is hard to find a program that has brought so much gain to so many at so little cost.
It has been the single most important factor in the rise of a significant, if still economically fragile, black middle class.


Collision Leaves a Man Dead
A local man was killed and a police officer injured after their cars collided a few blocks from Teaneck's police station on Saturday night, the authorities said.
The victim, Joseph T. Mulroy, 42, was crossing the intersection of Cedar Lane and Queen Ann Road about 10:35 P.M. when his car was rammed by a patrol car driven by Patrolman Jose Gonzalez, 22.
The Bergen County first assistant prosecutor, Frank Puccio, said Patrolman Gonzalez was responding to a call with his siren and lights on.
Investigators have not said whether one of the drivers was crossing against the intersection's traffic signal.


Max Sloan, 83, Whose Pushcart Grew Into a Supermarket Chain
Max Sloan, who left school after the eighth grade to go to work selling fruit and vegetables from a pushcart, and then went on to become president of Sloan's Supermarkets, died on Saturday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 83 and lived in Hollywood, Fla.
He had cancer, said his granddaughter Patti Mandel.


Wide Variety of Candidates In Schools Chancellor Search
The initial list of candidates to be the next New York City Schools Chancellor includes several formidable contenders, like the three finalists in the 1993 search.
Others are decided long shots, like a conservative professor who is a perennial candidate for public office, and a former New Jersey principal who patrolled school hallways with a baseball bat.
But Colin L. Powell, the only person to receive a public, albeit tongue-in-cheek, endorsement from both Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the Board of Education president, Carol A. Gresser, has officially quelled speculation about his candidacy.


I.B.M. Gives $2 Million For Preschool TV Series
I.B.M. has announced a contribution of $2 million toward the underwriting of "The Puzzle Place," a preschool series seen weekdays on PBS stations.
The half-hour show, geared to enhancing children's social skills and awareness of cultural diversity, is a co-production of KCET-TV in Los Angeles and Lancit Media Productions in New York, producers of the PBS series "Reading Rainbow."


New Jersey Brings Out Stoichkov's Best Play
The moments of brilliance so common during last summer's World Cup resurfaced this afternoon at Giants Stadium, which looked majestic again dressed in natural grass.
Much of the brilliance was provided by Hristo Stoichkov, the Bulgarian, who was magnificent in the World Cup last summer as he led his country to a fourth-place finish.
Transferred from Barcelona to Parma of Italy for $15 million this summer, Stoichkov proved he is worth every lira as he dazzled soccer fans again today in his return to Giants Stadium, where he led Bulgaria to the elimination of defending World Cup champion Germany last summer.
The irrepressible Stoichkov scored two goals and set up Tomas Brolin's goal in leading Parma to the Parmalat Cup title with a 3-1 triumph over Boca Juniors of Argentina.
Stoichkov was voted the most valuable player in the tournament even though he missed Friday night's 2-1 victory over the United States.
The Americans finished third after a 2-1 triumph over Benfica of Portugal this afternoon in the tournament's consolation match.
More than 32,000 fans showed up for today's games.
In the United States' victory, Frank Klopas, who played in Greece last year but is looking for a new club now, scored the first goal, on a penalty kick in the 12th minute.
Roy Lassiter recorded the winner for the Americans in the 68th minute.
Despite a disappointing third-place finish, United States Coach Steve Sampson said his team came away with some benefits from the two-day tournament.
Named full-time coach on Wednesday, Sampson said he discovered two or three more players for the national team in Lassiter, Jurgen Sommer and Steve Pittman.
With most of the American regulars having commitments with their overseas clubs, Sampson experimented with several players in this tournament.
He said he was particularly pleased with Sommer, who plays for Luton in the English League.
"I know now that we have three incredible goalkeepers and I have a decision to make," Sampson said of Sommer, who played his college soccer at Indiana and appears ready to challenge Casey Keller and Brad Freidel for the regular starting job in goal.
The Americans attacked in such high numbers early in the game that even Marcello Balboa and Alexi Lalas, two of their backliners, appeared to be lurking in Benfica's penalty area, looking for opportunities to strike.
Balboa started the play that led to the first goal when his shot from near the top of the penalty area hit Marcelo Cipriano's hand, giving the Americans a penalty kick that Klopas converted with a low shot to the left corner.
The Americans' hard-charging style vanished after the goal by Klopas, however, and Benfica took control of the play, forcing the Americans to chase the ball.
Benfica was the better team for the rest of the first half and early into the second half.
But all the team managed was a goal by Ilian Iliev of Bulgaria.
Iliev's goal came when Balboa and Lalas were caught upfield while the United States was taking a free kick.
Benfica quickly gained possession after the Americans misplayed the free kick and broke the other way for the score 18 minutes into the second half.
But the United States regained the lead five minutes later, when Lassiter saw Jeff Agoos race down the left flank with the ball.
Lassiter timed a run to the near post as Agoos sent a chest-high cross into the penalty area.
Lassiter used his head to flick the ball into the goal.


Croatia Declares Victory in Rebel Area
The Croatian Government has declared victory over rebel Serbs in the region they call Krajina.
"The self-styled Krajina no longer exists," a Ministry of Defense spokesman, Gen.
Ivan Tolj, said at 6 P.M. news conference in which he spoke with evident delight about the "ex-army of the ex-Krajina." The territory had been held by rebel Croatian Serbs since 1991.


Jensen Puts Skills To Work For Victory
On Saturday, Lauren Jensen gave a bicycling clinic to a group of amateur female athletes registered to compete in the Danskin Women's Triathlon.
Today, on the rain-soaked course at Hempstead Harbor Beach Park, Jensen put on another one for the nearly 500 competitors, winning the event in 1 hour 2 minutes 11.1 seconds.
"This feels so good," said the 27-year-old Jensen, a professional triathlete from Sycamore, Ill.
"My swimming was a little too slow, but I picked up good time on the bike."


Earnhardt Is Perfect, Even With No Practice
Before injuries ended his racing career in 1988, Bobby Allison summarized the frustration of trying to beat Dale Earnhardt.
After one race in which he thought he had Earnhardt behind him, only to see his nemesis get by for the victory, Allison shook his head and said, "You have to drive a stake through his heart."


For Florence's Glories, Bomb Repairs Go On
Two years after a car bomb exploded outside the famed Uffizi gallery, killing five people, art lovers and the Italian Government are still paying the price.
Of the 15 rooms damaged, only 3 are open to the public.
And while 135 paintings and 51 sculptures have been restored, scores more are stacked up, waiting their turn in makeshift workshops in the gallery's damaged west wing.
So far, Italy has spent about $10 million to repair the structural damage.
According to Antonio Godoli, the Uffizi's chief architect, it will take a year and $7 million more to completely restore the 16th-century palace that holds the world's greatest collection of Renaissance art.


In Florida, a Lobster for Every Pot
Aboard his 25-foot motor boat, Officer Mack Clark of the Florida Marine Patrol recently scanned these waters as vigilantly as a Customs agent would for drug shipments.
But it was not cocaine that Mr.
Clark was after, but crustaceans, specifically lobsters.
"How are you doing?" he called out as he circled a boat flying a red flag, which indicated someone was diving or snorkeling nearby.
"Got any lobster? Got a license? Can you open the cooler?"


It's a Sprint To Nowhere For the U.S.
The women's marathon turned out to be a lap short at the world track and field championships, starting a wild chain of events today that left Carl Lewis headed for home instead of the victory podium, left the Americans with more runners in the 800-meter final than the Kenyans and left Jackie Joyner-Kersee with a husband but perhaps no longer a coach.
When this poignant day was over, the United States had failed to win a medal in the 100-meter sprints for the first time at a major championship since 1976.
Canada had begun to remove the stain of Ben Johnson.
Two Olympic champions -- Linford Christie of Britain at 100 meters and Heike Drechsler of Germany in the long jump -- had shown rare ordinariness.
And Gail Devers of the United States had restored some slight normalcy among the favorites by repeating as champion in the 100-meter hurdles with a time of 12.68 seconds.


An Accuser Recants
The 17-year-old youth whose claim that he was pushed out of a Washington Heights building by a police officer ignited unrest in the neighborhood has recanted his story, a friend of the youth's family and the police said.
The youth's mother and the family friend had said that they had visited him in the hospital on Friday night and that he had insisted he was pushed.
But then he apparently had a change of heart.
Article, page B3.


Abroad at Home; The New Priorities
When the House of Representatives recessed last week after passing major spending bills, Speaker Newt Gingrich said it had demonstrated the new Republican priorities.
There were, he said, "substantial underlying changes going on at a philosophical level of how you try to do things in this country."
The Speaker was exactly right.
The shaping of the appropriation bills made clearer than ever where the radical Republicans want to take America.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Murphy's 63-63 Wins
Bob Murphy tied a Senior Tour record with his second straight 63 yesterday and won the V.F.W.
Seniors Championship in Belton, Mo., by one shot over Jim Colbert, the defending champion.
Murphy took the lead over the crowd favorite Colbert with a curling, 12-foot birdie on the tough par-4 17th hole and finished 15-under for the three rounds.
He and Colbert, who tied the tournament record with an eight-under 62, battled head-to-head over the last three holes for the $135,000 first prize.


Ste. Anne de Beaupre Journal; At Shrine, Prayers Get Priority, Sales Short Shrift
The Rev.
Guy Pilote was by the steps of his rectory pointing to the freshly mown grass across Rue Royale, where stalls once stood chockablock selling medals and multicolored rosary beads, St.
Anne T-shirts and luminous paintings of the Last Supper.
In this town on the north bank of the St.
Lawrence, about 20 miles northeast of Quebec, hawkers still appeal to the pilgrims.
But after the church authorities bought a couple of acres across the street, there now exists a kind of cordon sanitaire between the shops and one of North America's most celebrated Roman Catholic shrines.


With a Clank, a Thunk And a Boom-Chunk
Ten minutes of taped circusy music were played before Primus started its set on Thursday night at Roseland.
This is fun, the music insisted; the correct mood was jocularity and it would be strictly enforced.
Primus is one of the more unlikely rock successes of the 1990's.
Les Claypool, the band's bassist, singer and lyricist, started the group in 1984; its current lineup, with Larry Lalonde on guitar and Tim Alexander on drums, began in 1989.
The trio takes shards of 1970's progressive rock -- odd meters, dissonant guitar lines, lyrics about fantasy scenarios, stops and starts -- and recasts them for funk-bottomed 1990's-style abrasiveness.
Mr.
Claypool's clanky bass lines and cranky vocals are in the foreground as he sings about misfits and lowlifes with the cackle of a backwoods geezer.


Credit Mexico for Drug War Successes
To the Editor:
I found "Mexican Connection Grows as Cocaine Supplier to U.S." and "To Help Keep Mexico Stable, U.S. Soft-Pedaled Drug War" (front page, July 30 and 31) unbalanced, based on magnification of scattered information and anonymous sources.
You note that President Ernesto Zedillo has called the drug trade "the most serious threat to national security that Mexico faces." Unfortunately you chose not to mention the Government's many successes.


U.S. Message to Vietnamese: Freedom Pays
The sons and daughters of those who prevailed in the Vietnam War met Secretary of State Warren Christopher today, and he told them in surprisingly stark terms that independent courts, a free press and an end to authoritarianism were their best hope for achieving prosperity.
In a 45-minute speech today at the Vietnamese Government's top foreign-policy school, the Institute for International Relations, Mr.
Christopher described at length the democratic changes that have swept through parts of Southeast Asia over the last two decades and made it clear that Vietnam was far behind.


CBS Leaves A Door Open For Rival Bids
Terms of the Westinghouse Electric Corporation's deal to acquire CBS Inc. leave the door open for CBS to accept another bid for the company without paying Westinghouse's $150 million breakup fee.
Documents filed late on Friday with the Securities and Exchange Commission state that if Westinghouse does not have its financing agreements completed between Oct. 5 and Nov. 20, CBS can end the deal without paying a penalty.


Esiason and Jets Unveil A Conservative Offense
Watching the Jets this season could be an exquisite form of torture, or it could be like playing a snazzy pinball game.
Say this for the Jets, who won their opening exhibition game in the Rich Kotite regime: They showed they can make life interesting, maybe even frustrating, for the opposition.


Amusement Park Rides
Unlike some of the 13 people injured on the Coney Island thrill ride that malfunctioned last month, most of the approximately 7,000 people who are injured on amusement rides in the United States each year suffer minor injurie.
Fewer than 1 percent of the victims require hospitalization, according to the U.S.
Consumer Product Safety Commission, which says the number of injuries has remained steady for years.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Wednesday about the businesses of the four leading television networks, their corporate parents and merger partners characterized the Westinghouse Electric Corporation's relationship with two cable television channels incorrectly.
The company's Group W unit manages the business affairs of the Nashville Network and of Country Music Television; Westinghouse does not own Nashville and holds only a one-third interest in Country Music.
The Gaylord Entertainment Company owns the Nashville Network and the remaining two-thirds interest in Country Music Television.


Windows 95's Big Value May Be as a Lure to Network System
Is Windows 95 a decoy?
For all the attention being paid to the Aug. 24 introduction of the Microsoft Corporation's updated personal computer operating system, some experts think the software's true strategic value to Microsoft is not the few billion dollars in sales it is expected to bring to the company over the next few years.


Ushering In the New Year 6235


Credit Mexico for Drug War Successes; Swept Under the Rug
To the Editor:
Re "To Help Keep Mexico Stable, U.S. Soft-Pedaled Drug War" (front page, July 31): If the United States ignored official Mexican complicity in the drug trade to smooth passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement, what other corrupt aspects of Mexican society are being glossed over in the name of "free trade" and the stabilization of the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI?


Immigrants Fight Residency Rules Blocking Children in L.I. Schools
Thirteen years after the Supreme Court ruled that immigrant children are entitled to a free public education, Daniel Amaya plays on the hard concrete stoop of a garden apartment, a few skips from a school that will not enroll him.
At age 9, he is far too young to question why a school would bar him from the third grade or refuse him a desk in the crowded fall class of fourth graders in the Hempstead public schools.
"The school wanted many things that we did not have," Daniel said in Spanish, his voice high and clear.
These "things," are lease contracts, mortgage statements and notarized letters from absentee landlords -- documents that are the precious tickets to education in many Long Island schools and other suburban districts in the country.


Please Pass the Butter and Salt


A Rejuvenated Righetti Cools Indians' Hot Bats
White Sox 5, Indians 1
Dave Righetti won again in his remarkable rebirth as a starter yesterday, beating the Cleveland Indians, 5-1, and giving the Chicago White Sox their first victory in seven games at Jacobs Field.
With a steady wind blowing in from right-center field, Righetti (3-0) limited baseball's best-hitting team to one run and six hits in five-plus innings.
He struck out five and walked one.


No Headline
I realize that what is happening now to us is a different side of the same coin of ethnic cleansing.
But it's a great shock psychologically after it has been built up that we are winners. -- BORIS MIJAKOVAC, a Serb who fled Croatia.  [ A1:4. ]


Summer of Surprises


Protesters Fear the Future At New York Primate Laboratory


It's a Small World After All, Mr. Eisner
Michael D. Eisner, long one of the most feared men in Hollywood and now the most powerful, picked up the phone on Thursday night and called three industry executives, one after the other, who have made it clear in the last 10 months that they dislike him very much.
It was the first indication of how Mr.
Eisner, who last week announced the merger of the Walt Disney Company and Capital Cities/ABC Inc. into the world's largest entertainment company, may intend to wield his new power.


Two Quarterbacks Are Sore
The Giants will have two sore quarterbacks on their hands this week.
Starter Dave Brown injured his elbow today in the Giants' 19-13 exhibition victory over Cleveland.
His backup, Kent Graham, injured his ribs in the second half.
While neither injury was believed to be serious, both players will be sore and the third-stringer, Stan White, may get more practice time because of the injuries.


Dawn of an Age: An On-Line History
Articles and photos from The Times on the dropping of the atomic bomb on Hiroshima and Nagasaki and the end of World War II are available on line from @times, The Times's service on America Online.
Software and information: (800) 548-5201.


Cali Drug Leader Caught, Making It 6 Now in Jail
A top leader of the Cali drug cartel was arrested by the police in Cali today.
The arrest of the man, Miguel Rodriguez Orejuela, was hailed by Colombian and American officials as one of the final blows against the world's largest drug-trafficking organization.


Writer, Burglar, Fugitive: Oh, the Melodrama!
Barbara Joslyn -- romance writer, convicted burglar and neophyte fugitive -- remained stylish even on the lam.
She could be found at the Waldorf-Astoria yesterday, her lipstick red and fresh, her black high heels sinking deep into the thick rose carpet of the Art Deco lobby.
A new chapter of her own Manhattan melodrama was about to unfold.
She hugged herself tightly as she headed for the hotel doors, clutching only a little white square of a purse for luggage.
Her tangled mane of burgundy-brown hair lashed her face in the wet wind.


Brightness And Light, Earnestly
German music's incorporation of French and Italian cultures is borrowed sunlight.
The juxtaposition of Bach and Telemann with Albinoni and Vivaldi said as much at Thursday's Mostly Mozart concert.
The players were the members of Tafelmusik, the period-instrument orchestra from Canada; the place was Avery Fisher Hall.
Here was Bach, the admiring student and transcriber of Vivaldi's scores, transforming Italian models into something dark and serious.
The Violin Concerto (BWV 1041) is in A minor, a key the composer reserves for heavy pondering under overcast skies.
Telemann's suite, "Musique de Table, III" offers a clever gloss on French dance styles of the late Baroque.
The virtuoso writing has its own wit, albeit a wit more subdued and self-conscious than the originals on which it is based.
This is a paradox of the German mind, which yearns for the Gallic and the Latinate while clinging to its own consuming earnestness.


Who Were Criminals In Waco Assault?
To the Editor:
"Judgments on Waco" (editorial, Aug. 3) condemns the assault on the Branch Davidian compound as "imprudent and needless," yet fails to clarify the implications of such a verdict.
If there was a lack of prudence on the part of Attorney General Janet Reno and other Government officials, principles of criminal law compel the conclusion they are guilty of criminal homicide.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:


Corrections
The Patents column in Business Day last Monday, about a new type of hospital dressing gown, misspelled the surname of the patent holder.
She is Jean Brannon.


Corrections
The Pulse chart last Monday, about highway speed limits, characterized New York State's motor vehicle accident record for 1993 incorrectly.
The statistics reflected the number of accidents in which there were injuries and fatalities, not the total number of injuries and fatalities from car accidents that year.


Macworld Fills the Pre-Windows Quietude
Apple Computer Inc., taking advantage of the lull before Hurricane Windows strikes the computer industry with full force later this month, plans to introduce three new models in its desktop Power Macintosh product line today.
Apple will also announce a new software package that the company said would make it easy for Macintosh users to connect their machines to the Internet.


I.B.M. Expected Today To Name Chief for New Worldwide Unit
I.B.M. is expected today to name James A. Firestone, head of the home services unit of the Ameritech Corporation, to lead a worldwide consumer division that would greatly expand the company's offerings in on-line services, people familiar with I.B.M.'s plans said.
Before joining Ameritech, Mr.
Firestone, 40, was an executive at American Express, where he worked under Louis V. Gerstner Jr., who is now I.B.M.'s chairman and chief executive.
But unlike other outsiders Mr.
Gerstner has brought to I.B.M., Mr.
Firestone has strong ties to the company: his father was a 30-year I.B.M. veteran who served as a marketing executive in Japan.


Bridge
A New York team led by Juanita Chambers of Schenectady, N.Y., won the women's knockout team title here Saturday night at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.
Her squad, which includes Gail Greenberg of Manhattan, Jillian Blanchard of Riverdale, the Bronx, Irina Levitina of Teaneck, N.J., Lila Perlstein of Roslyn Heights, L.I., and Shawn Womack of Irvine, Calif., defeated the Chinese national women's team by 107 imps.
In the Spingold Knockout Teams, one semifinal was a desperately close battle.
In a match that was watched intently on Vugraph by about 500 spectators and ended at 2 A.M., the defending champions -- Richard Freeman of Atlanta, Nick Nickell of Raleigh, N.C., Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla., Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Ill., and Bob Wolff and Bob Hamman, both of Dallas -- prevailed by 9 imps.
The losers were a group headed by Richard Schwartz of East Elmhurst, Queens.


CHRONICLE
ALEXANDER AGOR made his debut at Lincoln Center last month, not with a musical performance but with a show of an innovative form of art.
Four years ago, for the 200th anniversary of the death of Mozart and the 25th anniversary of the Mostly Mozart Festival, Mr.
Agor, a photographer, took pictures of musicians in rehearsal and performance at the festival.


Soft-Spoken Republican Disarms the Democrats
Yearning for just one good firebrand at whom to shake a rhetorical fist, Representative Barney Frank of Massachusetts is adjusting restlessly in the Democratic minority.
He is losing battles to new committee chairmen from the Republican majority and finding one of the most important of them to be frustratingly non-raging, non-personal, nondescript.
"Worse is better," Mr.
Frank has decided, respectfully sizing up Representative Charles T. Canady.
He is a quiet Republican from Florida whose panel on the Constitution has gone little noticed but has shaped some of the heavier legislation of the House's Newtonian revolution -- affirmative action, abortion, school prayer and the flag amendment -- without benefit of whimper, bang or righteous press release.


From a Coffee Shop's Favorite Customers, the Blue Wall of Boycott
ABOUT two weeks ago, Manny and Peter Zanikos began preparing for the 6 o'clock rush at Michelle's, their coffee shop on the corner of Second Avenue and 20th Street.
They filled pitchers with ice water, got out the special dinner menus, checked the silverware, folded the napkins.
And then -- nothing.
Nobody came.
The restaurant, usually packed after the Police Academy around the corner lets out at 6, was empty.
And it has been ever since because Michelle's is the target of a boycott by police officers and recruits because Peter Zanikos, a man too candid for his own good, said something a while back that rankled some in the police union.


Money Sought to Buy Camp
Mayor Frank Maddaloni has asked the Morris County Department of Planning and Development for a $610,000 grant for Rockaway Township to buy an 82-acre camp from Jersey City.


Selling Virtual Reality, in Indiana
This conservative, supremely middle-American city, a financial and manufacturing center in a vast sea of corn and hogs, is not the first place that leaps to mind in discussions of virtual reality technology.
Virtual reality systems allow users to feel and act as if they are inside a computer-generated scene.
They have been largely bred in California, where they got their name, and in other electronic hotbeds, like the Seattle region, Texas, Boston, Chicago and New York.


Football Parking Price to Rise
Parking at Giants Stadium for football games is about to cost more -- $10 instead of $6.
The price increase is needed to cover the cost of cleaning and maintaining the lots, said John Samerjan, a spokesman for the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority.


Cuban Leadership Shows Little Hope Of Closer U.S. Ties
After months of diplomacy that raised Cuban hopes for a thaw in relations with the United States, the Government of President Fidel Castro appears to have abandoned hopes for a significant improvement before the American presidential election next year.
In recent speeches and interviews, Mr.
Castro and his senior aides have criticized the Clinton Administration as sharply as ever, attacking its support for the American economic embargo against Cuba and describing its proposal to increase contact between the countries as sabotage in disguise.


Bailey Warning: Promote Stars or Sport Is Up the Track
Jerry Bailey arrives at racing's Hall of Fame with 3,500 victories, including the Kentucky Derby and three of the last four Breeders' Cup Classics, and with a warning.
"Unless racing starts to market its stars," he said today on the eve of his induction, "unless it appeals to young people with its star horses and jockeys, no matter how much money is bet in simulcasting, it will lose appeal as a sport and a business."


Taking In the Sites; Number, Please? 3 Routes to Phone Listings
Many Internet surfers scan the World Wide Web for hot sites where movies and sound clips mingle with cyberchat.
But what if you are looking for -- horrors -- a mere telephone number?
Three sites approach the problem from different directions.


Power Struggle of 2 Top Leaders Grows
The power struggle between the two top leaders of the Bosnian Serbs intensified today as 18 generals vowed to stand by their military commander.
At the same time, the Bosnian Serb Parliament supported the decision of Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, to sideline the commander, Gen.
Ratko Mladic.
The general was the mastermind of the Bosnian Serb territorial gains over the last four years.


Jerzy Toeplitz, A Film-School Founder, 85
Jerzy Toeplitz, a film historian who headed film schools in Poland and Australia, died on July 24 in Warsaw.
He was 85 and had returned to Poland from Australia in 1979.
His death was reported in Britain on Wednesday by The Guardian and The Independent.
Mr.
Toeplitz, who was born in Ukraine, helped to found and was the first rector of the Lodz Film School, serving from 1949 to 1952 and again from 1957 to 1968.
Its students in those decades included the directors Roman Polanski, Andrzej Wajda and Jerzy Skolimowski.


Serbs Become Latest Victims In Changing Fortunes of War
After viewing themselves as victors against Muslims and Croats for the past four years, tens of thousands of Serbs found themselves refugees today, a humiliating role reversal for a people proud of their skills as warriors.
Riding tractors, hunched in trailers and astride horses, they poured from Croatia into Bosnia in one of the biggest exoduses of refugees in the fighting since Yugoslavia broke up in 1991.
Today, many of them were steadily moving on into Yugoslavia, and some were already showing up in Belgrade, the capital.


Lottery's Art Grants Stir Furor in Britain
It is just the sort of life-is-unfair saga that British tabloids love to exploit.
Every week, working men and women spend hard-earned pennies on lottery tickets.
But instead of helping the aged, homeless and infirm, the profits from the lottery are benefiting the "rich toffs" who attend the Royal Opera House at Covent Garden.
Of course, as is often the case, the facts are slightly different.
Charities get a hefty share of the lottery profits, as do sports organizations.
And in any event 50 percent of lottery takings go to ticket holders, spawning enough millionaires to feed endless streams of tabloid stories about the perils of instant wealth.


Rabbi Takes U.S.-Style Protest to Israel
Last week's wave of confrontations between Israeli settlers and security forces had many tactical hallmarks of the protests of the 1960's -- the deliberate acts of civil disobedience, the passive resistance before the police.
That was no coincidence.
The rabbi of the demonstrators was an American veteran of civil rights marches in Selma, Ala., and some of the most militant protesters were also immigrants from the United States.


China: Kind Words, Little Effect
For weeks, the Clinton Administration choreographed a fence-mending meeting between Secretary of State Warren Christopher and China's Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen.
When the two met last Tuesday in Brunei the rhetoric was diplomatically polite and the spin resolutely upbeat.
Unhappily, any optimism they may have generated about the relationship was doused when Beijing expelled two American military officers for alleged spying.
The Pentagon says the two men were engaged in legal surveillance.
Mr.
Christopher complains that their ill-timed snooping needlessly compromised his mission.
Nice try.
The string of incidents that have repeatedly tripped up relations between the United States and China this year cannot all be dismissed as bureaucratic accidents.


House of Environmental Horrors
When the House of Representatives passed an appropriations bill last week gutting two of the nation's basic environmental laws, President Clinton rose up in a rare display of fury.
He denounced the bill as "a stealth attack on our environment in the guise of a budget bill" and a "polluters' protection act."
These were true and necessary words.
They came, however, from a President who can lay no serious claim to environmental leadership -- a President who began his term by undercutting the conservationist ideas of Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt and who, just one week ago and without any public regret, signed a budget bill that will increase destructive logging on Federal lands.


Out of the Shadows of the World Trade Center Plot; Investigators Tracking Global Threads of Evidence Go After Motives and Methods
Two and a half years after an enormous car bomb tore open the World Trade Center and exposed America's vulnerability to terrorists, the case seems solved but not fathomed.
Like an intricately tangled Conan Doyle mystery, it continues to yield its intriguing secrets, but its deepest corners remain obscure.
The arrest last week of a new suspect has provided fresh details about the plot's final days and hours, but little new insight.
The suspect, Eyad Ismail, is accused of driving a van with 1,200 pounds of explosives into the trade center in Lower Manhattan on Feb. 26, 1993.


An ambitious survey by Conde Nast Traveler zeros in on the wallets of readers.
Richard D. Beckman, publisher of Conde Nast Traveler, is releasing today one of the largest studies ever done by a single magazine on the buying habits and tastes of its readership.
The magazine industry has long been dependent on what is known as syndicated research, which provides vast amounts of information based on interviews with thousands of readers of magazines and helps advertisers make decisions about where to place ads.


Burden of Transit-Fare Rise Will Not Be Borne Equally
As one who lives in the no man's land of two-fare zones, Arnold C. Lewis of Springfield Gardens, Queens, will be one of those hit hardest if the price of a token climbs to $1.50.
But he considers himself lucky.
"It will be hard for me, but I'll live," said Mr.
Lewis, 49, who counsels inmates at a work-release center in Harlem.
"However, someone who works for minimum wage, what is that person supposed to do? Some of them live in two-fare zones, too, and it's already $5 a day just to get to and from work."


A Moderate Republican Walks the Tightrope
Life can be awkward these days for Representative Sherwood Boehlert, a seven-term Republican from Utica who has become a standard-bearer for the nettlesome minority of moderate Republicans within Newt Gingrich's conservative majority.
As he works the House floor, Mr.
Boehlert has become accustomed to greetings of "Hiya, greenie" and "How you doing, tree-hugger?" Behind his back, the ribbing sometimes gives way to invective: Several House aides described Mr.
Boehlert as "sanctimonious," and one derided the multicolored, multicultural Save the Children tie he wore to a committee meeting this week.


Family Calls An Arrest In Bombing A Mistake
Eyad Ismail's college notebooks are still stacked on his desk in his family's house, on a hill high above the Roman ruins sprawling next to this sun-baked market town.
Except for an occasional visit by concerned relatives and friends, there is dead silence around the house, a plain dwelling of stucco and stone flanked by grapevines and olive trees at the side of a narrow, winding road.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about the Chancellor Broadcasting Company's agreement to buy Shamrock Broadcasting's radio stations for $395 million misstated the number of stations.
It is 19, not 17.


The Beat Goes On for 'Soul Train' Conductor
For the better part of three decades, Don Cornelius has straddled the worlds of popular music and broadcasting.
During that time, both businesses have changed almost beyond recognition.
In response, Mr.
Cornelius, the creator, executive producer and former host of the syndicated television program "Soul Train," has changed course very little.
He has clung steadfastly to his niche audience, and in return much of that audience has remained loyal.


Corrections
An article in Business Day last Monday about the Microsoft Corporation's new Windows 95 operating system software misstated the date of the first Windows version.
It was 1985, not 1990.


Legislation Would Expand Restrictions on Political Advocacy by Charities
Conservative Republicans are trying to soften the voice of charities and other nonprofit groups in the shaping of government policy, saying they foster the expansion of government.
The House last week approved legislation that would sharply circumscribe not just lobbying efforts, but also all other attempts to influence public policy at the national, state or local level by recipients of Federal grants.


The End of Life's Tether In a Japanese Art Form
The beginning and end of life were addressed and images of ardor, decay and gaudy frivolity conjured up on Friday night in "Solos From Japan," at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival.
Mitsuyo Uesugi and Uno Man are practitioners of Butoh, the darkly theatrical performance art born of the horrors and confusion of post-Hiroshima Japan.
Miss Uesugi, ballet-trained, studied with the Butoh artist Kazuo Ohno.
Uno Man performed with the Butoh group Dai Rakuda Kan before going out on his own.
Like Miss Uesugi, he has performed extensively abroad.


Student Transit Passes Allow School Choice
To the Editor:
Lost in the debate over who should pay for bus and subway passes for New York City students (news article, Aug. 3) is the probable effect that shifting the transportation burden to parents will have on the education of hundreds of thousands of city kids.


Kokura, Japan: Bypassed by A-Bomb
At 10:30 A.M. on Aug. 9, 1945, Nobuko Okamoto was sitting with her family in an underground bomb shelter, thinking of the "whump, whump" of the American bomber she heard overhead a moment earlier and waiting fearfully for the all-clear signal that the air raid was over.
At that same moment, 14-year-old Kenji Yoshio was scanning the sky, watching for the flash that would signal the detonation of a new bomb that America had devised.
But the sky was partly cloudy, so he strained to look through the patches of blue sky for the American bomber or the telltale flash.


Parenthood Plus: A special report.; Planned Parenthood Travels A Rocky Path Into the Future
When Solano County linked each of its Medicaid patients with a family practice in 1994, Chester Benefiel was nonplused to find that he had been assigned to Planned Parenthood.
"I told a friend I would probably be the only patient not worried about getting pregnant," said Mr.
Benefiel, 34, who has diabetes.
"When I got to the waiting room for my first appointment, I looked around and saw all these women. I was the only guy, and I stayed very quiet. But after I met the doctor, I decided this is what medical care is supposed to be like. It's very personal, they do their jobs well, and I'm actually happy to come here."


Rivals Criticize Bill on Welfare Offered by Dole
With Senator Bob Dole's plan to overhaul the nation's welfare system set to be debated on the Senate floor this week, two of his principal rivals for the Republican Presidential nomination today called his proposal too weak to stem the rising number of children born to single mothers.
Appearing on the CBS News program "Face the Nation," Senator Phil Gramm of Texas said he believed he had the votes to rewrite major provisions of the bill Mr.
Dole introduced on Saturday, although he said he did not know if the Senate would accept his proposal to ban Federal cash payments to unwed teen-age mothers.


Officer Hurt in Chase Dies
A Suffolk County police sergeant who was hurt during a chase of a burglary suspect last week died of his injuries last night, the police said.
Sergeant Henck, 30, suffered head and chest injuries.
He died at State University Hospital at Stony Brook at 9:55 P.M., said Ellen Barohn, a hospital spokeswoman.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A2-7 SERBIAN REFUGEES FLEE CROATIA Terrified of reprisals at the hands of Croatian Army troops, tens of thousands of Serbs became refugees, streaming out of Croatia for Bosnia and Yugoslavia.
A1  CROATIA DECLARES VICTORY  Three days after it launched an offensive, the Croatian Army declared victory over rebel Serbs in the region they call Krajina.
A6  CUBA ABANDONS HOPE FOR A THAW  After months of diplomacy that raised Cuban hopes for a thaw in its relations with Washington, Havana appears to have abandoned hopes for an improvement before the U.S. presidential election.
A1  COLOMBIAN DRUG SUSPECT HELD  A top leader of the Cali drug cartel was arrested by the Colombian police in what U.S. and Colombian officials describe as a final blow to the world's largest drug-trafficking organization.
A3  THE LUCKIEST CITY IN JAPAN  Half a century ago, an American bomber was sent to drop the world's first plutonium bomb on the Japanese city of Kokura.
But cloud cover prevented the attack, and the aircraft turned toward Nagasaki.
A7  CHRISTOPHER IN VIETNAM  In a speech in Hanoi, Secretary of State Warren Christopher declared that Vietnam's best hope of achieving prosperity lies in independent courts, a free press and an end to authoritarianism.
A7  Art lovers still pay the price of the Uffizi gallery bombing.
A2  A veteran of civil rights marches leads Israeli protests.
A5  Ste.
Anne de Beaupre Journal: Keeping hawkers from shrine.
A4 NATIONAL A8-10, B6-8 BUILDING A BUDGET COALITION  The White House is starting to look at a budget strategy that would rely on rallying a coalition of Democrats and moderate Republicans around an alternative to the Republican balanced budget plan.
A1  DOLE'S WELFARE PLAN CRITICIZED  Senator Bob Dole's plan to overhaul the nation's welfare was called too weak by two of his principal rivals for the Republican Presidential nomination: Senator Phil Gramm and Gov.
Pete Wilson.
A1  BEHIND THE G.O.P.
GAINS  Congressional Sketchbook: Representative Charles Canady's panel on the Constitution has gone little noticed but has shaped some of the heavier legislation of the House's Newtonian revolution.
B6  CHANGE FOR PLANNED PARENTHOOD  For Planned Parenthood, general-practice patients may be the only way the organization can survive in a health marketplace undergoing radical change.
A1  MEDIA DIVERGENCE  Globalization of the entertainment business is seen as a threat by both media executives and independent TV stations.
A1  ADVENTURE IN A CORN FIELD  A corn farmer near Shippensburg, Pa., has constructed the world's largest maze.
A8  UNION CANDIDATES GET SPECIFIC  News analysis: Nearly two months into their election campaign, the candidates to lead the A.F.L.-C.I.O. are turning initially vague platforms into ever more specific promises and even some action.
A8  DEAL IN BOMB CASE  The lawyer for Timothy McVeigh, the prime suspect in the Oklahoma City bombing, said he expected his client's Army buddy to be indicted on lesser charges in exchange for testifying for the prosecution.
A9  REPUBLICANS AND CHARITIES  Conservative Republicans are trying to quiet the voice of charities and other nonprofits in the shaping of Government policy.
A10  A lobster season in Biscayne Bay, Fla., gives divers a chance.
B8  Talk continued on regional telephone worker contracts.
A8 METRO DIGEST B1 BURDEN OF PROOF  Immigrants' rights groups contend that residency rules in some suburban school districts are so burdensome that some districts have locked out poor immigrant families, undocumented or not.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C9-14  British furor over arts grants from national lottery proceeds.
C9  Music: The Santa Fe Opera's "Modern Painters." C9  Tafelmusik.
C10  Primus at Roseland.
C11  Works by Libby Larsen.
C11  Ray Davies and the Kinks.
C11  Dance: Solos from Japan.
C9  Books: "Dark Sun: The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb." C14  Sports C1-7  Autos: Earnhardt's magic.
C2  Baseball: Yanks lose in 12th.
C1  A visit by Ripken.
C1  Mets finally recover.
C5  Columns: Vecsey on women's soccer.
C2  On Pro Football.
C3  Football: Giants win exhibition opener.
C3  Obituaries B10  Agha Hasan Abedi, Pakistani businessman who founded B.C.C.I.
Jerzy Toeplitz, film historian.
Editorials/Op-Ed A12-13  Editorials  House of environmental horrors.
China: Kind words, little effect.
Star Wars, the sequel.
Letters Anthony Lewis: The new priorities.
Bob Herbert: A lesson in blood.
Orlando Patterson: Affirmative action, on the merit system.
Bridge C12 Chronicle B2 Crossword C12


Despite Early Boos, Testaverde Just Says: What, Me Worry?
Cleveland Coach Bill Belichick was planning to talk with the journeyman quarterback Jim McMahon last night about a position with the Browns.
Vinny Testaverde wasn't worried.


Giants Discover New Player In Brown
On third-and-12 at the Giants' 37-yard line, New York quarterback Dave Brown, perhaps forgetting that this was a preseason game, decided to pull a Carl Lewis and try to long-jump past two Cleveland Browns defenders.
He ended up gaining 11 yards, and he got right up.
And he may have firmly established the Dave Brown era, with a gutsy -- though not that smart -- play that both impressed and scared his teammates as the Giants beat the Browns, 19-13, before 45,046 at Cleveland Stadium.
"When he did that," fullback Kenyon Rasheed said, "my heart went in my stomach."
Brown did bruise his right elbow later when he was sacked.
But apparently it is not serious.
Brown, who is harder on himself than anyone -- maybe sometimes too hard -- thought his performance was mediocre.
But it was better than that.


Corrections
Articles on Friday and Saturday about House votes on an appropriations bill for the Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education misstated the total spending called for in the bill.
It is $256 billion, not $560 billion.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Placed Mike LaValliere, catcher, and Jason Bere, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to Aug. 5.
Recalled Mike Bertotti, pitcher, from Nashville of the American Association.
Purchased the contract of Barry Lyons, catcher, from Nashville of the American Association.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Purchased the contract of Rob Dibble, pitcher, from New Orleans of the American Association.
Assigned Ron Rightnowar, pitcher, to New Orleans.


Equity Offerings Expected for Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:


A Cyberspace Front in a Multicultural War
Kozue Yamamoto's job for a Japanese on-line service provider is to demonstrate the wonders of the Internet to potential customers.
Miss Yamamoto easily goes through a well-rehearsed presentation, but when it comes to plumbing the wealth of information on the global computer network, she is at a loss.
Most of the messages and stored data are in English, which she does not understand.
"I tell the customers, 'You can find anything you want from all over the world,' " she said.
"Then I don't even know how to type in a word to retrieve the information."


Ruskin, at Full Cry in a New Form
"Great nations write their deeds in art," John Ruskin thunders in the opera "Modern Painters," all but rising from the grave and nailing his thesis to the door of the United States Capitol in this premiere production.
"Modern Painters," with music by David Lang and libretto by Manuela Hoelterhoff, sketches the biography of Ruskin, a renowned 19th-century English critic and social theorist, in a few eventful strokes.
But it takes its title from one of Ruskin's great critical studies and is mainly concerned with the world of ideas, where the air grows thin for opera.


Lesser Charges Seen for Friend Of Suspect in Oklahoma Blast
The lawyer for Timothy J. McVeigh, the prime suspect in the Oklahoma City bombing, said today that he expected his client's Army buddy, Michael Fortier, to be indicted on lesser charges in the case in exchange for testifying for the prosecution.
The indictments to be handed up by a grand jury in Oklahoma City this week, possibly on Thursday, are expected to name only Mr.
McVeigh and the other suspect in custody, Terry L. Nichols, as the main authors of the April 19 blast that destroyed the Federal Building and killed 167 people, said the lawyer, Stephen Jones.


Star Wars, the Sequel
There seems to be a big appetite in Congress this summer for defense spending the Pentagon does not want.
First came the effort to add more billion-dollar B-2 bombers to the 20 already on order.
Now the Senate has voted to revive the Reagan-era Star Wars strategic missile defense system, despite the fact that, again, the Pentagon sees no reason to build the system.
If this legislative blunder survives a House-Senate conference committee, President Clinton will be fully justified in vetoing it.
The vote authorized an additional $300 million to get the program going.
A complete Star Wars system, according to the Congressional Budget Office, will cost $48 billion.


INSIDE
A Cali Drug Leader Is Held
In a blow to one of the world's largest drug-trafficking organizations, a leader of the Cali drug cartel was arrested in Colombia.
Page A3.
Out of the Fog of Terrorism
There are still unanswered questions in the World Trade Center bombing, but some of puzzle pieces have fallen into place.
Page B1.
Deal in Bombing Case
Timothy J. McVeigh's lawyer said he expected his client's Army buddy to be indicted charges and to testify for the prosecution.
Page A9.
Pulp Nonfiction
Barbara Joslyn -- romance writer, convicted burglar and neophyte fugitive -- surfaced in a chapter of her own melodrama.
Page B1.


The Race for an Even Bigger Bomb
DARK SUN  The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb
By Richard Rhodes
Illustrated. 731 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster.  $32.50.
In the closing pages of his prize-winning history "The Making of the Atomic Bomb" (1986), Richard Rhodes wrote that immediately after the successful testing of the A-bomb, Edward Teller and Enrico Fermi "renewed theoretical work on the problem of thermonuclear ignition," the explosive force of which was expected to be 10 megatons, or 1,000 times the yield of the Hiroshima bomb.


Two Studies See a Bull Market Ahead for Book Industry
Despite concerns that books are being overshadowed by CD-ROM's and audio books, old-fashioned print titles will sell heartily through the end of the year and will have relatively steady sales through 1999, according to two new reports.
The reports, which predict future selling patterns and changes in the book market, are considered important studies in the book industry, which otherwise spends little time or effort on market analyses.


Sports of The Times; U.S. Finds Fresh, Young Legs in Overtime
HOMESICK.
That's what Tammy Pearman says she is.
She hasn't been home to New Mexico in a year, but then the coaches called her up to the national soccer team for the first time.
She was not about to say no.
The older players gave her the scruffy-looking pillow that the American team's rookie has been carrying for many, many years, judging from the assorted smudges and nicks and maybe even a few tear stains on it.
They told her to guard that pillow with her 21-year-old life.


WHITE HOUSE SEES G.O.P. MODERATES AS BUDGET ALLIES
Looking ahead to a bruising confrontation with Congress after the summer recess, the White House is hoping to use a budget strategy that would rely on rallying a coalition of Democrats and moderate Republicans around an alternative to the Republican plan to produce a balanced budget in seven years.
While the Republicans have generally displayed a remarkable degree of unity on fiscal matters this year, the White House chief of staff, Leon E. Panetta, pointed in a recent interview to fault lines between moderate and conservative Republicans.
Those fault lines, he said, had briefly come into view in past weeks as the House approved spending bills for programs on the environment, education, health and labor.


Dallas Cowboys' stadium ousts Coke, despite N.F.L. deal, and gives Pepsi 'pouring rights.'
ON its face, it appeared to be yet another episode in the continuing "Cola Wars" between Coke and Pepsi, the world's largest soft-drink makers.
Last Thursday, with the National Football League season opener just weeks away, Pepsi trotted out Jerry Jones, the maverick owner of the Dallas Cowboys, to announce that after 10 years with the Coca Cola Company, Texas Stadium, where the Cowboys have played their home games since 1971, was switching to Pepsico.
At a news conference outside of the Cowboys preseason training camp in Austin, Mr.
Jones kicked up his heels and flashed a pair of white leather cowboy boots tattooed with the Pepsi insignia, courtesy of Pepsi, and announced, quite unapologetically, that he would be "drinking Pepsi, selling Pepsi and promoting Pepsi" despite the league's agreement with Coke.


Cisneros Tours Urban Projects
Henry Cisneros, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, toured Camden's "empowerment zone" yesterday along with two dozen local officials and community representatives who pointed out projects slated to receive some of the $21.2 million in Federal funds earmarked for the zone, in the state's poorest urban area.


A Hearing on Nuclear Storage
Public testimony is scheduled for tonight on a plan to build a $15 million storage depot for spent nuclear fuel at the Oyster Creek nuclear power plant.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment approved the above-ground storage tank last year, but Judge Eugene D. Serpentelli of Ocean County Superior Court rescinded the permit after critics claimed they had not been allowed to offer testimony on why the project would be unsafe.


What Goes On?; Keep Those E-Mails Coming, Folks
"I'll send you an E-mail."
It's an increasingly common locution.
And to some ears, at least, as grating as gravel on slate.


In TV Deregulation, Qualms About Losing Local Control
G.
V.
Montgomery is worried that the Walt Disney Company could bring sex and violence to the South.
Mr.
Montgomery is a Democratic Representative from Mississippi, and during a House debate on the communications bill last week, he cited Disney as a reason not to lift Government restrictions on the ownership of media properties.
In Mr.
Montgomery's home district, the local ABC affiliates routinely pre-empt programming, like the racy "N.Y.P.D. Blue," that might offend their viewers.
Now that Disney is acquiring ABC, Mr.
Montgomery fears that the company could snap up ABC stations like WLOV in Columbus, Miss., which is owned by an independent businessman.


Unidentified Leg Found in Bomb Rubble
A new mystery surfaced in the Oklahoma City bombing today, just days before formal charges were to be lodged, when the State Medical Examiner disclosed that a severed leg and foot clad in a combat boot had been found deep in the rubble.
The brief announcement, more than two months after the authorities said all victims were accounted for, came after the lawyer for Timothy J. McVeigh, the prime suspect in the bombing which killed 167 people, said he would ask prosecutors to explore information that a severed leg had been found that could not be matched to a body.


Graf's Top Sponsor Still in Her Corner
STEFFI GRAF's main corporate sponsor says it has the right to suspend her contract, but will stand by her as long as it is clear she did not intentionally cheat on her taxes.
"We'd have to know that she intentionally dodged taxes," said HANS WILHELM GAEB, vice president of General Motors Europe, in an interview with Sudwestfunk radio.
"That would be the limit we couldn't cross." Gaeb said, however, he had no reason to believe Graf cheated on her German income tax.


Adventure Elec. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Healthsource Inc.(HS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Transtar Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A Modest Step to Save the Fish
It is hard to believe that at some point in the future there will not be enough fish in the sea for those countries that depend upon them for protein and for the fishermen who make their living from them.
But the truth is that the world's fisheries are in poor shape.
The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, once an ardent booster of highly mechanized fleets that sweep up fish by the ton, now says that virtually every commercial fish species is either declining or at serious risk.
It took a long time and a lot of work by environmental organizations to get that fact across to the people who write the laws of the sea.
But the truth has finally sunk in.
Last Friday, after two years of protracted and bitter negotiations, delegates from 100 countries meeting under the auspices of the United Nations approved the first international treaty to regulate fishing on the high seas.


Those Are Pinstripes, Not Prison Stripes
So Darryl Strawberry Darryl Strawberry is under arrest in the House That Ruth Built.
That is, when he made his first appearance at Yankee Stadium last night, he was under house arrest, as he has been since he was sentenced last April to six months' home confinement for Federal tax evasion.
Many people were incredulous that Strawberry did not get jail time.
He signed with the Yankees instead.


Madison Gas &amp; Electric Co.(MDSN,NNM) reports earnings for 12mos to Jun 30


Citizens Financial Group reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Applebee's Intl.(APPB,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 25


United Stationers Inc.(USTR,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Happer Leaves U.S.T.A. Post
Marshall Happer 3d, executive director of the United States Tennis Association over the last five years, resigned his position abruptly yesterday, just three weeks before the United States Open begins its two-week run.
Les Snyder, chairman and chief operating officer of the U.S.T.A., did not return phone calls seeking a reason for the resignation.
Calls to Happer's home went unanswered.


Consoltex Group reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Reckless Against Delicate, Brooding Against Bright
Sometimes musical collaborations produce the most interesting results when the participants are imperfectly matched, and at the Mostly Mozart concert at Avery Fisher Hall on Saturday evening, it was the tension between conflicting interpretive styles that yielded the brightest sparks.
Peter Maag was on the podium, and he made his preference for fastidiousness clear in Giacomo Tritto's "Convitato di Pietra" Overture, a slight, Italianate charmer that thrives on trim string and wind dialogues and tightly focused pianissimo phrasing.
Mr.
Maag was intent on bringing this same delicacy to Mozart's Piano Concerto No. 21 (K. 467), but the soloist, Cecile Ousset, is more of a daredevil.
Against Mr.
Maag's graceful backdrop, her entrance was reckless, even a little sloppy.
Ms.
Ousset soon reined in her approach, and if she and Mr.
Maag found common ground only fleetingly -- in an unsentimental account of the second movement, for example -- the quest produced a lively dialogue.


Repap New Brunswick Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Cleaning Up a Traffic Snarl


Harper Group Inc.(HARG,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Norma Industries reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Home Beneficial Corp.(HBENB,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


IBP Inc.(IBP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Mercury General Corp.(MRCY,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


MacKenzie Financial reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Hoboken's Class Tussle For a King of the Road
EARLY Sunday mornings, the old women in black own the streets.
They walk deliberately from church to market in sturdy round-toed shoes, their faces soft maps of Europe framed in kerchiefs.
By night, the city becomes its new stereotype, an MTV generation party.
It starts when pub crawlers get hopping and does not end until the bars close at 2 or 3 A.M.


XL Foods reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Eastern Europe's Next Round
With the economic decline that followed the collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe now reversed, many companies are increasing production and enjoying their first taste of profits.
But having taken the most obvious steps to improve their performance, like slashing payrolls and opening export offices in Germany, they still face a broad range of problems that defy easy solutions.


Caesarean Delivery Can Mark a Child's Psyche
To the Editor:
"Natural Birth vs. On-Time Delivery" (Parent and Child, Aug. 3) makes no mention of the principal player in the birth drama.
The pros and cons of Caesarean delivery are addressed entirely from the mother's and the economic point of view.
The newborn, whose task is hardest of all, is treated as an incidental byproduct.


Pickens Foes Declare Truce Over Mesa
David Batchelder declared an armed truce today in his battle to take control of Mesa Inc., proposing a new set of directors but backing away from his plan to unseat the current ones.
Mr.
Batchelder, Mesa's former president, said that rather than waging a costly proxy contest, he would wait to see whether the company's chief executive, T. Boone Pickens, follows through on a promise to take bids for the company's sale.


Edwards's Rare Double Comes in Triple Jump
Jonathan Edwards of Britain felt petrified before the triple jump today at the world track and field championships, his stomach a cauldron of doubt and fear.
To distract himself, he played chess.
"I knew if I jumped well I was capable of winning and breaking the world record, but I almost didn't dare to believe it," he said.


Singapore Certainly Isn't Anti-American; Folly to Return
To the Editor:
It is gratifying that my Government considers me such a threat to its political well-being and stability that it has resurrected hackneyed, duplicitous allegations (letters, July 20 and 30).
Those allegations were dealt with in my book, "To Catch a Tartar: A Dissident in Lee Kuan Yew's Prison," which, albeit not banned, is not available in Singapore.


Leaping Into Untouched Territory


Bantam Doubleday Unit Gets a Name, and Titles
Bantam Doubleday Dell said yesterday that its newest publishing division would be called Broadway Books and that it had already acquired the rights to more than a dozen titles, including two by Bernice King, the youngest daughter of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
William Shinker, the president and publisher of the new division, said Broadway Books was named for the New York City thoroughfare and was intended to reflect Broadway's eclecticism and flair.
The division will have a logo that is the letter "B" bisected on the diagonal.


Giants Keep Eye on Brown
When the Franchise, otherwise known as Giants quarterback Dave Brown, gets hurt, the entire organization takes a deep breath.
And even though Brown's elbow injury in Sunday's exhibition victory over Cleveland doesn't appear serious, the Giants will be walking on eggshells for the next several days.
"There is a lot of swelling there and we are concerned," Giants Coach Dan Reeves said, referring to Brown's elbow.


M.T.A. Panel Backs Rises In Subway and Bus Fares
The Finance Committee of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority approved a broad package of fare and toll increases yesterday, but the fate of transit passes for 500,000 students remained up in the air.
With barely a month left until school starts, Deputy Mayor John S. Dyson and M.T.A. officials agreed yesterday morning to meet before the day was over to try to save the passes.
But by day's end, there had been no meeting, and it was unclear if City Hall and the transit agency were any closer to resolving their impasse over the passes.


Black Journalist Granted Stay of Execution by the Judge Who Sentenced Him
Ten days before he was to be put to death for the murder of a police officer here, Mumia Abu-Jamal, a black journalist active in politics, was granted an indefinite stay of execution today by the same judge who sent him to death row 13 years ago.
The judge, Albert F. Sabo of Common Pleas Court here, has sent 31 people to death row, more than any judge in the state, and his aides said they could not remember another time that he had granted a stay of execution.


Tennis on a Steamy Carolina Day Sends Dinkins to the Hospital
Former Mayor David N. Dinkins of New York City has been in a South Carolina hospital since Sunday after being thoroughly whipped at tennis -- not by his opponent's serve or backhand, but by the midday sun.
Mr.
Dinkins, 68, was in good condition yesterday at Hilton Head Hospital, where he was being treated for heat exhaustion.
"I'm feeling terrific, and I hope to be out of here at noon tomorrow," Mr.
Dinkins said in a telephone interview.


International Briefs; New Toshiba Camera Can Transmit Images
The Toshiba Corporation said yesterday that it would begin selling the world's first still camera with built-in telecommunications functions.
The new Proshot is a digital camera equipped with a modem and communications software for sending recorded images along standard telephone lines.
It incorporates a 16-megabit flash memory and 2 megabytes of data storage, and has a microphone to allow users to record audio signals, Toshiba said.


SPX Corp.(SPW,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Speedy Muffler King reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Corrections
An article on Friday about the arrest of a new suspect in the World Trade Center explosion misspelled the surname of the Federal Bureau of Investigation supervisor who helped bring the suspect back to the United States.
He is Tom Pickard, not Picard.


Moog Inc.(MOG.A,A) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Canam Manac Group Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Ingles Markets Inc. reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 24


Market Place; A Bell Atlantic-Nynex cellular venture has spinoff prospects.
INVESTORS paid scant attention early last month when the Bell Atlantic and Nynex corporations said they had completed a merger of their cellular-telephone properties.
Then the chairman of Nynex, Ivan G. Seidenberg, let slip that the partners might consider spinning off the new company.
Suddenly, Wall Street was all ears.


KCS Energy Inc.(KCS,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


National Re Corp.(NRE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Senators Start Debate On Changes In Welfare
With Republicans and Democrats laying out differences between the two parties in broad philosophical terms, the Senate today began debating legislation to strip the Federal Government of control over the nation's main cash welfare program and give it to the states.
Senator Bob Packwood, the Oregon Republican who is chairman of the Finance Committee, said that the program, Aid to Families With Dependent Children, had utterly failed to cure poverty and had increased dependency since it was created 60 years ago as part of the Social Security Act.


Retired People Are Struggling in the New Russia
"We live very badly," said Anastasiya Krykova, 71, sitting on the deteriorating stoop of an old-age home for war veterans in the middle of Siberia.
"If I didn't still work, I wouldn't have enough to eat."
Mrs.
Krykova's pension is only 150,000 rubles, or $34 a month, supplemented by $16 more she gets for washing floors in a library in Irkutsk University, one of the cultural treasures of this city founded by the Czar's Cossacks in the 17th century.


Oneida Ltd.(OCQ,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


First Marathon reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Assigned Darin Erstad, outfielder, to Lake Elsinore of the California League.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Signed Sal Bando, general manager, to a three-year extension.


T R Financial reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


DavCo Restaurants (DVCO,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 1


PennCorp Financial Group Inc.(PFG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Bally's Grand Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Henning Named as Blackhawk Assistant
The Chicago Blackhawks announced yesterday that a former Islanders coach, LORNE HENNING, had joined Coach CRAIG HARTSBURG's staff as an assistant.
Henning spent 19 of the last 23 seasons as either a player, assistant or coach with the Islanders organization.
He was head coach at Minnesota from 1985-87, and last season he coached the Islanders to a 15-28-2 record before being dismissed.
Among Henning's players in Minnesota were Hartsburg and DIRK GRAHAM, captain of the Blackhawks the last six and a half years, Yesterday, Graham announced that he would retire and join Henning as an assistant coach, too.


SNC-Lavalin Group Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Tower Automotive Inc.(TWER,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Home Run Among 100 Oddball Notions
THE campaign to sell barbecue grills to vegetarians is languishing.
The boss wants ideas, and he wants them Thursday.
You could roll in your rocking chair until an idea comes.
You could take a long, ruminative walk.
You could ask the fellow who delivers the pizza.
Mindlink Problem Solver, Corporate Edition, a Windows program from the Mindlink Software Corporation of North Pomfret, Vt., extracts ideas buried in your head.
It is a solo brainstorming session.
It keeps track of crazy ideas that may lead to more crazy ideas; out of 100 ridiculous suggestions, one can point the way to a practical solution.


17 Are Hurt in Bus Collision


CHRONICLE
NANCY KERRIGAN, the 25-year-old Olympic figure skater, will marry her manager, JERRY SOLOMON, 40, next month in Boston, The Associated Press reported yesterday.


OS/2 No Longer at Home at Home
MICROSOFT Windows 95 is still vaporware and will be for another two weeks, but the fumes already appear to have claimed the first victim in the personal computer operating system wars.
My copy of the OS/2 operating system, developed by International Business Machines, just went out the window.


INSIDE
Wilson's Turnabout
Gov.
Pete Wilson of California, a leader in the fight against affirmative-action plans, was once a passionate supporter of them.
Page A10.
G.M. to Split Off Unit
Eleven years after buying Electronic Data Systems from H. Ross Perot, General Motors decided to split off the growing computer unit.
Page D1.
France Leads in Arms Sales
France surpassed the United States as the leading arms dealer to third-world countries last year, a Federal study reported.
A3.


Jobs Fair for Newark Schools
Hoping to fill 150 teaching positions and other vacancies for the coming school year, the State Education Department will hold a jobs fair on Thursday at the Rafael Hernandez Elementary School.


Pavin Is the Favorite Son in the P.G.A.
When the P.G.A.
Championship begins Thursday at the Riviera Country Club, the focus of attention will be a splay-footed man with curly hair and a salt-and-pepper mustache, a smallish fellow whose stature belies his status and whose Chaplinesque mannerisms conceal the heart of a golfing killer.
Finally, it's Corey Pavin's turn.
The supporting actor has become the leading man.
This will not be the first Grand Slam event that Pavin has gone into as one of the favorites, but it will certainly be the first that he has gone into as the favorite, the bet-the-ranch, mortal lock.


They Called for Talent. They Got It.
By 6:30 last Thursday morning, when it had reached only 70 degrees, there were already 20 young designers lined up in the parking lot at Union Square, using hat boxes as stools, lying on plastic-covered clothes as if they were sleeping bags.
By 9:30, when Paper magazine's Fashion Mobile -- a lumbering motor home full of fashion editors and stylists -- pulled into the parking lot, there were about 50.
And at 2:30 P.M., when Geoffrey Beene arrived as promised to view some of their efforts, the number was still rising, as was the temperature.
With its acres of tattooed flesh, the lunar landscape of body piercing and the sheer tenacity of those in line, this scene might have been a particularly disorganized distribution of tickets for a Hole concert.
But a close look at the tattoos of Marlene Clyne, for instance, revealed sewing machines and dress forms encircling her ankle.
Ms.
Clyne ("Marlene as in Dietrich, and Clyne as in Patsy," she said) and the others in line were taking a first step toward a near-impossible dream -- that of becoming a known designer.


Fortis Inc. reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


METRO DIGEST
25 ARE CHARGED IN FUEL TAX FRAUD Federal authorities unsealed an indictment that provided new evidence of the growing power of Russian organized crime in the metropolitan region, charging 25 people with taking part in an elaborate scheme that cheated the government of more than $140 million in fuel taxes.
If the Justice Department succeeds, it could lead to the closing of the Southbury Training School, home to 843 retarded adults.  [ A1. ] NEW YORK CITY  M.T.A.
COMMITTEE APPROVES INCREASES The Finance Committee of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority approved a broad package of fare and toll increases, but the fate of transit passes for 500,000 students remained up in the air.  [ B3. ] CLOSING ARGUMENTS IN ABORTION CASE An assistant district attorney prosecuting a doctor in a woman's death after an abortion described the doctor as an incompetent man who knowingly took on a complicated abortion that he did not have the skills to perform.
Mr.
Dinkins, 68, was in good condition at Hilton Head Hospital, where he was being treated for heat exhaustion.  [ B2. ] REGION  GROWING PAINS IN HOBOKEN Early Sunday mornings, the old women in black own the streets.
They walk deliberately from church to market in sturdy round-toed shoes, their faces soft maps of Europe framed in kerchiefs.
By night, the city becomes its new stereotype, an MTV generation party.
It starts when pub crawlers get hopping and does not end until the bars close at 2 or 3 A.M.
Afternoons, however, belong to everybody.
Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves.  [ B5. ] Chronicle B2


Singapore Certainly Isn't Anti-American
To the Editor:
William Safire (column, July 20) described Singapore as "anti-American." Singapore has consistently spoken up in support of the United States presence in the region.
Assistant Secretary of State Winston Lord said in Singapore in May 1995 that the United States had "a very positive ledger" with Singapore.


Kloster Cruise Ltd. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Northwestern Public Service Co.(NPS,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Jun 30


Teleglobe Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Fitting In Is a Snap For Jets' Alexander
David Alexander moved onto the Jets' first team offense today before he had even snapped a ball to a southpaw quarterback for the first time in his career.
The arrival of the former Eagle center kicks off a week in which many memories of the Eagles, good and bad, will surface for Coach Rich Kotite.
On Saturday night, the Jets will face the Eagles in Jackson, Miss.
To many this could be a confrontation between Kotite and Randall Cunningham.
Kotite still has said nothing publicly about his former quarterback, who has been openly critical of his former coach.


F.B.I.'s Search for Serial Bomber Is Unsettling for Radicals in the Bay Area
Near dusk one recent summer evening, Stephen Dunifer heard his doorbell ring, and with a quick glance out the window, knew almost at once that the stranger was a Federal agent.
"It was a guy in a suit, a jacket and tie and slacks and all that, and we don't get too many of those around here," recalled Mr.
Dunifer, a 43-year-old engineer.
"He said he had a tip from someone he had to check out, a tip that I was the Unabomber."


Caesarean Delivery Can Mark a Child's Psyche; Cancer and Light
To the Editor:
Re your Aug. 2 news article on how moving to a different country alters a woman's risk of breast cancer:


LSB Industries (LSB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
NBC to Pay $1.27 Billion To Broadcast Olympics NBC short-circuited the traditional bidding process for the Olympics by agreeing to pay $1.27 billion for the television rights to the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney, Australia, and the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City.
NBC executed a triple gambit: It shut out the Fox Network, owned by Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation, from acquiring the Summer Olympics in Mr.
Murdoch's native land; prevented Walt Disney from making a quick splash in sports TV, and ended CBS's run with the Winter Olympics.  [ Page A1. ] Bankers Say Public Offering Is Possible for Donaldson  Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities is considering an initial public offering, investment bankers said.
It could raise as much as $400 million.  [ D2. ] Archer Dismisses Informer for U.S.
Firstier closed at $37 a share, down $2.
But the companies are more likely to sell a piece of the venture.
Market Place.  [ D8. ] Bantam Names New Division  Bantam Doubleday Dell said its newest publishing division would be called Broadway Books and that it had acquired the rights to more than a dozen books, including two by Bernice King, the youngest daughter of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.  [ D7. ] Discord at Fund for Russia  The merger of two investment funds that pump American money into Russian ventures has spurred intense public discontent from the fund chief passed over for chairman.  [ D4. ]


Kraft Selling Baking Lines To CPC for $865 Million
CPC International said yesterday that it would buy the baking operations of Kraft Foods, which include Entenmann's cookies and Oroweat bread, for $865 million in cash.
The acquisition would more than triple CPC's baking-brands sales of $500 million.
The company, based in Englewood Cliffs, N.J., said it would merge the Kraft operations with its existing baking lines, which include Thomas's English muffins, Arnold breads and Sahara pita bread.
It said the combined operation would be the largest maker of premium, or higher-priced, baked goods in the country.


At End of Fatal Abortion Trial, Two Portraits of a Doctor
An assistant district attorney prosecuting a doctor in a woman's death after an abortion described the doctor yesterday as an arrogant and incompetent man who knowingly took on a complicated abortion that he did not have the skills to perform.
The doctor's decision, the prosecutor told jurors during closing arguments, caused the death of the woman, a 33-year-old Honduran immigrant who was the mother of four young children.


Opera Made Easier


Florida Insurers Still Face A Gap in Disaster Coverage
As Florida residents sigh with relief over the mildness of Hurricane Erin, insurers are alarmed at the holes that remain in the financial safety net created by the state after Hurricane Andrew in 1992.
Bankers in New York are near completion of two credit agreements totaling $2.5 billion that would help insurers pay claims after a big storm.
But those agreements are not enough to cover the losses possible from the most severe storms.


The Sounds and the Fury of the Whitewater Hearings
Pity the Congress's only Socialist today as the newest Whitewater hearings opened with five solid hours of tooth-and-claw partisanship among panel members before even getting to the first witness.
"Excuse me, but I feel this very strongly," apologized Representative Bernard Sanders, Socialist of Vermont, furious at the proceedings after he fairly staggered from the hearing room.
The Congressman, bewailing the inquiry as a far tangent from more essential public business, stood on the steps of the House Rayburn building.
He looked apoplectic and more solitary than ever amid what opening statements were well recertifying as the ultimate two-party town.


Reinsurance Group of America Inc.(RGA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Hahn Automotive Warehouse Inc.(HAHN,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Geico Corp.(GEC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Wackenhut Corp.(WAK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Uniroyal Chemical Corp.(UCHM,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 2


Of African Meditation Vs. American Bluster
The double bill at Central Park Summerstage on Saturday afternoon brought together West African rock, by Ali Farka Toure from Timbuktu in Mali, and African-American blues by Lucky Peterson, originally from Buffalo.
There was kinship between the two in scales, rhythms and vocal inflections, in the down-home tone of their electric guitars, and in some boogie riffs Mr.
Toure has borrowed back from the blues.
Mostly, however, the double bill brought out contrasts between African contemplation and American swagger.
Mr.
Toure's songs have a relaxed, rolling sense of time.
Usually, an introductory phrase or two leads to a circular guitar line that will be repeated for the length of a song; a second guitar part, rhythms from two drummers and call-and-response vocals intertwine with the central phrase.
Mr.
Toure's singing is ardent but dignified, never straining; his lyrics, in such languages as Songhai, Peul and Bambara, impart advice -- "When the community needs you, you should not turn a blind eye" -- or confide in a loved one.


Smith Barney to End Up-Front Payments
Smith Barney Inc. said in a statement yesterday that it would eliminate up-front bonuses and enhanced commissions as incentives to recruit brokers.
These securities industry compensation practices have been widely criticized because they might encourage brokers to switch to higher-paying jobs and put their own interests before those of their customers as they seek to raise their incomes.


Trimin Enterprises reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Scientific-Atlanta Inc.(SFA,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Accuser Tells Of Sex Acts By Lawmaker
A 19-year-old woman today changed the tenor of the sexual assault trial of a Chicago Congressman, saying they had sex on numerous occasions in his campaign office when she was a 16-year-old volunteer worker.
The woman, Beverly Heard, broke her self-imposed silence in the trial of Representative Mel Reynolds, 43, who is charged with aggravated criminal sexual abuse, aggravated criminal sexual assault, obstruction of justice and solicitation of child pornography.


Clayton Homes Inc.(CMH,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


American Travellers Corp.(ATVC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Mafco Consolidated Group Inc.(MFO,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Flyers Renew Contract With Antoski
The Philadelphia Flyers yesterday signed left wing SHAWN ANTOSKI to a new contract.
Terms of the deal, announced by the club president and general manager, BOB CLARKE, were not disclosed.
Antoski, 25, led Philadelphia with 107 penalty minutes in 32 games last season after being acquired from Vancouver in mid-February.
Antoski had one assist -- his first point as a Flyer -- in 13 playoff games before separating his right shoulder in the conference finals. (AP)


Finally, the Role Marian Seldes Was Born For
"Oh my darling!" Marian Seldes says, even to a stranger.
"My love!" Everything about Ms.
Seldes in person is theatrical.
Her skin is pale, moonlike, her hair a brutal shade of black, the eyebrows bushy.
She speaks in italics.
The voice is breathless, floaty.
Every sentence seems to end with an exclamation.
At midday, she is dressed all in black except for a dusky gray silk stole.
And yet onstage in Edward Albee's "Three Tall Women" at the Promenade Theater, where she has just switched roles -- shedding the even-handed, almost subdued character known only as B to become A -- a mean old anti-Semitic "gorgon," as Ms.
Seldes calls her -- there is nothing stereotypically theatrical about Ms.
Seldes at all.
She has managed as A not only to express the dark rages of a serpentine, often grotesque old woman, but also to find moments of poignancy and even a kind of beauty; perhaps, Ms.
Seldes says, because it is a part she just may have been born to play.


Health o meter Products Inc.(SCAL,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Q&amp;A
Ball Lightning
Q.
My family saw what looked like a ball of lightning enter the glass front door, go right past us (or possibly even through us) in the living room and leave by the back window, where it hit a tree, causing some damage.
What was it and why weren't we hurt?


New York's Surliest
The lessons in vindictiveness start early in the New York City Police Department.
Just ask the Zanikos family, which runs a restaurant patronized by police recruits but now finds itself the target of a boycott after one of them spoke the truth to a reporter about police behavior.
This story began when the Times columnist Joyce Purnick was preparing an article on illegal parking by police officers throughout the city.
She interviewed Peter Zanikos, whose family restaurant, Michelle's, is around the corner from the police academy and caters mainly to its instructors and recruits.
Mr.
Zanikos made the mistake of asking two common rhetorical questions posed by many citizens who see police cars parked in defiance of the law: "Why don't cops put a quarter in the meter like I do? Why don't they get tickets like I do?"


Knockout Bridge Title Is Won Again by Team
The top-ranked team headed by Richard Freeman of Atlanta won its third straight title in the Spingold Knockout Teams at the conclusion of the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals here on Sunday night.
But the team members had nothing to spare: when play ended at 1 A.M., they had prevailed by the slender margin of seven imps.
The Freeman team included Nick Nickell of Raleigh, N.C., Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Ill., Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla., and Bob Wolff and Bob Hamman, both of Dallas.
The losers were Zia Mahmood and Michael Rosenberg, both of Manhattan, Chip Martel of Davis, Calif., and Lew Stansby of Castro Valley, Calif.


Publisher Arraigned After Wife's Drug Death
A Manhattan publishing executive was arraigned yesterday on drug possession charges after his wife died of what was apparently a heroin overdose in their Upper West Side apartment.
Richard Marback, 38, a publisher of a medical journal, was charged with possessing two glassine envelopes containing heroin, which the police found shortly after being called by Mr.
Marback to the couple's 14th-floor apartment at 222 West 83d Street late Sunday morning.


Bradley Opponent Raises Heat
Even though the election is more than a year away and he has not officially announced his candidacy against Senator Bill Bradley, Representative Richard Zimmer, Republican of Delaware Township, is turning up the heat.
Today he will publicly announce endorsements from Assemblyman Rodney Frelinghuysen, Republican of Harding Township, and Oscar Doyle, the chairman of the Morris County Republican Committee.


SFFed Corp.(SFFD,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Thomas Nelson Inc.(TNM,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Foster (L.B.) Co. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Torrence Is Fastest, If Not Most Popular
This should have been a celebrative moment, full of hugging and backslapping congratulation and the happy tears of achievement.
Gwen Torrence, the Olympic 200-meter champion, had finally won a world title at 100 meters today with a blistering start and a determined finish.
She saw "winner" flashed next to her name on the scoreboard and raised her hand in triumph as the fastest woman in the world.
But when she brought her hand down, no one came over to shake it.
Earlier on a cool, breezy afternoon, Jonathan Edwards of Britain twice broke the world record in the triple jump, becoming the first man to jump beyond 60 feet, which he surpassed by a quarter of an inch.
Edwards and the second- and third-place finishers -- Brian Wellman of Bermuda and Jerome Romain of the island of Dominica -- stood on the track, held hands and took a bow after a riveting competition.


New Survey of Sky Finds Most Quasars Are Equally Ancient
EVER since they were discovered more than 30 years ago, quasars have been a stunning enigma.
Shining like faraway beacons, they are the most luminous objects in the universe, each one emitting energies hundreds of times greater than all the combined stars in the Milky Way galaxy.
They are also among the most distant known objects, meaning that they provide glimpses of the early universe and must harbor clues to those primordial conditions.
Most astronomers suspect that quasars are fundamentally related to the formation of early galaxies, the origin of which is one of the great unsolved problems of astrophysics.
And quasars are presumably powered by another mysterious phenomenon, black holes, those extremely dense regions at the center of many galaxies where gravity is so strong that light cannot escape.


Chess
There is much more uncertainty in chess than most people imagine.
The grandmasters look so self-possessed at the table that it is easy to suppose that they are comfortably in control of whatever is going on.
But really, that look is the product of long years' training in concentration.
A good part of the time, it is just a disguise for anxieties.
The grandmasters have learned to carry on without the assurance that everything is going to come out all right.
Not every chessboard situation is solvable like a theorem in plane geometry, but they do their best to introduce clarity into the unclear and steel themselves to accept vicissitudes.


No Headline
"My family still wonders when I'm going back to medical school. They think, 'He's in New York with his hobby, doing dresses, but he'll go back one day.' " GEOFFREY BEENE, the designer.  [ B8:6. ]


CHRONICLE
When it came to deciding what to do if the retrial of the Menendez brothers and the Serbian war crimes trial should significantly overlap, there was no doubt for STEVEN BRILL, chief executive and editor in chief of Court TV, what course to take.
Court TV will not broadcast the second trial of the brothers, whose first trials for the murders of their parents ended in hung juries, Mr.
Brill announced yesterday.


Let All Under-18's Ride Free on Public Transit
To the Editor:
For years I have wondered why New York City has such an absurd transit pass system for schoolchildren.
I have marveled at the number of people involved in issuing these hologrammed passes, not once a school year, but once a month.


Art in the Hamptons: More Is Clearly More
In the beginning was the light: soft sunlight bathing miles of potato fields and sand dunes.
Artists like Jackson Pollock and Lee Krasner, Willem de Kooning and Fairfield Porter put down roots.
They were the early settlers, before the Hamptons became the Hamptons.


Creative Technology Ltd.(CREAF,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


PartnerRe Ltd.(PTREF,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Bank United of Texas FSB reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Canseco Wins One With Feet, Not Bat
Red Sox 5, Blue Jays 4
The Boston Red Sox traded for Jose Canseco because of his powerful bat.
Yesterday, Canseco's feet paid off.
Canseco scored the winning run on a sacrifice fly in the 10th inning, giving Boston a 5-4 victory as the Red Sox finished an 8-2 trip with a four-game Skydome sweep of the Blue Jays.


VLSI Technology Inc.(VLSI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Florida East Coast Industries(FLA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


Clinton Is Expected to Get Tough on Tobacco Regulation
President Clinton said today that he favored "a tough and mandatory-type program" of new Federal efforts to deter smoking and tobacco sales among minors, but he did not specify what restrictions he had in mind and aides said he was still weighing his options.
With the President set to venture into the heart of tobacco-growing territory for an address to a Baptist convention in Charlotte, N.C., on Wednesday, the White House hinted that he was edging toward a harder approach to limiting young people's access to cigarettes.
Aides suggested Mr.
Clinton would not accept voluntary enforcement plans without a "hammer" that could be used to compel compliance by the tobacco industry.


Ex-Airline Chief Says $8 Million Went to Mexican Party
In documents filed quietly in a Texas court case, the fugitive former chairman of Mexico's largest airline has declared that he paid $8 million in illegal campaign donations to the governing party during his country's presidential elections last year.
Although opposition leaders have long accused the governing party of extorting huge donations from Mexican corporations, the statements by the former chief executive of the airline, Aeromexico, is the first time that any major business leader has lodged such charges.


France Takes Lead in Worldwide Arms Sales
France surpassed the United States as the leading arms dealer to third-world countries last year, probably signaling the end of American dominance in the $25 billion-a-year weapons market to developing nations, a Government study reported today.
Sales from the United States to what the study defined as developing countries fell to their lowest levels in eight years, to $6.1 billion last year from $15.4 billion in 1993, while sales from France jumped to $11.4 billion from $3.8 billion, the Congressional Research Service said.


BellSouth Unit To Merkley Newman
BellSouth Telecommunications, a division of the BellSouth Corporation, named Merkley Newman Harty in New York to handle its account, which had been at Tucker Wayne/Luckie &amp; Company in Atlanta for the last 45 years.
Though the billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $45 million to $50 million.
Cindy L. Frisina, the advertising and marketing communications director at BellSouth in Atlanta, said last week that Merkley Newman, a unit of the Omnicom Group, was awarded the account after a seven-week review, but she declined to provide further details.
Adweek listed the other finalists as Tucker Wayne; Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas in New York, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies, and Wells Rich Greene BDDP in New York, a unit of BDDP Worldwide.


For $1.27 Billion, NBC Accomplishes An Olympic Sweep
NBC fired a remarkable pre-emptive strike at rival networks yesterday by agreeing to pay $1.27 billion for the television rights to the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney, Australia, and the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City.
With support from General Electric, which owns it, NBC executed a nifty triple play: it shut out Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation, which owns the Fox Network, from acquiring the Summer Olympics in the magnate's homeland; prevented the Walt Disney Company, which agreed to acquire Capital Cities/ABC last week, from making a quick splash in sports television, and ended CBS's run as the home of the Winter Olympics at three.


Dole Rejects Democrats' Effort at Compromise on Bill to Curb Regulation
At the urging of business groups, Senator Bob Dole, the Republican leader, has rejected a new Democratic effort to break the impasse on legislation to limit Federal health, safety and environmental regulation.
A group of Democrats who proposed a new compromise had debated among themselves for more than a week over how far they ought to bend on the legislation, a central element in the Republican program but one that is proving to be extraordinarily difficult for the new majority in Congress to enact.


N.B.A. Battling Deadline
With the National Basketball Players Association poised to self-destruct at midnight tonight, league and club officials have launched a campaign to dissuade players from voting to decertify the union.
The campaign may become meaningless if the union disclaims interest in representing the players in collective bargaining, as it has promised to do if it does not have an agreement with the league by midnight.
The union has called a meeting of player representatives for tonight.


U.S. Pilot Rescued in Bosnia Is Leaving Active Air Force Duty
Capt.
Scott F. O'Grady, the Air Force F-16 pilot whose downing over Bosnia and dramatic rescue captivated the nation, said today that he would leave active duty and join the reserves later this fall.
Joining the Air Force Reserve will free up the 29-year-old pilot to give inspirational speeches, address military survival courses, help Air Force recruiting drives, write a book and perhaps even help make a movie about the six days he endured behind enemy lines.
He joined the Air Force in 1989.


Midland Walwyn reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


U.S. HOMECARE DISCUSSING CREDIT REVAMPING
The U.S.
Homecare Corporation said yesterday that it was in discussions with its banks and the Connecticut Development Authority to restructure the terms of its revolving line of credit and to obtain an additional $3 million of financing that would be guaranteed by the Connecticut authority.
The restructuring of the bank arrangement would include a waiver and amendment of existing covenants, U.S.
Homecare said.
The company, which is based in Hartsdale, N.Y., also said that revenue rose in its second quarter by 1 percent, to $18.2 million, from the corresponding period a year earlier.


Nowsco Well Service Ltd. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


An agency makes progress by roughing it in a field with few competitors: environmental issues.
TO Hugh Hough, the Manhattan advertising agency he founded, Green Team Advertising, has its origins in Cali, Colombia.
He does not mean the Colombia of the murderous Cali drug cartel, but the lushly forested Colombia of his youth and the richly imagined Colombia of the novels of Gabriel Garcia Marquez.
"I'm committed to saving the environment because of where I grew up and where I happened to work," said Mr.
Hough, who is 38 years old, citing work for clients like Greenpeace.
"But I also think I can make a living from it."


Prudential Told To Pay Broker In Fraud Case
In a highly unusual finding, a New York Stock Exchange arbitration panel has agreed with a Prudential Securities broker that her firm committed fraud by instructing her to sell limited partnerships to clients during the 1980's, and ordered Prudential to pay her more than $327,000.
The complaint was brought by Betty S. Allen, a 50-year-old broker at Prudential's office in Orlando, Fla., who sold more than $12 million of the limited partnerships during the seven and a half years she worked at the firm.
These sales were responsible for 60 percent to 80 percent of the commissions that Ms.
Allen generated during her career at Prudential, her lawyer, N. James Turner, said in a telephone interview yesterday.


International Briefs; Conditions Are Sought In S.A.S.-Lufthansa Pact
The European Commission said yesterday that Lufthansa, the German airline, and Scandinavian Airlines System must guarantee fair competition on routes between Germany and Scandinavia to get approval for their planned alliance.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Two Former Champions Are Upset
Former champions Mats Wilander of Sweden and Guy Forget of France were first-round losers yesterday in the $1.8 million ATP Championship in Mason, Ohio.
Wilander, who won the tournament four times in the 1980's, lost to Renzo Furlan of Italy, 6-4, 7-6 (7-4).
Forget, the winner in 1991, lost to 16th-seeded Alberto Berasategui of Spain, 7-5, 4-6, 6-4.
Two other seeded players moved into the second round.
No. 11 Jim Courier, the tour's top-ranked player in 1992, beat Jared Palmer, 6-3, 6-2, and No. 15 Todd Martin defeated Jaime Yzaga of Peru, 6-3, 6-4. (AP)


Loans for Microentrepreneurs Make Sense
To the Editor:
Grameen Bank has indeed been successful in having an impact on millions of families in Bangladesh by making available small amounts of capital to individuals ("Global Grass-Roots Banking," editorial, July 27).


Timberwest Forest reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


On the Trail of a Vagabond Manatee
His name is Chessie and he is an Olympian of a mammal known as a manatee.
He is male, about 10 feet long, 1,200 pounds and 30 to 50 years old.
He was spotted here yesterday swimming up the East River.
And anybody who messes with him could be fined $20,000.
Chessie has now broken all records for known manatee travel, Linda Taylor of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service said.
Last year, on his first trip north, he made it as far as the Chesapeake Bay before scientists, concerned about his health in cooler waters, had him airlifted back to Florida in October.


Atlanta Gas Light Co.(ATG,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


CHRONICLE
Where has CRAIG DAWSON, the legendary maitre d'hotel of Sam's, the theater industry hangout at 263 West 45th Street, gone?
Not far.
After 18 years at Sam's and its predecessor, Charlie's, he has moved on to Barrymore's, two doors down at 267 West 45th Street, taking with him five waiters and many of the actors, technicians, casting directors and other theater folk who congregated around him.
He said yesterday that he had made the switch six weeks ago because of differences with Sam's management and the sense that it was time to move on.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  CROATS SEAL THEIR VICTORY  In the captured Serbian rebel capital of Knin, Croatian soldiers consolidated and celebrated a triumph that has altered the Balkan balance of power.
A1  CHANCE FOR PEACE, OR MORE WAR?
News analysis: Now that Croatia's offensive has redrawn the strategic map in the Balkans, many Western diplomats are asking if this is an opportunity for peace or the prelude to an even wider war.
A1  BALKAN REFUGEE CRISIS  As 120,000 fleeing Croatian Serbs sought help in Serb-held Bosnia, relief officials said they faced the biggest refugee crisis of the war.
A6  THE JAPANESE A-BOMB PROJECT  As Japan honors those who were killed at Hiroshima and Nagasaki, one aspect of the dawn of the nuclear age is nearly forgotten: Japan's own attempt to build an atomic bomb during World War II.
A2  RUSSIA'S POOR PENSIONERS  Many of Siberia's elderly, watching the value of their pensions dwindle with inflation, feel nostalgia for life under Communism.
A3  FRANCE LEADS IN ARMS SALES  France surpassed the United States as the world's leading arms dealer last year, while American sales fell to their lowest levels in eight years.
A3  MEXICAN CORRUPTION CLAIM  The fugitive former chairman of Mexico's largest airline said that he paid $8 million in illegal campaign donations to the governing party during his country's presidential elections last year.
A8  A blast that killed 22 people in Sri Lanka was tied to Tamil rebels.
A2  Cam Ranh Journal: Is Vietnam ready for U.S. soldiers' return?
A4  National A10-19,B6  HOUSE TAKES UP WHITEWATER  The House Banking Committee began a week of hearings into the financial and political underpinnings of President Clinton's investment in the Whitewater deal.
A1  AN EXTRA-PARTISAN DEBATE  Congressional Sketchbook: Lawmakers are displaying an unusual degree of partisanship as they look into the Whitewater case.
A18  NBC EXECUTES OLYMPIC SWEEP  NBC agreed to pay $1.27 billion for the television rights to the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney, Australia, and the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City.
A1  WILSON'S CHANGING STANCE  Gov.
Pete Wilson of California, now the point man in the fight to eliminate affirmative-action programs, was a passionate supporter of them as recently as last year.
A10  STAY FOR JAILED JOURNALIST  Mumia Abu-Jamal, a black journalist active in politics who was to be put to death for the murder of a police officer, was granted an indefinite stay.
A10  VICTORY FOR SIMPSON'S TEAM  A North Carolina woman to whom a detective repeatedly uttered a racial epithet may be forced to testify in the O. J. Simpson case.
A14  LAWMAKER'S ACCUSER TESTIFIES  A former volunteer for Representative Mel Reynolds testified that she and the lawmaker began having sex when she was 16.
A14  UNNERVED BY UNABOM INQUIRY  Authorities investigating the Unabom case have focused their attention on leftists and environmental radicals in the San Francisco area, particularly Berkeley.
A19  LEG FOUND AT BOMBING SITE  A medical examiner revealed that a mysterious, unidentified leg had been found in the rubble of the Oklahoma City Federal Building.
A19  WELFARE DEBATE BEGINS  The Senate began debating legislation to strip the Federal Government of control over the nation's main cash welfare program and give it to the states.
B6  REGULATION FIGHT CONTINUES  Senator Bob Dole rejected a Democratic attempt to break the impasse on legislation to limit Federal health, safety and environmental regulation.
B6  GINGRICH RUNS INTO OPPOSITION  Speaker Newt Gingrich fled from an Atlanta meeting organized for him to discuss changes in Medicare as trade unionists accused him of seeking to cut the program to finance tax cuts for the rich.
B6  The President backed plans to deter smoking among minors.
B6  Metro Digest B1  RUSSIAN MOB INDICTMENTS  Authorities unsealed an indictment charging 25 reputed members of the Russian mob in a scheme that cheated the Government out of more than $140 million in fuel taxes.
A1  HOME FOR RETARDED IN QUESTION  A Federal court convened to consider the fate of Connecticut's sole large home for the retarded, with the Clinton Justice Department pushing for a goal previous administrations have rejected: placing residents in the community.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C13-17  In the Hamptons art whirl, more is definitely more.
C13  Marian Seldes and the role she may have been born to play.
C13  "Harbinger" returns, and Eliot Feld remembers.
C13  Theater: "Deviant Craft." C14  Music: Foetus.
C14  Mostly Mozart.
C15  Ali Farkas Toure.
C15  Books: "War of the Worlds," a warning about cyberspace.
C16  Television: Three addicts.
C16  Fashion B8
They called for talent.
They got it.
Science C1-11  Restored wetlands called an effective buffer for flooding.
C1  To every perception, the brain may attach a value judgment.
C1  Quasars all seem to be equally ancient, new data say.
C1  There may be a window of opportunity to fight spinal damage.
C3  The prediction of earthquakes remains an uncertain science.
C5  Q&amp;A C5  Sports B9-14  Baseball: Yanks' McDowell shuts out Baltimore.
B9  Mets' Mlicki wins.
B11  Columns: Berkow on Ripken.
B9  On Baseball on Strawberry.
B11  Football: Jets' new center.
B13  Giants shallow at corners.
B13  Golf: Spotlight on Pavin.
B9  Track: A hot time but a cold shoulder for Torrence.
B9  Obituaries D20-21  Gay Wilson Allen, biographer  Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials  The Croatian offensive.
New York's surliest.
A modest step to save the fish.
Letters  Russell Baker: Ready for the last war.
A.
M.
Rosenthal: A return to Hiroshima.
Bernard W. Nussbaum: What I did and why I did it.
Nathan Glazer: The next chancellor's big chance.
Chronicle B2  Chess C11  Crossword C16


Aquila Gas Pipeline Corp.(AQP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CBI Industries (CBI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


May Department Stores Co.(MA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Sports of The Times; The Streak Is Boring, but Not Ordinary
IT'S a dull story, and if you happen to be busy there's no reason to read on.
This is a story about Cal Ripken.
And this is what Ripken has not done lately: He has not blasted anybody.
He has not been arrested or totaled his car in the wee hours.
He has not been admitted into a drug rehab center or been released from one or sought to renegotiate his contract or played the peacock after having homered.
Thus it is hard to make Cal Ripken, the Orioles' shortstop, interesting, and therefore it's surely a waste of time to read about him.
In fact, after last night's game against the Yankees in Yankee Stadium, he is just 28 games away from breaking one of the most boring records in the annals of sports.


Gloves, Hip or Classic
Once, a woman -- young, middle-aged or elderly -- wouldn't leave the house without wearing gloves.
Look at old photographs or vintage movies for proof.
But after the radical 1960's turned many traditions upside down, gloves simply became a way to keep the hands warm.
No more.
This fall two extremes of fashionable women, the conservative and the hip, will be wearing gloves for their own sake.
The hip will look for shiny black patent or animal prints, the classicists for white or black leather or some shade of suede.


Gay Wilson Allen, Biographer, Dies at 92
Gay Wilson Allen, a scholar and biographer who was a leading authority on Walt Whitman, died on Sunday at Rex Hospital in Raleigh, N.C.
He was 92 and had moved to Raleigh in 1988 from Oradell, N.J.
Professor Allen retired in 1969 from New York University's English department, which he joined in 1946.
He taught at Bowling Green State University, in Bowling Green, Ohio, from 1935 to 1946.


Bulldog Days: It's All McDowell as Yanks Triumph
With all the hoopla before the game, with all the news conferences that were held (three), with all the attention showered on Darryl Strawberry, Bobby Bonilla and Cal Ripken -- with all of that and more, the Yankees and the Orioles also played a baseball game at Yankee Stadium last night.
A big one. For both teams. And it was a good one.


Fidelity National Financial Inc.(FNF,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Equity Residential Properties Trust SBI (EQR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Perkins Family Restaurants L.P.(PFR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Saving Salt Marsh Of Remotest Queens; 2 Women Lead Fight for Preserve, Persuading City and Landowners
At 86, Aurora Gareiss cannot squish her feet through the marsh mud the way she used to.
Her eyes have trouble spotting the muskrats in the tall grass and the mussels on the shore.
And even with her hearing aid, she is unable to hear the night songs of the toads.
But on a recent sticky-sweet summer afternoon, Mrs.
Gareiss giggled like a girl when her friend, Virginia Dent, 73, took her arm and helped her the 50 yards or so along wooden planks from her house in Douglaston, Queens, to the rim of Udalls Cove.


2 Oil Companies Name Agencies
Two oil companies named agencies on their accounts last week.
The Citgo Petroleum Corporation in Tulsa, Okla., a subsidiary of Petroleos de Venezuela S.A., selected Wells Rich Greene BDDP in Chicago, a unit of BDDP Worldwide, to handle its account, with billings estimated at $10 million.
The creative portion of the account was previously handled in-house, while media services were previously handled by Bates Southwest in Houston, a unit of Cordiant P.L.C.
Wells Rich was awarded the account without a formal review.


Novacare Inc.(NOV,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


International Briefs; Dresdner Gets Shares
Dresdner Bank A.G. of Germany said yesterday that it held 92.41 percent of the capital of Kleinwort Benson, the British investment bank.
Dresdner announced on June 26 that it would acquire Kleinwort for $1.6 billion.
In a statement, Dresdner said it had been offered 118 million Kleinwort shares, or 87.51 percent of Kleinwort's capital, as of Friday afternoon.
It already had a stake of 4.91 percent.
Dresdner said it planned to buy the remaining shares before the end of 1995. (Reuters)


I.R.S. Pays $25,000 for Disclosing Data
The Internal Revenue Service has paid $25,000 in damages to a California tax preparer for improperly disclosing to one of his clients that the tax preparer had not filed his 1992 tax return.
But the service has refused to apologize for the incident, the tax preparer's attorney said yesterday.
"We got almost $1,000 per word spoken by the revenue officer," said Montie S. Day, the attorney who filed a wrongful disclosure lawsuit on behalf of the tax preparer, Curtis D. McCauley of Oakland, Calif.


House Panel Opens a New Front In the Whitewater Investigations
With Republicans saying the White House was deceptive and Democrats complaining of a partisan witch hunt, the House Banking Committee today began a week of hearings into the financial and political underpinnings of President Clinton's investment in the Whitewater real estate deal.
Representative Jim Leach of Iowa, the Republican committee chairman, said that contrary to White House arguments, his investigators had uncovered a pattern of influence peddling in Arkansas.
He said the pattern involved Mr.
Clinton's partner, James B. McDougal, putting up most of the money in the failed Whitewater venture while receiving favors from Mr.
Clinton and the state government when he was Governor.


Avon Office Is Expected To Remain In Midtown
Avon Products Inc., which has threatened to move its headquarters and 950 employees from West 57th Street in Manhattan to Westchester County or Connecticut, is now expected to move to the Avenue of the Americas instead, real estate executives said yesterday.
If Avon remains in Manhattan, it will probably join a long list of corporations that have received city tax breaks as an incentive not to leave.
City officials declined to comment yesterday.


International Briefs; Whitbread to Purchase A Marriott Franchise
Whitbread P.L.C., best known as a brewer, said yesterday that it would become the third-largest hotel company in Britain with the purchase of a Marriott franchise.
Whitbread said it would buy 16 Marriott hotels in Britain from Scott's Hospitality Inc. of Canada for $:180 million ($288 million).
The company also signed an agreement with Marriott International Inc., based in Bethesda, Md., to develop the franchise in Britain.


Merisel Inc.(MSEL,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Talisman Energy reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Priestly Celibacy
To the Editor:
The Vatican's displeasure with Bishop Brendan Comiskey of Ireland for breaking ranks in his recommendation that the Irish Roman Catholic Church have an open debate on celibacy for priests, has set off a furor in Ireland (news article, July 30).
Bishop Comiskey has been called to Rome for "an exchange of views."


Insurance Auto Auctions (IAAI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


As Demonstrators Gather, Gingrich Delays a Speech
Speaker Newt Gingrich fled from a meeting organized for him to discuss changes in Medicare this morning as about 100 trade unionists, led by a Democratic Congressman, appeared in the hall to accuse him of seeking to cut the program to finance tax cuts for the rich.
Mr.
Gingrich did not confront the protesters face to face, and he returned later to speak unhindered.
But the demonstrators were the angriest group he has confronted this summer over Medicare, the health care program for the elderly, which is one of the most incendiary issues in Republican budget plans.


Canada Malting Co. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


On Affirmative Action, Wilson's Moderate Path Veered Quickly to Right
Gov.
Pete Wilson of California is now the point man in the fight to eliminate affirmative-action programs based on race and sex.
In speeches across the country, and in a successful push to eliminate preference programs in the University of California system, the Governor has seized upon an issue that by all accounts commands the attention of many Americans.


Balkan Opening: To Peace or More War?
Now that Croatia's lightning offensive has redrawn the map of the Balkans, the question is whether this is an unexpected opportunity for peace or the prelude to another round of war.
The cautious optimists, including some European and American officials, hope that Croatia's emergence as a muscular regional power, combined with NATO's recent ultimatum against the rebel Serbs in neighboring Bosnia, offers the best chance in recent years for a negotiated settlement.


Telecom Argentina Stet-France Telecom SA reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Cascades Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Lord Lever, Millionaire Adviser To British Laborites, Dies at 81
Lord Lever, a wealthy investor who served as a Cabinet minister and economic adviser to two British Prime Ministers, died on Sunday at his home in London.
He was 81.
His family did not disclose the cause of death.


Harry Jenkins, 68, Navy Pilot Imprisoned for 7 Years in Hanoi
Harry Tarleton Jenkins Jr., a retired Navy captain who spent more than seven years imprisoned in North Vietnam, much of it in solitary confinement, died last Wednesday in the crash of his light plane in Arizona.
He was 68 and lived in Coronado, Calif.
Captain Jenkins was piloting a Long Eze, a two-seater light plane that he built about five years ago from a kit.
The plane suddenly lost power while taking off from Prescott Municipal Airport, said his son-in-law, Comdr.
David M. Kennedy, senior test pilot for the Naval Weapons Test Squadron at Point Mugu, Calif.


25 Charged in Fuel Tax Fraud
Offering new evidence of the growing power of Russian organized crime in the metropolitan region, Federal authorities have indicted 25 people for taking part in an elaborate scheme that cheated the Government of more than $140 million in fuel taxes.


Don Patinkin, Israeli Economist and University President, 73
Don Patinkin, an eminent American-born Israeli economist who served as president of Hebrew University, died yesterday in Jerusalem.
He was 73.
The cause of death was lymphoma, some friends in the United States said.


Kulicke &amp; Soffa Industries (KLIC,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
5.72
4.30
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.41
5.39
4.43
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.40
5.39
4.93
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.45
6.48
7.28
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.89
6.91
7.53
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.73
7.75
8.29
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.26
6.22
6.38
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Lab Funds at Issue in Congress
Federal legislation to finance the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory is headed for a House-Senate conference committee.
The Senate voted last week to slash the lab's main Federal financing source by 40 percent.
The House passed a similar cut last month, but the two bills have a crucial difference.
The House bill does not specify how much money the Princeton lab should get.
The Senate version would allow the Energy Department to spend up to $56 million to continue operation of the Tokamak Fusion Test Reactor, the Princeton lab's main research machine.


National Western Life Insurance Co. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Hees International Bancorp reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Teva Pharmaceutical Industries(TEVIT,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


G.M. Planning to Split Off E.D.S. in Shareholder Deal
Eleven years after buying Electronic Data Systems from Ross Perot, the General Motors Corporation said today that it intended to part with the company through a stock swap that would leave it in the hands of its shareholders.
The long-expected split would allow E.D.S., the rapidly growing computer services company, to acquire other companies and to pursue mergers in its tumultuous industry more easily than it could with its intricate ties to G.M.


An American Tempest at Fund Created for Russia
Two years ago, President Clinton and Congress joined hands to create two investment funds that were to be the primary tools for pumping American money into Russia's ravaged economy and teaching the American way of doing business.
But the lessons the two funds have been offering lately are surely not ones the Americans intended: about board room fights, wounded egos, invective and angry resignations.
And some people say the ultimate lesson may be that the formula for success on Wall Street does not always work in public and nonprofit operations.


General Re Corp.(GRN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Rightchoice Managed Care Inc.(RIT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Malette Inc. reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Illegal Vans Move Closer To Licensing
The City Council took the first steps yesterday toward licensing some of the van operators who provide popular but illegal transportation in many neighborhoods of New York City.
A Council committee approved applications by two van operators in Brooklyn and one in the Bronx to be licensed by the city's Taxi and Limousine Commission.


GS Technologies Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Cedar Fair L.P. (FUN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 25


Six Are Found Guilty Of Mob-Related Crimes
Six reputed members of the Lucchese crime family, including one man said to be a capo, or captain, were convicted today on Federal charges related to the family's attempts to extend operations from New York to New Jersey.
The reputed capo, Joseph Giampa, 54, was found guilty of conspiring to establish gambling operations and aiding in racketeering in New Jersey.
The other men were convicted on charges that included dealing in drugs and firearms.


Restoring Wetlands Could Ease Threat of Mississippi Floods
JOHN RYAN is a pioneer in a brand new business: recreating wetlands.
A demand for restored swamps and marshes has been stimulated by the Clean Water Act, under which developers are required to create an acre or more of new wetland for each acre they drain.
Mr.
Ryan's wetland here is a rich refuge of birds and wildlife.
And it has another property that some believe could be of vast importance to the land along the Mississippi River: it can absorb copious quantities of flood water.
This sometimes overlooked feature of wetlands, some hydrologists believe, could be the foundation for a quite different method of flood control, one based on restoring enough wetlands to sponge up water naturally instead of relying so much on dikes and levees to contain it.
New data suggest that in the upper Mississippi watershed, a mere 3 percent of the land could suffice, less than farmers already set aside from production.


A Painful Portrait of Three Addicts
"High on Crack Street," an excrutiating close-up of three addicts, begins by switching back and forth between what remains of the textile mills that once made Lowell, Mass., a thriving city and the crack houses that have replaced them.
The documentary makers, Jon Alpert, Maryann De Leo and Rich Farrell, spent 18 months charting the highs and lows of Boo Boo, Brenda and Dick.
An occasional question is heard from behind the camera, but there is no narration and the principals, all white by the way, are allowed to tell and show.
Even their incoherence can be revealing.


Schultz Sav-O Stores Inc.(SAVO,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 15


Rooting for the Dark Side And Shattering the Past
"Hello and goodbye; this is the final Foetus performance ever," Jim Thirlwell, the leader of the 15-year-old industrial-rock band Foetus, roared on Friday night at Tramps.
The statement shouldn't worry Foetus fans.
Mr.
Thirlwell probably says that every night.
He's just that kind of doomsayer, a singer for whom the end is more exciting than the beginning.
In his lyrics, there is no love without violence, no ordinary house without a dead body tucked away somewhere, no automobile without blood on the fender.
He is the musical equivalent of the gruesome narrators of comic books and television shows, telling tall horror tales and rooting for the dark side.
Mr.
Thirlwell's music is similarly apocalyptic, with the past (snippets of classical and big-band records) shattering into pieces against a callous present (military drumming and hard guitar riffs).
In addition to having released more than 30 records under various pseudonyms (most of them involving the word Foetus), Mr.
Thirlwell is also an ace remixer, having added extra venom to music by Nine Inch Nails, Pantera and the Red Hot Chili Peppers in recent years.
On Friday night, he concluded his first tour in three years.
Dressed in a white tuxedo, looking like a big-band leader possessed by the Devil, Mr.
Thirlwell strutted menacingly around the stage screaming lyrics like "Me and my mental health don't agree most times."


Where Truth Is Fluid, And Cyber-Pets Charm
WAR OF THE WORLDS Cyberspace and the High-Tech Assault on Reality By Mark Slouka 185 pages.
Basic Books. $20.


Observer; Ready For the Last War
When you heard the Senate had voted to spend $1.5 billion to buy another Seawolf submarine you doubtless said to yourself, "The Seawolf -- isn't that the gigantic submarine built to keep the Soviet Union from conquering the free world?"
Then, unless I miss my guess, you said, "Sure it is, but hasn't the Soviet Union gone with the wind?"


Stadler and Cypress Tree Go Way Back
With a few swipes of a chain saw, golfer CRAIG STADLER extracted a bit of revenge.
Stadler returned to the Torrey Pines Golf Course in San Diego yesterday to help cut down the tree that contributed to his disqualification from a tournament in 1987, costing him a second-place finish and $37,000 in prize money.
"It's been eight years; it's time to put it to rest," Stadler said of the tree, which had been dying from a fungus.


Stocks Move Higher in Price, With Dow Climbing 9.86
The stock market moved higher yesterday as traders bought shares of companies expected to show higher-than-average earnings increases in the months ahead.
Cyclical issues that are sensitive to moves in the economy led the Dow Jones industrial average higher by 9.86 points, to 4,693.32.
General Electric rose 1 1/8, to 58 3/4; Goodyear, 1 1/8, to 43 1/4; Alcoa, 1, to 57 5/8, and International Paper, 1 1/8, to 86 3/8.


A Romp Relived, 86 Ballets Later
The year was 1966.
A youngster named Eliot Feld decided to try out some ideas he had about choreography in a studio at American Ballet Theater, where he was dancing at the time.
With encouragement from an older and wiser friend named Jerome Robbins, for whom Mr.
Feld had danced in the Broadway musical "West Side Story," he finished his first ballet, named it "Harbinger" and saw it performed by Ballet Theater at the New York State Theater in May 1967.
"Harbinger," a piece as bouncy and meditative as its Prokofiev piano score, will be performed by Feld Ballets/NY tomorrow and throughout the company's three-week summer season at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea), which ends on Aug. 19.
How does it feel to look back on that youthful effort, from the perspective of a man who has created 86 ballets and established one of the city's major dance troupes?
Is there anything he wishes he had done differently?


Bacharach Serenades Hall Inductees
Jerry Bailey, the East Coast jockey, and Bobby Frankel, the West Coast trainer, were enshrined in the racing Hall of Fame today while Burt Bacharach sat at a piano on the stage and played "That's What Friends Are For."
Bacharach, who owns the Kentucky Derby dropout Afternoon Deelites, set the tone for the induction ceremonies when, as keynote speaker, he played and sang a medley of his tunes and enthralled the crowd in a huge tent next door to the National Museum of Racing.
He denied any implications for the racing business with his choice for an opening song, "Raindrops Keep Falling on My Head."


Giant Labor Lobby Might Do the Job
To the Editor:
An Aug. 2 news article indicates the labor movement is planning a major emphasis on organizing.
What is needed is an approach for the 84 percent of workers not organized.


U.S. Joins Effort to Transfer Retarded Into Group Homes
A Federal court convened today to consider the fate of Connecticut's sole large institution for the mentally retarded, with the Clinton Justice Department pushing toward a goal that previous administrations have rejected: the transfer of hundreds of residents into the community.
If the Justice Department succeeds, it could lead to the closing of the Southbury Training School, home to 843 retarded adults.


Katz Media Group (KTZ,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMERITECH CORP., Chicago, the telecommunications holding company, said it would acquire ABE Marketing, a publisher of business directories in the Czech Republic, Croatia, Slovakia and Slovenia.
Terms of the transaction were not disclosed.
CHEVRON CORP., San Francisco, said its subsidiary Chevron Chemical Co., San Ramon, Calif., had agreed to sell its Channelview, Tex., polyethylene plant to Heller &amp; Co.
Terms were not disclosed.
DEAN FOODS CO., Franklin Park, Ill., an ice cream and frozen vegetable company, said it had bought Norcal Crosetti Foods Inc., Watsonville, Calif., a frozen vegetable concern.
Terms were not disclosed.


International Briefs; Profit Up at British Air
British Airways said yesterday that its pretax first-quarter profit rose 57 percent, to a record $:135 million ($216.4 million), helped by strong passenger traffic.
The profit for the three months ended June 30 compares with a restated $:86 million for the corresponding period of 1994, and was comfortably higher than analysts' forecasts. (Reuters)


Showboat Inc. (SBO,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Thorn Apple Valley Inc.(TAVI,NNM) reports earnings for Year to May 26


Avnet Inc.(AVT,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Man Charged in Dog-Punching
Two months after he walked away from a halfway house, Daniel Bock, a convicted robber, is back behind bars.
And Dux, a police dog, is recovering from injuries that the police say were inflicted by Mr.
Bock, who was captured over the weekend, The Associated Press reported.


UCAR Intl. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Hopes for Predicting Earthquakes, Once So Bright, Are Growing Dim
THE science of earthquake prediction has fallen on hard times.
Many of the nation's leading seismologists now think that earthquakes are inherently unpredictable.
They say that the search for ways to warn people days, hours or minutes before an earthquake appears to be futile.


A Metaphysical Takeoff In 'Marat/Sade' Style
Watching W. David Hancock's elaborate environmental theater piece, "Deviant Craft," is like cutting into what looks like an ordinary chocolate cake and discovering that it has 20 layers, each with a different flavor and consistency.
Don't ask what kind of cake it is.
Just dig in, chew thoughtfully, and decide for yourself what essence you wish to extract.
The play, performed by the Foundry Theater company in the inner recesses of the Brooklyn Bridge Anchorage, mixes "The Tempest," science fiction, "Marat/Sade," and "The Snake Pit" into an intriguing open-ended meditation on art and chicanery, insanity and genius.
Among other notions, the play re-imagines Prospero's "rough magic" in the more contemporary language of H. G. Wells and "Star Trek." It takes its title from a rowboat that levitates late in the play with several passengers aboard.
The craft may or may not be a time machine.


Unitor Group reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


METROPOLITAN GOLF REPORT
Met Amateur
The Met Amateur final is a 36-hole affair, but it was evident after only seven holes on Sunday that Jerry Courville Jr.'s name would join that of his father on the coveted trophy.
Courville, who like his father, plays out of Shorehaven Golf Club in East Norwalk, Conn., won six of the first seven holes against Harry Goett 3d of Oak Ridge Golf Club in Clark, N.J., and went on for a 7-and-6 victory at the Century Country Club in Purchase, N.Y.


Simpson Witness May Be Forced to Testify
A North Carolina woman to whom Detective Mark Fuhrman repeatedly uttered a racial epithet may be forced to testify in the O. J. Simpson case after a state court of appeals in Raleigh today cleared her way to California.
Reversing a trial court's decision made on July 28, the North Carolina Court of Appeals ruled that the testimony and tape recordings of Laura Hart McKinny, a college professor and would-be screenwriter who hired Mr.
Fuhrman as an adviser, "could reasonably make a difference in the outcome of the trial." In those tapes, Mr.
Fuhrman uses the word "nigger" 27 times, Ms.
McKinny's lawyers said.


Giants Want to Be Deeper at Cornerback
It appears that the Giants' defensive coordinator, Mike Nolan, has put together another pretty good defense.
It is only the preseason, but based on what the Giants' first-team defense did against the first-team offense of the Cleveland Browns in Sunday's preseason game, there is reason to be optimistic.
Granted, the Browns' Vinny Testaverde is to pro quarterbacks what "Wayne's World" is to CNN, but you can't take away what the Giants did to the Browns.
The Giants' starters held Cleveland's starters to 11 plays and just 23 yards over about a quarter and a half.
Despite having the Pro Bowl receiver Andre Rison and the solid running back Leroy Hoard, the Browns did not convert a third down until the third quarter, against the Giants' second-stringers.


Intrenet Inc.(INET,NSC) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Independent Insurance Group Inc.(INDHK,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Donaldson, Lufkin Is Said To Weigh a Public Offering
The Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities Corporation, seeking more capital, is considering an initial public offering, bankers familiar with the company say.
Such a sale would probably involve selling a portion of the investment bank, perhaps 20 percent, and could raise as much as $400 million, or more.
While the Equitable Companies, Donaldson, Lufkin's parent, said earlier this year that it had discussed a potential sale of the brokerage firm with several interested buyers, it later shelved those proposals, citing potential problems with financial regulations.


Oceaneering Intl.(OII,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Brain May Tag All Perceptions With a Value
THE palette of sights and sounds that reach the conscious mind are not neutral perceptions that people then evaluate: they come with a value already tacked onto them by the brain's processing mechanisms.
This is the conclusion of psychologists who have developed a test for measuring the likes and dislikes created in the moment of perceiving a word, sound or picture.


A Manatee Off Manhattan
His name is Chessie.
He's an Olympian of a mammal known as a manatee, a male, about 10 feet long, 1,200 pounds, 30 to 50 years old.
He was seen swimming up the East River, far from his winter home in Florida.
Last year, on his first trip north, he made it as far as Chesapeake Bay.
He has now broken all records for known manatee travel.
Article, page B5.


On My Mind; A Return to Hiroshima
The assignment was to return to Japan, where he had lived as a foreign correspondent, and write a magazine article for his paper on the anniversary of the bombing of Hiroshima.
The article detailed the horrors of that day in August 1945 and the horrors that lived with survivors every day since -- the sense of separation from the rest of the world, the anguish of young women having to expose the scars on their faces as they walked in the street.
Who would marry such as them?
Would they dare to give birth to a child?


Treasury Securities Up; Japan Buying Is Watched
Prices of Treasury securities moved a little higher yesterday, on optimism that a stronger dollar will increase foreign demand this week at the Treasury's auctions.
But many in the market are skeptical that Japanese buying in the quarterly auctions, at which $42.5 billion of United States securities are being sold, will be stronger than ususal, despite last week's announcement by the Japanese Finance Ministry that it was loosening rules to encourage Japanese institutions to invest more overseas.
But few expect the demand by Japanese investors will be anywhere near the level they exhibited in the 1980's.


Genesis Health Ventures Inc.(GHV,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Animal Studies Hint at Ways To Treat Spinal Cord Injuries
Scientists say the results of new research with animals suggest that damage from wounds to the spinal cord may not be as irreversible and uncontrollable as previously believed.
It may be possible to reduce, or even reverse, some of the damage with quicker treatment, especially immediate therapy to disrupt a biochemical cascade of secondary injury that follows the initial wound, the researchers say.


Universal Corp.(UVV,N) reports earnings for Year to Jun 30


State Auto Financial Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Goldsmith/Jeffrey Gets an Account
DCR Communications in Washington, a wireless telephone service company, named Goldsmith/Jeffrey Advertising in New York as the first agency to handle its account.
Although the billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated they could reach $30 million.


Figgie Intl.(FIGIA,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Slocan Forest Products Ltd. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


American Medical Response Inc.(EMT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Orsulak's Power In a Pinch Lifts Mets
With all the young prospects the Mets are playing in their outfield these days, Joe Orsulak knows he has to be patient.
Even if he's not in the starting lineup, the man affectionately referred to as the consummate professional knows he'll probably get at least one chance to make an impact on the game.
When his chance came in the seventh inning last night at Shea Stadium, Orsulak delivered in thrilling fashion.
With two out and two runners on in a tie game, Orsulak watched three balls from reliever Terry Mathews before sending his next pitch sailing over the right-field wall for a three-run home run.


Pool Energy Services Co.(PESC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


The Croatian Offensive
The war in the Balkans has reached another dubious milestone with the Croatian Army's swift and successful offensive against Serbian fighters and civilians who have controlled the Krajina region between Zagreb and the Adriatic coast for the last four years.
Like the Bosnian Government, which has adopted a more aggressive military strategy in recent months, Croatia seems to have given up on international efforts to roll back Serbian conquests and decided to act itself.
It is not yet clear whether this shift will speed an end to the former Yugoslavia's sufferings or make matters worse.
What seems reasonably certain is that the initiative is now passing from outside powers, long frustrated in their efforts to achieve diplomatic compromise, to Balkan leaders impatient for clear-cut military solutions.


Donnelly Corp.(DON,A) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 1


MEMC Electronic Materials Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Great Dane Holdings reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Tide of Fleeing Serbs Put at 120,000
The estimate of the number of Serbs fleeing Croatia after Government troops retook rebel-held land rose to 120,000 today, and relief officials said they faced the biggest refugee crisis of the Balkan war.
The president of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Cornelio Sommaruga, said here tonight that he was concerned about reports of attacks from areas held by Croatian troops on the refugees.
Some of the refugees have traveled as far as Serbia, while others are in Serbian-held parts of Bosnia and others are trying to leave the area of Croatia taken by the Government.


I.B.M. and Toshiba Expected To Announce a $1 Billion Plant
Joining a multibillion-dollar international rush to increase production of computer memory chips, I.B.M. and the Toshiba Corporation were expected to announce plans today to invest more than $1 billion in a new plant in northern Virginia, people familiar with the announcement said.
The two companies, which already conduct joint semiconductor research in East Fishkill, N.Y., and have a joint venture that produces flat-panel color screens in Japan, would split the cost of the new plant, which is expected to come on line in 1997, according to those familiar with the deal.
The new plant would produce the latest generation of dynamic random-access-memory chips, which are mostly used in personal computers.


100,000 New Yorkers May Be Cut Off Welfare in Crackdown
In an unprecedented hunt for welfare fraud and abuse, the Giuliani administration says it is planning to cut off benefits to more than 100,000 New Yorkers by the end of the year.
Though some outside fiscal monitors say they do not believe the city can meet that goal, many people who have unsuccessfully tried to win welfare benefits in recent weeks have become utterly convinced that the city is serious.


Cable TV Channels Choose Agencies
Two cable television channels have named new agencies to handle their accounts, without formal reviews.
The Weather Channel in Atlanta, a unit of Landmark Communications, selected Bozell New York, a unit of Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt, to handle its account, which was previously handled by various agencies on a project basis.
The billings were estimated at $10 million.


World News Briefs; U.S. Moving to Extradite Man Wanted by Israel
The United States plans to begin extradition proceedings this morning against a man identified as a top leader of the militant Palestinian group Hamas who is being detained in New York City, a defense lawyer said last night.
Israeli asked the United States last week to arrest and extradite the man, Mousa Mohamed Abu Marzook, a 45-year-old Palestinian businessman, on charges he helped organize terrorist attacks in Israel.


J. H. Marshall, 90, An Oil Executive
J.
Howard Marshall 2d, a lawyer, oil industry executive and philanthropist, died Saturday at Park Plaza Hospital in Houston, where he lived.
He was 90.
Mr.
Marshall was known for the role he played in the family feud that has been going on for more than a decade at Koch Industries, one of the biggest privately held companies in the country.
A director of the company and a large shareholder, Mr.
Marshall sided with Charles Koch, the chairman of Koch Industries, and foiled a takeover attempt by Mr.
Koch's brother, William.


Accounts
*
UK Charity Lotteries, London, to Bartle Bogle Hegarty, London, as the first agency to handle its account.
The billings were estimated at $7.5 million. *
Cashgraf Software Inc., St.
Petersburg, Fla., to Rizzuti Marketing and Media Group, Carrollton, Tex., to handle its account, which was previously in-house.
The billings were estimated at $6 million.


Patterns; Parsons to Close Auditorium
The Parsons School of Design Auditorium, at 40th Street and Seventh Avenue, never passed itself off as a grand setting for fashion shows.
Rather, it was a reliable, no-frills workhorse of a space for designers, particularly the cash-strapped.
Now it will close.
Construction to convert it to a two-level classroom space will begin next summer.
Seventh on Sixth, which used the auditorium as one of three sites for the men's wear shows in late July, will soon begin looking for alternatives. (This week it expects to settle negotiations with the owners of the Bryant Park Grill to let it pitch its tents in the park for the fall shows.)


6 Hurt in Chain Collision
A driver ran a red light at a busy downtown intersection during the lunch hour yesterday, setting in motion a chain reaction that left at least six people injured.
The police charged that Idena Brown's 1986 Buick collided with another car, ran down three pedestrians who were trying to cross the street and then struck the rear end of a third auto that, in turn, collided head-on with yet another car.


Citation Corp.(CAST,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 2


Japan's A-Bomb Project: One of War's 'What Ifs'
As Japan honors the spirits of those who were killed when America dropped the atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki half a century ago, one aspect of the dawn of the nuclear age is nearly forgotten in Japan, unmentioned in textbooks, speeches and peace museums.
It is Japan's own attempt to build an atomic bomb during World War II.


Transtar Holdings L.P. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CROATS CELEBRATE CAPTURING CAPITAL OF SERBIAN REBELS
Croatian soldiers swaggered through this captured Serbian rebel capital today, consolidating and celebrating a triumph that has altered the Balkan balance of power.
As the Government declared a formal end to its successful three-day campaign, Serbian civilians spoke of shelling that terrorized them and of abuse of civilians during the three-day battle.


Women Hit Hardest by Layoffs
Three-quarters of the 744 state workers who lost their jobs last month when Motor Vehicles Department offices were turned over to private companies were women, and nearly half were members of minorities, state personnel records show.


Robert P. Hulburd, Educator, 74
Robert Penniman Hulburd, a former chairman of the German department and administrator at Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass., died on Saturday in the L. W. Blake Hospital in Bradenton, Fla.
He was 74 and lived in Holmes Beach, Fla.
Mr.
Hulburd, whose father was chairman of the mathematics department at Phillips Exeter Academy in Exeter, N.H., graduated from Phillips Exeter and, in 1943, from Princeton University.
He later received a master's degree from Middlebury College in Vermont.


Mercantile Stores Co.(MST,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Vishay Intertechnology Inc.(VSH,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Tejas Gas Corp.(TEJ,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Mexican Claim of Graft
In documents filed in a Texas court case, the fugitive former chairman of Mexico's largest airline has asserted that he paid $8 million in illegal campaign donations to his country's governing party during the presidential elections last year.
Article, page A8.


Tommy Hilfiger Corp.(TOM,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Man Seriously Injured in Subway Accident
A man was critically injured last night when he fell between the cars of a moving subway train, the authorities said.
The accident occurred aboard a southbound J train at 7:45 P.M., said Bob Slovak, a spokesman for the New York City Transit Authority.


Rival Co.(RIVL,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Hearing Set for Nebraska Receiver
On the same day Nebraska will begin to defend its college football title, receiver RILEY WASHINGTON will face a preliminary court hearing on an attempted murder charge.
Washington was not in court yesterday when Lancaster County Judge JAMES FOSTER scheduled the hearing for Aug. 31, the day that Nebraska starts its season against Oklahoma State at Stillwater, Okla.


Williams Loses Quickly
Her practice partners are men and her blistered shots leave skid marks, but when the lights go on, Venus Williams is still a beginner.
Playing in front of an umpire for the first time in 10 months, the 15-year-old dropped her first three service games tonight, sprayed her ground strokes all over the country club and lost to 63-ranked Asa Carlsson of Sweden, 6-4, 6-1.
"I'm just 15, and this is just the beginning of my tennis," she said.
"But this is where I grew up and I wanted to play well."


Russian Emigres Are Among 25 Named in Tax Fraud in Newark
Federal authorities unsealed an indictment today that provided new evidence of the growing power of Russian organized crime in the metropolitan region, charging 25 people with taking part in an elaborate scheme that cheated the government of more than $140 million in fuel taxes.
Officials said many of those indicted are emigres from the former Soviet Union who have moved up from petty scams to multilevel conspiracies like the one they are now accused of, which revolved more around dummy corporations and sleight-of-hand accounting than street-corner hustling.


Cablevision Systems Corp.(CVC,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Wheatley Signs: 5 Years and $5.2 Million
After months of rocky but amicable negotiations with the Giants, Tyrone Wheatley has finally joined the team.
Wheatley, the No. 1 draft pick out of Michigan, signed a five-year deal late last night worth about $5.2 million.
Wheatley reported to training camp at Fairleigh Dickinson University in Florham Park, N.J., at about 9 P.M. and will work out with the team today.


Plane Lands Hastily on I-287
Interstate 287 became a makeshift runway yesterday, when a single-engine plane made an emergency landing after losing power during a training flight.
Trooper Al Della Fave of the state police said the 1980 Cessna four-seater touched down at 1:30 P.M. on a lightly traveled stretch of road.
Neither the pilot, Philip C. Haws, nor his student, Kenneth A. Calandriello, was reported injured.


New Jersey Transit Is Fined
Federal regulators said yesterday that New Jersey Transit should pay $322,704 in fines for violating safety standards for underground storage tanks at 18 bus stations and radio towers throughout the state, The Associated Press reported.
Most of the tanks were used to store gasoline, and they did not comply with regulations designed to prevent leaks, spills and even explosions, the Environmental Protection Agency said.
Penny Bassett Hackett, a transit spokeswoman, said the agency's current operations comply with E.P.A. regulations.


Commercial Federal Corp. reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Deaths of Children in Troubled Families at a Low, Panel Reports
Twenty-five children whose troubled families were known to New York City child protection officials died in 1994, the lowest number since 1985, according to a city report.
An additional 49 children who were not known to the city's Child Welfare Administration died of suspected abuse in 1994.


Personal Health; Impotence: more options, more experts, more success.
FEW people relish the idea of having to go through a "clinical" procedure to engage in sexual activity.
Most would prefer sex to be a wholly spontaneous act, which is the main reason why birth control methods that must be used at the time of intercourse are not very popular or successful.
But when the choice is between performing a preliminary mechanical act and being unable to enjoy sexual intercourse, a growing number of men with erectile dysfunction are choosing to forgo spontaneity so they can maintain an active sex life.


Cox Communications Inc.(COX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Journey to Hanoi
Twenty years after the fall of Saigon and one month after President Clinton established diplomatic relations with Hanoi, Secretary of State Warren Christopher's visit to Vietnam last weekend was an important step in the painful process of reconciliation.
Mr.
Christopher set just the right tone on a journey he said he had long hoped to make.
There would normally be nothing unusual about a Secretary of State visiting the capital of an East Asian country of 70 million people that eagerly courted American investment and was a leading military power in a region made nervous by recent Chinese belligerence.
In this case, no United States Secretary of State had ever gone to Hanoi before.


Journal; Who Lost The Arts?
What if Barbra Streisand had not defended the National Endowment for the Arts at Harvard?
What if Bill Clinton had defended the N.E.A. as vociferously as he did public broadcasting?
What if Christopher Reeve, the most driven celebrity lobbyist for the arts, had not fallen from his horse?
What if Time had run Robert Hughes's take-no-prisoners defense of Federal arts funding on its cover before rather than after the crucial Congressional votes?
What if Melanie Griffith had not only lobbied Newt Gingrich but accepted a pouting-sex-kitten role in the screen version of his novel?
Now that Congress has almost gutted the Arts and Humanities Endowments -- in the House's case cutting their budgets by up to 40 percent and setting a two-year deadline for the N.E.A.'s extinction -- it's fair to ask: Did this drama have to reach this dire climax?
An informal survey of some on the barricades suggests that while the battle to save the N.E.A. was often scattershot, the agency never stood a chance once it became the designated scourge of the religious right.


Thousands of Serbian Civilians Are Caught in Soldiers' Gunfire
Tens of thousands of Serbian refugees were trapped as they fled Croatia today, caught in sporadic fighting between a conquering Croatian army and fleeing Serbian rebel forces, relief officials said.
The refugees, a 40-mile stream of civilians with rebel soldiers in their midst, were fleeing the Krajina region, heading for the relative safety of a Serbian-controlled area in neighboring Bosnia.


Dancers' Benefit
The Emergency Fund for Student Dancers will hold its annual summer benefit performances today, tomorrow and Friday at 9 P.M. at the Merce Cunningham Studio, 55 Bethune Street, West Village.
The fund, founded in 1989, helps students with financial emergencies and provides information on social services, health care and housing.
Tickets are $10; Theater Development Fund vouchers accepted.
Reservations: (212) 691-9751.


U.S. Won't Challenge Microsoft Network Before Its Debut
The Justice Department removed a cloud of uncertainty yesterday from the Microsoft Corporation's plan to enter the on-line business, announcing that it would take no antitrust action before the Aug. 24 introduction of the Microsoft Network.
The department indicated that its antitrust investigation would continue, but the decision removed the prospect of a last-minute showdown with Microsoft, which plans to start its new network on the same day that it begins selling its widely anticipated Windows 95 operating system software for personal computers.
The company's plan to include access to the Microsoft Network as a feature of Windows 95 has raised antitrust concerns that it could use its dominance in the PC software market to achieve an unfair advantage in the on-line computer business.


Eating Well; No Italian plums: You can still make a great torte.
IT'S a bit early to be talking about plum tortes, the dessert that usually means Italian plums, the purple ones of late summer and early fall.
But this spring, when I wanted to make a plum torte for cooking demonstrations around the country, I managed to do so without any purple plums.


Wine Talk
ONE of the great pleasures of wine -- right behind drinking it -- is collecting it.
Enthusiasts collect wine for a variety of reasons.
The most common is to acquire fine wine at reasonable prices, age it, then drink it when it matures.
Some just like to know that when they particularly enjoy a wine, there are more bottles of it close at hand.


Turner Discussing the Purchase Of Time Warner's 18% Stake
The Turner Broadcasting System said yesterday that it was continuing to hold discussions with Tele-Communications Inc. and Time Warner Inc. over Time Warner's 18 percent stake in Turner Broadcasting.
Turner disclosed the discussions in a conference call with Wall Street analysts.
The company also said that earnings rose 70 percent in the second quarter, helped by a strong gain in revenue.


For Huge Recreation Complex, It's Time to Start Playing All
The golf driving range that Shinya Muto built just outside Kobe, Japan, was still standing after an earthquake leveled the city last January.
So there's no reason to be concerned, Mr.
Muto said through an interpreter last week, about the one now being erected on Pier 59, jutting out into the Hudson River at 17th Street.
"The clubhouse came down," Mr.
Muto said about the Kobe range.
"But there was no damage to the driving range towers."


Parolees Keep Aides On Edge
The ex-convict shifted in a chair, pulled on a cigarette and exhaled a blanket of smoke, as though to cushion the hardness of the words that Richard Novack was hurling his way.
"I am going to run your life from here on out!" Mr.
Novack, a longtime parole officer, said.
"I am going to tell you what you can do and when you can do it, where you can go, who you can see. Do you understand?"


Atkinson Co. of California reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Battle Mountain Gold (BMG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A Fire at Erasmus High
A fire that apparently started in scaffolding threatened the 208-year-old Erasmus Hall High School in Flatbush, Brooklyn, early this morning, fire officials said.
The fire broke out shortly after midnight, but as of 1:15 A.M., about 160 firefighters had apparently contained the blaze, which was not expected to grow, said Firefighter Michael Candelaria, a Fire Department spokesman.


Whitewater Lion or Lamb? At Hearing, It's All in Eye of Beholder
Senator Lauch Faircloth listened patiently through much of today's Senate Whitewater hearing, a permanent squint betraying his skepticism as he waited for Susan P. Thomases to demonstrate that she was indeed "the Midnight Caller" of the Clinton Administration: the unofficial power nexus to Hillary Rodham Clinton, a backstairs Richelieu who "has the juice," as one Clinton strategist once put it in expressing his wariness of her.
Instead, Ms.
Thomases, a 51-year-old New York lawyer who brandishes a generation of close ties to the Clintons but no formal White House portfolio, offered the gentlest of testimony, devoid of all suggestions that she was the First Lady's tough eminence grise, ever ready to protect her from taint as the Whitewater affair goes through a grueling summer of dual hearings.


Consumers Can End Child Exploitation
To the Editor:
Bob Herbert's column "Buying Clothes Without Exploiting Children" (Aug. 4) recounts consumer frustration over imports made by child labor, yet fails to credit the power that consumers wield in ending child labor exploitation.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Sampras Beats Korda in the ATP
Extended to a second-set tie breaker, second-ranked Pete Sampras rediscovered his overpowering serve to beat Petr Korda in the second round of the $1.8 million ATP Championship last night in Mason, Ohio.


Overture on Balkans
President Clinton is dispatching emissaries to Europe to discuss new diplomatic initiatives in the Balkans.


Call Renewed for Packwood Hearings as More Details Emerge
Senator Barbara Boxer today renewed her call for Senator Bob Packwood to face public hearings after details emerged about the latest accusations of sexual advances, including that one victim was a 17-year-old high school student who worked in his office in the early 1980's.
The Senate voted 52 to 48 last week to forgo public hearings and to allow the Select Committee on Ethics to finish its investigation into numerous accusations against the Oregon Republican.


N.F.L. TRAINING CAMP REPORT
San Francisco 49ers
Running back Marion Butts practiced with the San Francisco 49ers yesterday after signing with the team for the National Football League minimum salary.


Surgery for Dinkins
Former Mayor David N. Dinkins is to undergo angioplasty this morning to clear a blocked artery at a hospital in Charleston, S.C.
Mr.
Dinkins, 68, learned about the problem a few hours before he was to be released from Hilton Head Hospital, where he was admitted on Sunday when he complained of weakness after playing tennis.
An upbeat Mr.
Dinkins said he planned to return to New York City tomorrow.
Article, page B3.


Bar Owner May Serve Up a Lawsuit to a Youthful Drinker
An under-age customer bought a drink at Eli Cannon's Tap Room and got off with a lecture from the police.
The bar was forced to shut down for three days, losing an estimated $20,000 in revenue.
The bar's owner, Phil Ouellette, does not think that is fair.
And he wants to sue the young customer for damages.


Relatives of Ex-Cooper Official To Pay $2.5 Million Settlement
Relatives of Gary A. Singer, the former co-chairman of the Cooper Companies, have agreed to pay $2.5 million to settle a civil lawsuit filed in 1992 by the Securities and Exchange Commission as part of its investigation of Mr.
Singer's fraudulent trading practices at the company.
Without admitting or denying guilt, the Singer family members agreed to return $1.9 million in trading profits and $600,000 in interest they received from Mr.
Singer's trading activities, for which he was convicted in January 1994 on criminal racketeering charges.
Mr.
Singer is scheduled to be sentenced in that case today.


No-Win Choices on Health Care
"Will run clinic for food" reads a small sign in the administrative office of a crowded, but doomed, county health center.
The gallows humor speaks for an entire struggling county, which made the hard decision last week to sacrifice a social ideal to help plug a billion-dollar budget gap.
The clinic, the H. Claude Hudson Comprehensive Health Center, in downtown Los Angeles, has long been part of a ambitious commitment by Los Angeles County to extend medical care to more than one million indigent patients a year -- a commitment that the county has now determined may have become too expensive to maintain.


Friend of Suspect in Bombing Appears Ready to Cooperate
In a major boost to the Government's case today, the closest Army friend of Timothy J. McVeigh has reached an agreement to testify against the prime suspect in the Oklahoma City bombing about his knowledge of the preparations for the blast.
The likelihood that Michael Fortier would become a Government witness was signaled earlier today when his wife, Lori, was granted immunity and testified before a grand jury.


CHIRON CORP. (CHIR,NNM)
The Chiron Corporation reported yesterday that its second-quarter earnings fell 84 percent after it took a write-down for acquiring technology units and a charge for reorganizing its business.
The biotechnology company, based in Emeryville, Calif., said its net income fell to $830,000, or 2 cents a share, from $5.1 million, or 15 cents, a year ago.
Chiron was expected to post a loss of 22 cents a share, according to Zacks Investment Research.
The results were released after the stock market closed.


A Wilson-Waits Premiere to Open Next Wave
The 13th Next Wave Festival at the Brooklyn Academy of Music is to open on Oct. 6 with the American premiere of "Alice," a collaboration between the director Robert Wilson and the songwriter Tom Waits based on Lewis Carroll's "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland" and "Through the Looking Glass."
Other highlights of the festival, which runs through Dec. 17 and has a budget of $2.7 million -- about the same as last year's program -- include unconventional productions of Oscar Wilde's "Salome" and John Webster's "Duchess of Malfi," a screening of Carl Dreyer's silent film "The Passion of Joan of Arc" with a newly composed choral score by Richard Einhorn, and a program of recent works by Mark Morris.


ABORTION DOCTOR GUILTY OF MURDER
A Queens obstetrician was convicted of second-degree murder yesterday in the death of a woman who went to him for an abortion, making him the first doctor in New York State found guilty of murder stemming from the medical mistreatment of a patient.
Dr.
David Benjamin faces 25 years to life in prison in the death of the woman, Guadalupe Negron, 33, who bled to death two years ago in the doctor's storefront clinic in Corona, Queens, after the bungled abortion, which occurred as Dr.
Benjamin was appealing the revocation of his license.


East Side Barbeque
Andrew Silverman, one of the owners of the City Crab and Seafood Company at 19th Street and Park Avenue South, finally opened Duke's, a barbecue restaurant with a well-worn look, at the end of July.
It is at 99 East 19th Street, around the corner from City Crab.
"We had ventilating problems," said Mr.
Silverman, who was a few months behind schedule in opening.


President Issues Executive Order To Buttress Toxic Emission Rules
With gritty seaport smokestacks as his backdrop, President Clinton issued an executive order today to assure that companies doing business with the Government will continue to comply with current Federal disclosure requirements on chemical emissions -- requirements the Republican Congress is trying to weaken.
"There are people who want to strip away decades of public health protection," Mr.
Clinton declared at a campaign-style rally of environmentalists and citizens at the south edge of this city's harbor.
"I intend to fight them every step of the way."


Accounts
Skechers U.S.A.
Inc., a footwear and apparel company based in Manhattan Beach, Calif., to DDB Needham Los Angeles, a unit of the Omnicom Group.
The billings were not disclosed.


Book Notes
The Streets Where She Wrote
There is something especially savory about novels set in real places, with real street names, real shops, real sights and smells that ring true for those who know the territory.
Getting such details right means extra work for an author.
But for Patricia D. Cornwell and her mystery-solving medical examiner, Kay Scarpetta, that is where the fun begins.


International Briefs; B.P. Profit Rises 55%
The British Petroleum Company reported a 55 percent increase in second-quarter earnings yesterday and surprised London markets with a sharp rise in its dividend.
Net income before exceptional items in the second quarter rose to $:519 million, or $830 million, from $:335 million in the quarter a year earlier.
B.P. raised its dividend to 4 pence a share from 3 pence in the first quarter.
The unexpected rise in the dividend reflected the company's confidence that improvement in underlying performance was sustainable, B.P. said. (Reuters)


TV Violence: A Solution With Risks
Sure, it would be better if the television "violence chip" that is on the verge of being mandated by Congress were not needed, if children had more refined tastes, parents had more time or were more attentive, producers and television executives were less exploitative.
But in the absence of the millennium, an easy way to black out programs signaled as menacing seems like a user-friendly method of keeping children (or even naughty adults) from seeing what is unhumorously described as adult fare.
For as little as $5, it is promised, a set owner will be able to install a gizmo that will pick up a warning signal from broadcasters or cable operators that a show with violence, nudity or obscenity looms and can then block it. (Program-blocking gizmos are already on the market, but hardly anyone seems interested.)


Questions Linger in Del Harassment Case
When Del Laboratories, a cosmetics and pharmaceutical company, agreed to pay $1.185 million last week to settle a Government complaint that its chief executive had sexually harassed women employees, women's groups hailed the action as a step toward discouraging such behavior.
But many lawyers and experts on the way companies are managed see nothing to cheer about.
They say the behavior of the company's board of directors fell far short of what shareholders should expect.
Among their questions are whether the Del board was too dominated by friends and associates of the chief executive, Dan K. Wassong, with no truly independent directors who could step back and act dispassionately.
They also asked whether a separate board committee should have guided the company's response.
And they wondered why Mr.
Wassong was allowed to remain deeply involved in the board's deliberations.


Dow Corning Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CHRONICLE
ROSEANNE, the caustic queen of prime-time television, gave birth to an eight-pound boy on Saturday.
The baby, who has been named BUCK THOMAS, was born at St.
John's Hospital in Santa Monica, Calif., said Roseanne's spokeswoman, Marleah Leslie.


Hello, Sydney? This Is Going to Be Big, Really Big
NBC swept its rivals away on Monday by paying $1.27 billion for the television rights to the 2000 Summer Olympics and the 2002 Winter Olympics, while Universal was reported to be paying Sylvester Stallone $60 million for three films.
Coincidence or trend?
Trend.
Entertainment companies want blockbuster programming, worldwide stars and global amusements to make more piles of money.


Dinkins Due For Surgery For Artery
Former New York Mayor David N. Dinkins is to undergo angioplasty this morning to clear a blocked artery at a hospital in Charleston, S.C.
Mr.
Dinkins learned about the problem a few hours before he expected to be released from Hilton Head, S.C., Hospital, where he was admitted on Sunday when he complained about weakness after two rigorous hours of tennis on a sultry day.
Doctors found the blocked artery while conducting a stress test on Mr.
Dinkins yesterday.


Mayor Says Deal Is Near to Save Transit Passes
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that the city and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority were close to a temporary truce that would save transit passes for almost 500,000 students, at least for the first few months of the coming school year.
For the first time since October, when he withdrew $128 million a year in financing for the passes, the Mayor indicated that the city might cover part of the bill.
An official close to the talks said the city had offered to contribute $15 million to $20 million to issue passes through December, or less than half the amount it would have paid for a similar period in years past.


Pond's gives its campaign a face lift and vaults into the top ranks of skin-care products.
IN the world of women's cosmetics, the caste system used to be as strict as that of India.
In the upper castes dwelt the Estee Lauders and Chanels at Saks Fifth Avenue and Bergdorf Goodman, while in the lower castes the faux-designer perfumes and other pretenders sat in the murk of suburban strip malls.
The marketing, for the most part, was as caste-ridden as the products.
The Brahmins lavished millions on artfully sculptured bottles and skin-care jars, and even more artful magazine advertising.
The outcastes skimped on packaging and advertised scarcely at all, and then only to rail at the $30 to $100 price tags of the prestige brands.


Asia Pacific Resources International Holdings (ARH,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Mallinckrodt Group Inc.(MKG,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Writers' Groups Criticize Times on Freelancer Policy
A new policy by The New York Times limiting the rights of freelance contributors to profit from re-uses of their work drew sharp criticism yesterday from three writers' groups.
The policy, announced in an internal memorandum at The Times last month, is part of the newspaper's effort to secure its ownership of its content as it broadens its efforts in on-line publishing and other forms of electronic distribution.


After 58 Years, More Taxis
New York City will be able to increase the number of yellow taxis for the first time in 58 years, under legislation signed by Gov.
George E. Pataki.
The new measure authorizes the city to auction off 400 new taxi medallions -- the shields that identify legal cabs -- over the next three years.


The Many Facets of Whitewater


Supper in a Sandwich, Grilled Indoors or Out
AT first glance this seems like a long recipe.
But it can easily be put together in less than 30 minutes for a wonderful, casual, summery supper.
Boiled in advance, the eggplant will cook very quickly on the grill and need almost no oil.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Signed Mike Hartley, pitcher, and assigned him to Rochester of the International League.


Museums: The Sluggers of the Culture Lineup
If numbers meant as much to art lovers as they do to sports fans, the following statistic would be quoted everywhere: In any given year, New York City art museums draw far larger crowds than all New York professional sports teams combined.
Modern audiences may boycott baseball or cough through Wagner, but the popularity of looking at art has been growing steadily for several years, give or take a few dips and peaks.


In Supermarkets, a New Kind of Tomato Surprise
ON the stands in the Union Square Greenmarket during last week's stunning heat, only the tomatoes seemed to thrive.
And they appeared to be ripening by the minute.
Dr.
Monette Basson, a Manhattan neurologist, was buying some unusual cherry tomatoes last Wednesday.
"I never buy tomatoes from supermarkets," she said, echoing the long-standing canon of tomato lovers disaffected by the usually hard, tasteless pink things called tomatoes in the chain stores.


Officer Shot, but Bulletproof Vest Shields Him
An undercover police officer was shot in the chest last night in Queens, but narrowly escaped serious injury because of his bulletproof vest, the police said.
The officer, Richard Anderson, 26, was being treated last night for trauma at Elmhurst Hospital Center, the police said.
The bullet was lodged in the vest, inches below the officer's throat.


Inphynet Medical Management (IMMI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Dollar General Corp.(DG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


Don't Tax the School Kids
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority's finance committee has approved a package of fare and toll increases designed to cope with huge anticipated deficits over the next five years.
As the package now stands, subway and bus riders would be hit with a 25-cent fare hike, and half a million schoolchildren who now travel free or at half fare would have to pay the full new fare of $1.50 per ride.
That is an unconscionably high tax to impose on struggling families that rely on public transit to get their children to school.
A family with two children who now ride free would have to come up with more than $1,000 to pay for transportation during the next academic year.
The M.T.A. is undeniably facing dire budget problems.
But before the full M.T.A. board votes on this regressive fare package tomorrow, it should try harder to work out a more equitable deal with Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, who indicated yesterday that an interim solution might be reachable.
The schoolchildren of New York ought not to be required to shoulder the M.T.A.'s financial burdens.


Guilty Plea in Fatal Jewel Theft
A 17-year-old youth has pleaded guilty to his role in a botched holdup at a Franklin Park jewelry store that led the owner to shoot his wife fatally.
The youth, Michael Guhse, also agreed on Monday to testify against four other defendants who have been charged with felony murder in the March 14 robbery at the store owned by Jeffrey and Brenda Wolf.
In exchange for the plea, the Somerset County Prosecutor's office agreed not to seek to try him as an adult, his lawyer, Richard K. Hurley Jr., said.
The youth faces a maximum 10-year sentence.


Congoleum Corp.(CGM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Captain Wadkins Is Making A List
There are many questions to be settled by this week's P.G.A.
Championship.
Among them: Will all four majors be won by Americans this year?
Will Davis Love 3d get his first Grand Slam victory?
Can Corey Pavin prevail on his home court?
Will Greg Norman, Nick Price or Nick Faldo win a major this year?
But there is another important issue being kicked around locker rooms all over America, including the antique wooden one here at Riviera Country Club.


A Bad Day for the Kenyans
They have slugged him in back of the head, waved spikes threateningly in his face and triple-teamed him as if he were Michael Jordan.
But Kenya's 10,000-meter runners have not been able to handle Haile Gebrselassie of Ethiopia, the man known assertively as the Boss.
Another world record did not fall to Gebrselassie today, but a second consecutive world championship did, in a meet-record time of 27 minutes 12.95 seconds.
There were no fisticuffs or clipped heels this time, only a fierce sprint to the finish of the eighth-fastest 10,000 ever run, with the Ethiopian covering the final 200 meters in 25.3 seconds.
He finished ahead of Khalid Skah, the Olympic champion from Morocco, and Paul Tergat, the world cross-country champion from Kenya.


Jail Alternative Is Faulted
Programs designed to keep youths who have committed nonviolent crimes from being jailed need to do a better job of investigating the backgrounds of offenders before they are admitted, Robert N. Wilentz, the Chief Justice of New Jersey, concluded in a report released yesterday.


Giants, Concerned About Brown, Are Happy to Have Wheatley
Dave Brown, the Giants' talented quarterback, said his sore elbow will heal in time for him to play next week.
The team physician said it may be two weeks before he plays.
But some people in the Giants' organization were worried today that Brown could miss the entire preseason.
"Everyone is basically guessing," said one team official, who requested anonymity.
"Dave says he's feeling better but it would not surprise anyone if he missed more than two weeks. And I don't think it would surprise anyone if he wasn't ready until the Dallas game."


Brigid Brophy Is Dead at 66; Novelist, Critic and Crusader
Brigid Brophy, a novelist, critic, essayist and crusader for myriad causes ranging from better royalty payments for writers to better treatment for animals, died on Monday at a nursing home in Lincolnshire, England.
She was 66 and had been suffering from multiple sclerosis for many years.
Miss Brophy was the author of 4 plays, 7 novels and 14 other books, but she is just as well known for her most successful campaign, for lending rights for authors.
In 1979, her efforts resulted in a law that for the first time allowed authors to receive royalty payments from the British Government every time their books were checked out of a public library.


CHRONICLE
This is shaping up as some week for WILLIAM M. KUNSTLER.
On Monday, he had an operation at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan to have a pacemaker implanted.
Tonight, he is planning to make his debut as a standup comic, at Caroline's, the comedy club on Broadway near 49th Street.
Mr.
Kunstler, 76, the lawyer whose clients have ranged from the Chicago Seven to defendants in the World Trade Center bombing trial, is a folk hero to some and an unpatriotic scoundrel to others.
But a standup comic?


International Briefs; Takeover of Insurer By Axa Is Approved
Policyholders in the National Mutual Life Association of Australasia Ltd. brushed aside global politics and agreed to be taken over by Axa S.A. of France for 1.1 billion Australian dollars, or $817 million.
The vote drew attention because of friction between Australia and France over French plans to resume nuclear testing in the South Pacific.
More than 97 percent of policyholders approved the takeover, in which Axa is to gain a controlling stake.


E-Z Serve Corp.(EZS,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 25


Of Youth, Heart and a Bit of the Blarney
Edward Burns craftily shot "The Brothers McMullen," a romantic comedy full of heart and humor, using little more than $20,000 along with friends, parents, parents' house (as a principal set) and can-do ingenuity to burn.
Even allowing extravagantly for the post-production funds (several hundred thousand dollars) that brought "The Brothers McMullen" up to commercial speed, you could still make 350 films like this for the price of one "Waterworld." And audiences would have a better time.
But it would be hard to find 350 new film makers who rivaled the talented, 27-year-old Mr.
Burns as a triple threat.
Having written "The Brothers McMullen" with a solid grasp of story and character, he has also directed it with smooth commercial confidence despite a bare-bones look and obvious rough edges.
In addition, he stars as this film's resident cynic, the most jaded of three Irish-American brothers trying to work out problems with the women in their lives.
Brash and photogenic, charmingly cavalier, Mr.
Burns could have had a movie career without even bothering to write or direct.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Poor Treasury Auction Weakens Bonds and Dollar  The Treasury's auction for three-year notes was poorly bid, dashing hopes that a recent easing of Japanese investment regulations would spur greater interest in U.S.
Government securities and strengthen the dollar.
The credit market showed its disappointment by selling off much of its earlier gains, ending little changed.
Labor costs moderated, helping hold down inflation.
And the average number of hours worked fell by the largest number in 15 years, as businesses shed jobs.  [ D4. ] Netscape I.P.O.
Price Soars  As demand for an initial public offering of Netscape Communications intensified, the underwriters raised the price to $28, more than double the original offering price.  [ D2. ] MCI and Murdoch Going On-Line  MCI Communications and Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation are expected to create a new Internet-based on-line information service today.
It will replace Mr.
Murdoch's Delphi Internet Services and enter a tough competitive field dominated by America Online, CompuServe and Prodigy.
AT&amp;T and Microsoft are also entering the fray.  [ D5. ] Goldman Drops Board Seat  Daniel M. Neidich, a partner at Goldman, Sachs, has resigned from the board of Rockefeller Center Properties.
Goldman and its Whitehall Real Estate Fund resigned the board seat during sale talks.  [ D6. ] Talks Over Turner Stake  Turner Broadcasting said it was continuing to hold discussions with Tele-Communications and Time Warner about Time Warner's 18 percent stake in Turner.
Turner also said that earnings rose 70 percent in the second quarter, to $22 million, or 8 cents a share.  [ D5. ] S.E.C.
Settles Fraud Case  Relatives of Gary A. Singer, the former co-chairman of the Cooper Companies, have agreed to pay $2.5 million to settle a civil lawsuit filed in 1992 by the S.E.C. .
Mr.
Singer is scheduled to be sentenced for fraudulent trading practices today.  [ D4. ] U.S.
Urging Changes in Vietnam  Washington is trying to persuade the Vietnamese to privatize their inefficient state-run industries.
News Analysis.  [ A3. ] Navigation Help From Hertz  Hertz is equipping some cars in several cities with a high-tech navigation system.
With the system, a driver gets driving directions from a four-inch video screen mounted under the dashboard that is accompanied by automated voice instructions.
At the heart of the system is a Global Positioning Satellite receiver that determines the car's location by using satellite signals.
Business Travel.  [ D4. ] The High Cost of Ego  A new study indicates that the premium paid by acquiring companies for takeovers relates more to what the study's authors call the acquiring chief executive's hubris than to business rationales like synergy and eliminating inefficiencies.
Market Place.  [ D6. ]


Lackluster Treasury Refunding Takes Spark Out of Stocks
Stocks wound up on the fence yesterday, with the market focusing for much of the day on the disappointing start of the Treasury Department's quarterly refunding.
"The Dow was flirting with 4,700 at one point," said Edward Nicoski, managing director of Piper Jaffray in Minneapolis.
"But as it became apparent that the refunding would not go that well -- and it did not -- equities came down with it."


Elron Electronic Industries reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


I.B.M. Said to Reveal Plans for Lotus Notes
I.B.M. is expected to announce today that it will make its newly acquired Lotus Notes software available over its vast global data network early next year, people familiar with the plans said.
The new service would make it easier for corporate clients to use I.B.M. hardware and software to share information around the world.
The expected announcement would come only two days after the AT&amp;T Corporation said that its new Network Notes partnership with Lotus was commercially available.
That service also allows customers to share information.


General Growth Properties Inc.(GGP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Everett's Slugging Keeps Mets On a Roll
Joe McIlvaine is using the rest of this season to evaluate some of the younger talent in the Mets' organization.
Tonight, with McIlvaine looking on, the 24-year-old right fielder Carl Everett gave the Mets general manager something to think about.


Hugh Borton, 92, Expert on Japan and Ex-College President, Dies
Hugh Borton, an authority on Japan who became president of Haverford College after heading Columbia University's East Asian Institute, died on Sunday at his home in Conway, Mass.
He was 92.
Dr.
Borton was in the State Department from 1942 to 1948 and was chief of its Japanese affairs division and special assistant to the director of Far Eastern Affairs in charge of preparations for the peace treaty with Japan.


F.A.A. Tells Airlines To Tighten Security
The Federal Aviation Administration has ordered that security be tightened at American airports because of an increased possibility of terrorist attacks, a Federal official said tonight.
The official, who spoke on condition that he not be identified, confirmed an account of the heightened security that appeared in Wednesday's issue of The Washington Post.


David Begelman, 73; Headed Columbia Pictures
David Begelman, the amiable Hollywood executive whose bizarre check-forging spree cost him his job as president of Columbia Pictures in 1978 but did not halt his career, was found dead yesterday in a room at the Century Plaza Hotel near his home in Los Angeles.
He was 73.
A spokesman for the coroner's office said he was killed by a gunshot wound that appeared to be self-inflicted, but a formal finding of suicide could not be made until after an autopsy.


Chief Investigator in Bombing Is Named to No. 2 F.B.I. Post
The agent who has led the investigation into the Oklahoma City bombing was named the Federal Bureau of Investigation's second-ranking official yesterday and said the bureau would have to devote even more resources to combat terrorism in the United States.
The agent, Weldon L. Kennedy, who has spent 32 years in the F.B.I., was appointed deputy director.
He will assume his post after Labor Day.
In announcing the appointment, Director Louis J. Freeh called Mr.
Kennedy "superbly qualified."


Less Practice, but Better Music Students
Piano teachers say that today's music students are more self-motivated, more interested in technology and better all-around musicians than students two decades ago -- but do not practice as much.
The survey, by the Music Teachers National Association, asked 2,400 independent and collegiate music teachers about how music lessons had changed in the last 20 years.
About 1,000 instructors, 92 percent of whom have taught for at least 20 years, returned the survey.
Nine of 10 respondents said they primarily taught piano.


Disney Is Big, but Is It So Bad?; The Mouse as Shark
To the Editor:
In May 1990, ABC's "PrimeTime Live" aired a feature on Disney World titled "Tragic Kingdom." The segment called the Disney company to task for polluting the environment, killing federally protected birds, encouraging tasteless development, gobbling up local tax funds, manipulating local government, reneging on promises to build residential centers and bringing traffic and air pollution to Orlando, Fla.


Alliance Entertainment Corp.(CDS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., known as Freddie Mac, is selling $50 million of notes due in 2000 through Smith Barney Inc.
The issue is callable in two years, and is priced at par to yield 6.725 percent.


Clinton Sending 2 Foreign Policy Advisers to Europe With New Proposals on Balkans
President Clinton is dispatching two senior foreign-policy officials to Europe on Wednesday to discuss several new American ideas for diplomatic initiatives in the Balkans.
Anthony Lake, who is Mr.
Clinton's national security adviser, and Peter Tarnoff, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, are to visit London, Paris, Bonn and possibly Rome and Moscow, ranking policy-makers said.
One White House aide said they would put forward "very concrete notions, not only on how to get the peace process off the dime but on trade-offs that we think might work."


Cost of G.O.P.'s Medicare Plan Draws Criticism
White House officials today contested Speaker Newt Gingrich's assertion that the Clinton Administration was trying to scare the elderly with false claims about Republican proposals to save money on Medicare.
The officials said the Republican plans would cost Medicare beneficiaries even more than they had originally estimated.


International Briefs; Cordiant Reports a Loss And Sees More Problems
Cordiant P.L.C., the advertising group based in London that was thrown into turmoil by the departure of its founders early this year, yesterday reported a loss for the first half of this year and warned that profits may not return in the near future.
Cordiant, which was formerly known as Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, said it lost $:38.6 million, or $61.4 million, for the half.
In the first half of 1994 it had a profit of $:6.3 million.
Revenue for this year's first six months was $:374.7 million, or $595.8 million, down from $:379.4 million in the corresponding period of 1994.


The Ramones, 20 Years Later and Still the Same
The backdrop the Ramones brought to the Academy on Saturday night showed a row of pillars and a quasi-Presidential seal -- both befitting an institution, as well they might.
It's an institution on the way to a planned phase-out; the Ramones' new album, "Adios Amigos" (Radioactive/MCA), is being described as its last one, and the band currently plans to play its final tour next spring, after two decades on the road.
The Ramones' music is the foundation of punk-rock; without it, bands from the Sex Pistols to Green Day would not sound the same.
And since the Ramones were formed in 1974 -- they released their first album in 1976 -- they have clung to their style with the tenacity of barnacles.
A Ramones concert in 1995 is not significantly different from one that took place 20 years ago: that's its beauty.


MCI and News Corporation Seen in an On-line Venture
The MCI Communications Corporation and Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation are expected to announce the creation of a new Internet-based on-line information service today, deepening an alliance the two companies formed in May.
The new service, which is expected to replace the News Corporation's Delphi Internet Services, will enter the fiercely competitive on-line market this fall with a range of offerings including multimedia entertainment, custom electronic newspapers, communications services and home shopping, a person familiar with the companies' plans said last night.


Daniel Kearns; Theatrical Manager, 39
Daniel Kearns, a theatrical manager who worked on and off Broadway, died on Monday at the Hospice at Mission Hill, outside Boston.
He was 39.
The cause was complications from AIDS, said his press representatives, Boneau/Bryan-Brown.


Sinfully Charming, Noel Coward's 'Me' Requires Charisma
"Garry Essendine is me," Noel Coward once said of the posturing protagonist of his "Present Laughter," which has been revived at the Williamstown Theater Festival.
If the admission is true (and all visible evidence supports it), this 1939 comedy is among the most shameless, if liveliest, self-addressed valentines in theater history.
A cigarette-holder-wielding matinee idol slipping very reluctantly into middle age, Garry Essendine may be self-dramatizing, self-important and hopelessly self-infatuated.


Kentucky's Rhodes Is Heading to U.S.C.
RODRICK RHODES, the former Kentucky forward, announced yesterday that he plans to finish his college career at U.S.C.
In a three-minute news conference in Lexington, Ky., Rhodes said, "The best place for me to reach my potential is at the University of Southern California." Rhodes would not answer any questions after reading the statement.
Rhodes, who starred in high school at St.
Anthony in Jersey City, entered the National Basketball Association draft after last season.
But after a lackluster showing in the pre-draft camp, he withdrew his name after it appeared that he would not be a high pick.


Edward Thompson, 82, Judge And Former Fire Commissioner
Edward Thompson, a lawyer and firefighter's son who became a New York City Fire Commissioner as well as a judge, died on Saturday at his home in Babylon, L.I.
He was 82.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Judge Dismisses Allison Copter-Crash Suit
Davey Allison would have survived the crash of his helicopter if he had been wearing his shoulder harness, a Federal judge in Birmingham, Ala., ruled Monday as he threw out a $25 million lawsuit against the craft's manufacturer.


CHRONICLE
A mayor with a passion for opera ventured into the violin section yesterday.
RUDOLPH W. GIULIANI declared it ISAAC STERN Day and played host to Mr.
Stern at City Hall.
Mr.
Stern, 75, did not play during the ceremony: he left his Guarnerius del Gesu violin at home.
"Isaac Stern has captivated the entire world with his virtuosity for more than 50 years," Mr.
Giuliani said.
"He has never failed to lend a hand to either a struggling young artist or to a glorious concert hall, like Carnegie."


Add Sierra's Name to the Growing List of Yankee Heroes
Ruben Sierra took one step out of the batter's box after unleashing a huge swing in the sixth inning and decided there was no reason for him to run, trot or even jog.
He wanted to watch the missile that had just jumped off his bat, the white blur that gave pitcher Rick Krivda an immediate stiff neck.
So Sierra admired its flight over the 399-foot sign in left-center field.
Sierra obviously has great vision to accompany great power and great timing.
He never doubted that he had swatted a three-run homer and terminated an 0-for-13 slump.
He added a three-run double and a run-scoring single to help rescue David Cone from a deficit again and thrust the Yankees to an 11-4 victory over the Baltimore Orioles at Yankee Stadium.


Test-Driven by Trainers
EVER walk by a gym and watch an exerciser hard at work with a personal trainer, sweating or groaning through pushups, sit-ups and bench presses, and wonder about the allure of it?
Perhaps you have assumed that personal trainers are too expensive and time consuming, that you would never know how to find one or that if you did, the trainer would spend the whole time either barking at you to push harder or lecturing you about the evils of creme brulee.


Kobs &amp; Draft Agrees To Buyback Plan
Cordiant P.L.C. in London and its international direct marketing unit, Kobs &amp; Draft Worldwide, said yesterday that they had reached an agreement for the management of Kobs &amp; Draft to buy the unit back from its parent for $27.2 million.
Cordiant, which owns other agency networks like Bates Worldwide and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, said it had agreed to the buyout, pending approval from its shareholders.
The Kobs &amp; Draft managers, who have formed the KDA Acquisition Company for the purpose of the transaction, have agreed to pay $13.7 million in cash, $9.5 million in a 10 percent subordinated loan note and $4 million in redeemable preferred stock in KDA Acquisition.


Poorly Bid Note Auction Proves Drag on U.S. Bonds
The Treasury's auction for three-year notes was poorly bid yesterday, dashing hopes that a recent easing of Japanese investment regulations would spur greater interest in United States Government securities.
The market -- which had played up these expectations days before the auction -- showed its disappointment by selling off much of its earlier gains once the results were made known, to end little changed.


INSIDE
Rumors of War in Rwanda
The Rwandan military is massing troops on its western border in defense against a feared reprise of last year's civil war.
Page A8.
Remembering Nagasaki
Japan's traditional storytellers have turned their skills to combating those who would forget the atomic bombing of Nagasaki.
Page A8.
Dinkins Has Blocked Artery
The former Mayor, hospitalized after playing tennis on a hot day, is to undergo angioplasty at a hospital in Charleston, S.C.
Page B3.
Pirogi and Blini vs.
Big Macs
Entrepreneurs in Moscow, trying to compete with McDonald's in their country, started a chain that offers traditional Russian foods.
Page D1.
Labor Accord for N.B.A.
The National Basketball Association and its players' union reached a six-year labor pact, which still must be ratified by the players.
Page B7.


F.A.A. to Study Its Handling of Plane Parts
The Federal Aviation Administration yesterday responded to widespread criticism of how it handles counterfeit and unapproved parts on aircraft, announcing that it had established a task force to study all its policies and procedures and make recommendations.
Several types of unapproved parts are turning up frequently on airplanes, the Inspector General of the Transportation Department told a Senate subcommittee in June.
These parts, which the F.A.A. lumps together as "suspected unapproved parts" include junked parts that had been improperly reconditioned, parts that were fraudulently labeled, new parts that were rejected as defective and new parts that had evaded required inspections.
The Inspector General cited greed by unscrupulous suppliers and poor oversight by the F.A.A. as reasons why the parts were being installed on airplanes.


On Line: The War, Viewed From Japan
Nicholas D. Kristof, Tokyo bureau chief of The Times, will discuss Japan's perspective on World War II, 50 years later, in a live interview for computer users tonight at 8, Eastern time, on @times, The Times's service on America Online.
Software and information: (800) 548-5201.


Seles to Return Next Week
Monica Seles said yesterday that she will begin her long-awaited comeback next week at the Canadian Open in Toronto, where the field will include top-ranked Steffi Graf.
"As long as you don't play matches, you don't know how it's going to go," said Seles, who had hoped her tuneup for the United States Open, which starts later this month, would consist of at least two hardcourt events.
Instead, she has settled for just Toronto because of a lingering case of tendinitis in her left knee.


New York City's Park and Hospital Chiefs Deserve Our Praise
To the Editor:
Your profiles of Parks Commissioner Henry Stern (July 23) and Health and Hospitals Chairwoman Maria Mitchell (July 26) neglected to mention their substantive accomplishments.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  SERBIAN REFUGEES TRAPPED
Thousands of Serbian refugees were trapped as they fled Croatia, caught in fighting between a conquering Croatian army and fleeing Serbian rebel forces.
A1  WELCOME LULL IN BIHAC
Since the outbreak of the war in Bosnia three years ago, Bihac has been blockaded by Serbian forces.
Now some relief has come.
A1  U.S.
OVERTURES ON BALKANS
President Clinton is dispatching emissaries to Europe to discuss new ideas for diplomatic initiatives in the Balkans.
A7  Some fear Croatia may now turn against Bosnia.
A7  FORGING TIES WITH VIETNAM
News Analysis: As U.S. delegates discovered recently in Hanoi, it is hardly a foregone conclusion that economic self-interest will now bind together once-bitter enemies.
A3  NAGASAKI IN MEMORY
For centuries, storytellers have spun folk tales for younger generations, but the ancient legends cannot match one man's tales of the atomic bombing of Nagasaki.
A8  RUMBLINGS IN RWANDA
As the United Nations withdraws its peacekeepers from Rwanda, the country's military is massing against what many fear may be a reprise of last year's civil war.
A8  Protests of expanded Palestinian self-rule across Israel.
A3  Extradition hearing for a Hamas leader wanted in Israel.
A5  Moscow Journal: To business risks in Russia, add poison.
A4  National A12-16, A20  DELAY FOR WELFARE BILL
In a setback for Bob Dole, Senate Republican leaders said they could not finish work on a bill making vast changes in welfare programs, and they decided to lay aside the bill until after a summer recess.
A1  CLINTON ISSUES POLLUTION ORDER
The President issued an order to assure that companies doing business with the Government will continue to comply with Federal disclosure requirements on pollution -- rules Congress opposes.
A1  LOS ANGELES'S HEALTH CUTS
To save money, Los Angeles County's supervisors adopted a budget that envisioned the closing of all 6 comprehensive health centers and all but 10 of the county's 39 community clinics.
A12  EX-REVOLUTIONARY ARRAIGNED
Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin, who was once known as the fiery revolutionary H. Rap Brown, was arraigned on weapons possession and assault charges stemming from a shooting in Atlanta.
A12  GAIN FOR BOMBING PROSECUTION
Timothy J. McVeigh's closest army buddy apparently will testify for the prosecution about his knowledge of the preparations for the Oklahoma City bombing.
A12  ACCOUNT OF WHITEWATER
An investigator told a House panel that officials in the Justice and Treasury Departments, as well as in the Resolution Trust Corporation, sought to block her as she pursued the Whitewater case.
A14  WHITEWATER FRUSTRATIONS
Capitol Sketchbook: Susan Thomases' unrelenting politeness and passivity drew frustration from Whitewater questioners.
A14  CALL FOR PACKWOOD HEARINGS
Senator Barbara Boxer renewed her call for public hearings into accusations against Senator Bob Packwood after new details about his association with a 17-year-old.
A14  A CANDIDATE'S INFLUENCE
Alan Keyes, who is seeking the Republican nomination for President, is usually ranked last among his challengers.
But his relentless focus on abortion and moral issues has granted him an influence that exceeds his expected vote tally.
A16  SIMPSON WITNESS POSTPONED
Testimony in the O. J. Simpson trial stumbled as the long-anticipated face-off between a Nobel Prize winning-chemist and a prosecutor was postponed.
A20  A second regional phone company settled with employees.
A16  Education A17  A Yale summer program pays students to serve in New Haven, Conn.
Metro Digest B1  DOCTOR CONVICTED OF MURDER
A Queens obstetrician was convicted of killing a woman who went to him for an abortion, making him the first doctor in the state found guilty of murder stemming from the medical mistreatment of a patient.
A1  WELFARE CUTS AND THE RURAL POOR
During the vigorous push in Albany to tighten welfare rules, the debate focused on reducing costs in big cities, but the Legislature may have created hurdles far higher for rural people than for the urban poor.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C9-14  CULTURAL HEAVY HITTERS
In any given year, New York art museums draw larger crowds than all New York professional sports teams combined.
The big museums have become a blend of playground, cafe and fair.
A1  The 1995-96 New Wave Festival.
C9  Theater: "Present Laughter." C9  Film: "The Brothers McMullen." C9  Music: The Ramones.
C12  Books: Two police novels.
C14  Book Notes C14  Television: Critic's Notebook C14  The Living Section C1-7  At work with the Art Guys.
C1  Health Page C8  Personal Health: More and more help for erectile dysfunction.
Two new treatments for impotence in testing stage.
Sports B6-11  Baseball: Yankees batter Orioles.
B7  Mets beat Phillies.
B9  Basketball: N.B.A. and union announce agreement.
B7  Columns: Rhoden on the N.B.A. union B7  Football: Giants worried about Brown's sore elbow.
B7  Track: Ethiopian takes 10,000meter title.
B11  Obituaries D19-20  Hugh Borton, former president of Haverford College.
D19  Brigid Brophy, novelist, critic and essayist.
D20  David Begelman, quixotic former head of Columbia Pictures.
D20  Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials  Don't tax the school kids.
Senator Dole's welfare defeat.
Journey to Hanoi.
Letters  Frank Rich: Who lost the arts?
Charles G. Boyd: America prolongs the war in Bosnia.
Geraldine Brooks: The condos are eating our history.
Chronicle B2  Crossword C14


Packwood Vote Conflict
To the Editor:
Reasonable people may differ on whether the Senate should hold public hearings into the charges against Senator Bob Packwood.
But we should all be appalled that Senator Packwood was allowed to participate in the Aug. 2 vote when the outcome of that vote so directly affected his personal interests.


Corrections
A brief report in the Company News column of Business Day on Friday about the acquisition of two companies by the Olsten Corporation referred to one company incorrectly in some editions.
IMI Systems Inc. is a provider of information technologies services; it is not an employment agency.


Wakefield Just Keeps Stacking Victories
Red Sox 5, Indians 1
Tim Wakefield won his ninth consecutive start last night to become baseball's second 13-game winner in leading the Boston Red Sox to a 5-1 victory over the visiting Cleveland Indians.


A Summer At Camp: Parent's Weekend Hello Mother, Hello Father; On Visiting Day at Raquette Lake, Emotions Run Rampant
Angela Clark, a counselor in the bunk Raquette, sometimes has a hard time getting her third-grade campers to take a shower and sweep under their cots.
But an hour before dinner on a recent Friday everything, including their hair, was spotless, and Angela was tying Amanda Mullens's braid with blue and white ribbon.
Erica Rothschild, 8, was putting the finishing touches on the porch decorations, arranging pink loops of Silly String foam polyurethane and taping up pictures that seemed to be abstracts but were actually landscape paintings of Raquette Lake.


After Early Exit, It's Time to Get Back to Books
Her father lent her to the women's tour again, and the tour handed Venus Williams right back.
She is 15, approaching 6 feet 2 inches, powders her first serve and, for her next trick, might put a ball in play.
This prodigy is a biannual event, and it shows.
Venus Williams waited 10 months for her second pro tournament, lasted 85 minutes and cried all the way to her news conference.


No Headline
"What are us people in rural areas supposed to do, if you don't have a license, or you don't have a vehicle? The way I see it, the people who make the rules don't care. They have cars, they have jobs. They don't know what our situation is like." -- SHARON DEBARGE, a welfare recipient in Allegany County, N.Y.  [ B4:1. ]


Anderson Exploration reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


BankAmerica Successor Is A Surprise
In a surprise choice, the BankAmerica Corporation, the nation's second-largest banking company, yesterday named David A. Coulter to succeed Richard M. Rosenberg, its 65-year-old chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Coulter, 48, now a vice chairman, becomes president immediately and chief executive on Jan. 1.
Mr.
Rosenberg, who has been president since 1990 and chief executive since 1991, will remain chairman until an unspecified date in the second quarter of next year, when he will pass that title on to Mr.
Coulter, as well.


Block Drug Co.(BLOCA,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


U.S. Charges A Palestinian In Terror Case
At the opening of an extradition hearing, Federal prosecutors said yesterday that a leader of the Hamas movement being detained in New York financed and helped organize terrorist attacks in Israel.
In a criminal complaint unsealed in Federal Court in Manhattan, Federal prosecutors asserted that the Hamas political leader, Mousa Mohammed Abu Marzook, had raised hundreds of thousands of dollars for the Palestinian militant movement and had authorized the use of some of that money to buy weapons.


British Petroleum Co.(BP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Market Place; Linking the cost of an acquisition to the acquiring chief's vanity.
WITH Wall Street's Great Game -- the mergers and acquisitions business -- surging, the investment bankers, takeover lawyers, arbitragers and all the others who split the spoils are grinning like Cheshire cats.
A lot of chief executives, too, are all smiles about bagging new trophies.
What about the shareholders -- should they be cheering?


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
Can you sublet space on the astral plane?
I wondered about this as I stood in line at my Greenwich Village health-food store and overheard the following exchange between a customer and the cashier:
Customer: I'm moving to Sedona next week.
Clerk: Lucky you. That's such a special place.
Customer: I know!
I feel like I'm not just moving to another town but to a higher level of consciousness.
Clerk: So you're really giving up your apartment here?
Customer: Are you kidding? I'm rent stabilized. BILL BARBANES
. . .
Scene: A supermarket in West Orange, N.J.
Dramatis personae: Attractive woman with neatly coiffured blond hair; she wears a pale blue pants suit.
She walks up and down the aisles very slowly, a result of her surgical collar and three-pronged cane.
A box of cereal is tucked under her free arm.
She looks up and recognizes another shopper.
"Helen?" she says.
"Beverly?" the woman says uncertainly.
"I haven't seen you in ages. How have you been? You look terrific! Keep in touch!" DOROTHY C. GOLDBERG
. . .
Dear Diary:
Heard the other day at my nail salon in Little Silver, N.J. -- a 20-something manicurist to her client:
"We like to go out for dinner on Saturday night and then go to the Hilton for an after-dinner drink. They play nice music -- classical -- like Frank Sinatra." ARLEEN NATELSON
. . .
Dear Diary:
At dinner recently at a cafe on East 18th Street, my husband and I couldn't help overhearing a conversation between two women of a certain age, one of whom almost drowned out the other.
The strident portion we heard went something like this:
"No, I don't do that! You always say I do, but I don't!"
"You're not listening! It's not me. You've got me mixed up with somebody else."
"I'm telling you I don't do that! I always press the eye. I don't shake. Listen to me! I never shook a cantaloupe in my life!" SUSAN THOMSEN
. . .
A beautiful nonhumid summer evening finds William Irvine and a friend enjoying an outdoor dinner at L'Ardoise on the Upper East Side.
When the waiter asks for their drink order, they also request water.
"Would you prefer San Pellegrino or Giuliani?" the waiter asks.
. . .
SUMMER PLAINT
I disagree with Whittier's thought
on what words are the saddest.
For me a different mood is caught
That also makes me maddest.
My "sad words of tongue or pen"
That I in heat had spoken,
I hope I never hear again
"The air-conditioner's broken." RUTH WARD
.. .
Dear Diary:
To be filed under "D," as in differences between raising city kids and country kids.
A New York City couple I know are spending the summer in Putnam County with their 5-year-old son.
Overheard on a recent afternoon, a brief conversation between city kid and mother of country kid.
Mom: Guess what. Today we're going to a mall.
Son: Wow! Is that going to be like "Amahl and the Night Visitors?" JEAN MARKS


Cooking Schools Change Hands
PETER KUMP'S NEW YORK COOKING SCHOOL and the New York Restaurant School, two places in Manhattan that specialize in training chefs, are expecting new owners.
When Peter Kump died in June, the food world wondered about the future of the cooking school he founded.
Then Richard Smilow, an entrepreneur, made his offer.
He said he hoped to complete the purchase in about two weeks, but he would not reveal the price.


Rwanda Repays Good Samaritan
Last October, when Rwanda's Acting Foreign Minister disappeared here with the $187,000 he was bringing to rescue the country's penniless United Nations mission, the relief organization Americares saw a novel way to help.
The organization, which had been flying medical supplies to Rwanda, offered the mission a $200,000 interest-free loan.


Father Faces U.S. Charges Over Support
In the largest prosecution yet under a three-year-old Federal law intended to corral fathers who abandon their children, Federal prosecutors yesterday charged a prominent investment adviser with failing to pay $580,000 in child support to his former wife over the last five years.
The man, Jeffrey Nichols, a 47-year-old expert on investments in precious metals, was arrested on criminal charges at his home in rural Vermont yesterday by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
He was released on $50,000 bond and is to be arraigned in Manhattan on Monday.


2 New Treatments For Erectile Ills
MANY men who suffer from impotence balk at jabbing a needle -- even a very tiny one -- into the penis, even if it results in a good erection.
Such injections deliver what is currently one of the safest and most effective treatments available for erectile dysfunction.
But now two less invasive treatments for impotence are being tested in clinical trials.
And while manufacturers are careful not to make claims about their new products, doctors familiar with the treatments are optimistic.


Senator Dole's Welfare Defeat
Senator Bob Dole withdrew his welfare bill from the Senate floor yesterday, unable to muster enough support for passage.
That is fortunate because the Dole bill would have made the welfare system, with all its flaws, markedly worse.
Mr.
Dole's retreat could allow for a better bill in September -- but only if President Clinton takes a decisive stand to shape its contents.
The Dole bill is better than the harshly punitive measures already passed by the House and proposed in the Senate by Phil Gramm, whose Presidential ambitions depend on attracting the party's hard-core conservatives.
Yet Mr.
Dole's bill is bad enough.
It would end a 60-year Federal commitment to increase aid for states with rising poverty.
It would allow states to stop spending their own money on the poor.
It would allow states to strip benefits from unwed teen-age parents and legal immigrants.
It threatens innocent children yet does little to put dysfunctional parents to work.


The Condos Are Eating Our History
The backhoes arrived a few weeks ago on the farm near my home, where Washington's sprawl finally surrenders to a wide hazy view of the Blue Ridge Mountains.
The backhoes and the little piles of earth mean a developer is testing the land to see how many houses it can carry.
Next year, the hay bales won't be there, lit up by the afternoon sun.
The hedgerow with its tangle of blackberries and bishop's lace will have been bulldozed for site access.
And the thread -- the fine, frail thread that binds here and now to there and then -- will have been frayed just a little bit closer to breaking point.


Former Black Radical of 60's Is Held in an Atlanta Shooting
For the last 20 years, Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin has been a soft-spoken minister and leader of the Community Mosque in this city's West End neighborhood.
But in the 1960's, Mr.
Al-Amin was known as H. Rap Brown, the leader of the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee, or S.N.C.C., and an official of the Black Panther Party, who once said, "Violence is as American as cherry pie."
Today Mr.
Al-Amin was arraigned on weapons possession and assault charges stemming from a shooting in July near a city park.
The case has angered members of his mosque, who say the charges were possibly the result of a set-up by drug dealers because of his anti-drug work in the city.


Greenwich Air Services Inc. reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Windows 95 Shows Apple's Miscalculation
To the Editor:
"Business Often Goes to the Swift, Not the Best" (Week in Review, Aug. 6), on the dominance of Microsoft's Windows 95 operating system software over Apple misses essential aspects of the competition.
The theory that aggressive and swift software marketing yielded long-term market control would be better applied to how Windows beat out the OS-2 operating system than to its competition with Apple.


A Little-Known Candidate With a Big Issue
Members of the New Hampshire Christian Coalition had been listening to Alan L. Keyes for almost 40 minutes when they began to nod and murmur, "Amen."
"In a society where you have a Christian community, you shouldn't need a welfare system," Mr.
Keyes said.


Green's Star on the Rise On Kotite's Depth Chart
It is not the fear the Jets suffered in the paranoid final days of the Joe Walton regime at the end of the 1980's.
A healthier fear seems to drive the Jets under Coach Rich Kotite, who demands accountability.
And fear of failure has helped a little-known special-teams player named Victor Green move up in Kotite's esteem and on the depth chart.
In fact, Green will probably play with the defense close to full time when the Jets meet the Eagles on Saturday night in Jackson, Miss.


Borscht and Blini to Go
Just five years after the "Beeg Mek" took Russia by storm, a group of local businessmen has retaliated by beginning the country's first chain of fast-food restaurants, complete with their own version of a Happy Meal -- borscht, blini and vodka.
Open less than a week, in a spotless two-story space across Pushkin Square from the busiest McDonald's in the world, Russkoye Bistro promises to do for Russian culinary capitalism what, well, McDonald's did for Russian culinary capitalism.


'Megan's Law' Case Grows
Additional charges have been filed against a paroled child molester whose arrest last month raised questions about the effectiveness of "Megan's Law." After John Edward Greene was arrested on charges that he lured a 15-year-old boy into an apartment in Toms River on July 28 and molested him, a 14-year-old boy told the police that he was propositioned by Mr.
Greene in a bowling alley on July 23, and a man reported that the defendant assaulted him at a pool hall in mid-June.


N.B.A. and Union in Agreement at Midnight Hour
Ten minutes before a union-created midnight deadline, negotiators for the National Basketball Association and its players union announced a new six-year labor agreement last night.
Rather than conclude a labor battle, the agreement marked the beginning of the real fight -- the scrap between the league and the union on one side and the camp of dissident players on the other.


Limited Inc.(LTD,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Senate Backs Moratorium In Species Act
The Senate agreed tonight to place a one-year moratorium on any new listings under the Endangered Species Act to allow Congress time to review the law.
The amendment, adopted by a voice vote as part of a $12 billion spending bill for the Department of Interior, would soften a House proposal that would prohibit the Federal Fish and Wildlife Service from making any new listings to the Endangered Species list.


Columbia Gas System (CG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Bosnian Muslims Just Don't Trust Croats
At her stall in the city's main market, Vildana Kajanija dispensed predictions of her country's future as she sold fruits and vegetables.
Now that Croats have driven ethnic Serbs from a slice of their country, she expects the Croats will turn on Bosnia.
"The Croats will do what they have always done to us Muslims, they will stab us in the back," she said in the cool shade of the market building that was erected by Turkish rulers in the 16th century.


Frank Massi, Head Of Hearst, Dies at 85
Frank Massi, a former president and chief executive of the Hearst Corporation, died on Monday at his home in Garden City, L.I.
He was 85.
He also had a home in Boca Raton, Fla.
At his death, he was a director of Hearst.


Disney Is Big, but Is It So Bad?
To the Editor:
In "From Disney World to Disney's World" (Op-Ed, Aug. 1), Benjamin R. Barber tellingly reveals his contempt for the free market, as do all consumer advocates who want to protect us from ourselves.
Mr.
Barber begins with a false construct (corporate integration equals synergy equals monopoly), and then argues that a helpless public is victimized by the monopolistic practices of such as the Walt Disney Company.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Aug 4
Jul 28
Aug 5
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.6
7.7
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.0
3.4
Gasoline stocks
203.0
207.4
210.6
Distillate stocks
123.7
120.6
130.2
Crude imports, daily
7.6
7.5
6.9
Product imports, daily
1.9
1.7
2.2
Crude stocks
308.1
313.7
324.8
Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.6
Refinery utilization (%)
95.1
93.8
95.5
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a fuel tax evasion scheme in New Jersey referred incorrectly in some copies to one of two men outside Federal District Court in Newark.
The man on the right was a defendant, Gregory Khutorsky, not a lawyer.


METRO DIGEST
WELFARE RULES ALSO AFFECT RURAL POOR
In Friendship, N.Y., where oil barons lived in splendor 100 years ago, today an estimated 1 in 6 households is on welfare and 1 in 4 is poor, about the same percentages as in Brooklyn.
Yet amid this year's vigorous push in Albany to change the state's welfare rules, there was little discussion of the problems that afflict the rural poor.  [ Page A1. ]


Allou Health &amp; Beauty Care Inc.(ALU,A) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


After Long Siege, Bosnians Relish 'First Day of Freedom'
Emira Komic swam in the river today for the first time in three years.
After that, she went home and put on lipstick and blue eyeshadow, fixed her red hair, put on a cheery dress that had been in storage since the war began, and with a big smile of relief walked about this city.
"I feel free," declared Ms.
Komic, a high-school biology teacher who lost the last three of her 46 years to a state of siege.


Welfare Rules Created for Cities Cause Trouble in the Countryside
This region of cornfields and shale-encrusted hills near the Pennsylvania border once seeped with wealth in the form of crude oil.
Now the very same hills conceal pockets of poverty and welfare dependency.
In this town where oil barons lived in splendor 100 years ago, today an estimated 1 in 6 households is on welfare and 1 in 4 is poor, about the same percentages as in Brooklyn.


Day Camp Buses Collide in Brooklyn


General Nutrition (GNCI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 22


Merkley Abandons Diet-Center Review
Merkley Newman Harty in New York has withdrawn from the review of the Weight Watchers International account, with billings estimated at $30 million to $35 million.
The account for Weight Watchers, a unit of the H. J. Heinz Company in Jericho, L.I., has been at Doig, Elliott, Schur in New York for the last year.
Alan Krinsky, a partner at Advice &amp; Advisors Inc. in New York, the consulting company handling the review, said yesterday that Merkley Newman, a unit of the Omnicom Group, had pulled out of the review citing the additional workload from its recently acquired BellSouth Telecommunications account.


Paramedics Can Practice Life-Saving Process on Cats
Gov.
George E. Pataki announced today that he had signed legislation that allows paramedics to practice inserting breathing tubes into the throats and lungs of live cats.
The statute is intended to provide paramedics more realistic training in a process known as endotracheal intubation for children.
Cats have breathing passages similar in size and shape to those of human children.


ANN TAYLOR STORES CORP. (ANN,N)
The Ann Taylor Stores Corporation yesterday posted a wider-than-expected loss for the fiscal second quarter, reflecting weak sales of its spring women's fashions.
But investors focused on the retailer's prospects for a rebound.
Ann Taylor said it lost $3.81 million, or 16 cents a share, in the quarter ended July 29, compared with net income of $7.06 million, or 30 cents a share, in the corresponding period a year earlier.


Ex-Union Chief's Hearing Is Adjourned
ALAN EAGLESON's disciplinary hearing before the Law Society of Upper Canada was adjourned yesterday until Nov. 13.
Eagleson, former head of the National Hockey League Players Association, is charged by the law society with professional misconduct and conduct unbecoming a barrister.
Eagleson's lawyer, BRIAN GREENSPAN, had sought the adjournment to allow Eagleson to deal with extradition to the United States before facing charges in Canada.


Fisher Scientific International Inc.(FSH,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


DOLE POSTPONES FURTHER DEBATE ON WELFARE BILL
Caught in an impasse created by conservative Republicans and many Democrats, Senate Republican leaders said today that they could not finish work this week on a comprehensive bill making vast changes in the nation's welfare programs, and they decided to lay aside the legislation until after a three-week summer recess that begins this week.
The decision was a major setback for Senator Bob Dole, the Republican leader and the front-running candidate for his party's Presidential nomination in 1996.
Revamping welfare is one of the Republicans' political priorities, and just a month ago Mr.
Dole threatened to keep the Senate in session through August if necessary to pass a welfare bill.


Dynacare Inc. reports earnings for 2nd qtr to Jun 30


King's Career at Army Appears Finished
The often-injured Army fullback AKILI KING has been suspended by the academy and probably will be dismissed.
King left West Point, N.Y., last Friday, according to the Army director of public relations, Lieut.
Col.
DON McGRATH.
King's departure came four days after West Point Superintendent Lieut.
Gen.
HOWARD D. GRAVES recommended his dismissal.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMOCO CORP., Chicago, the oil and gas company, said it was entering a joint venture with Fomento Economico Mexicano S.A., Monterrey, Mexico, to manage and build convenience stores at Mexican gas stations.
Fema will own a majority stake in the venture.
GOODYEAR TIRE AND RUBBER CO., Akron, Ohio, said it would build a $14 million plant in Statesville, N.C., to build molds and molded parts for passenger-vehicle and truck tires in the United States and Canada.


Bad Cops, Bureaucrats And a Natural Schlemiel
PIGTOWN  By William J. Caunitz  308 pages.
Crown. $23.
UNDER GROUND  By Michael Daly  415 pages.
Little, Brown. $21.95


Through Survivors' Tales, Nagasaki Joins Japan's Timeless Folklore
Since near the dawn of Japanese history, storytellers called kataribe have spun folk tales for younger generations, but the ancient legends of dragons and ogres cannot match the stories of Toshiyuki Hayama.
"I still see her sometimes in my dreams," said Mr.
Hayama, who was 15 and badly burned in the atomic bombing of Nagasaki 50 years ago today.
"In front of me was a mother carrying a baby in a cloth on her back, and she was gently rocking back and forth so it could sleep.


Esther Muir, 92, Character Actress
Esther Muir, a character actress who began her career on Broadway in the 1920's and went on to appear in some 70 films, died on Aug. 1 at Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
She was 92 and lived in Somers, N.Y.
Ms.
Muir started modeling while still in high school in New York City and soon landed a role in a show called "Greenwich Village Follies." She went on to appear in the "Earl Carroll Vanities" and in "International Revue," a show that starred Gertrude Lawrence.
Her big break came when she landed the title role in "My Girl Friday!" in 1929.
Shortly thereafter, the columnist Walter Winchell introduced her to the Hollywood director and choreographer Busby Berkeley, whom she married.
They were divorced in 1931.


Sports of The Times; Beginning Of a New N.B.A. Battle
CHARLES SMITH's car phone was breaking up, but in between scratches and breaks, you could hear traces of strained optimism.
Smith, the vice president of the National Basketball Association Players Association, was on his way to Brooklyn yesterday afternoon to review a new collective bargaining proposal he felt could save the reputation, indeed, the very existence, of his organization.
On Monday, N.B.A. lawyers had faxed a response to the association's four major bargaining points.
"What it comes down to is this," Smith said.
"The league has given us another deal -- the deal we want."


Food Notes
Uptown Garage
In November, Gourmet Garage, at 453 Broome Street (at Mercer Street), a market that sells produce, cheeses and the like at near wholesale prices, will open a branch on the Upper East Side.
The new 7,000-square-foot space, at 301 East 64th Street, is on a block lined with garages filled with Fords, not food.
Official Foods
The first of what promises to be a flood of "official" food products for the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta is now on the market.
The array of chocolates, coffee, bottled waters, candy, salad dressings and biscuits in commemorative tins includes Eternal Flame Hot Sauce, a fierce blend of several kinds of chilis made by Oak Hill Farms in Atlanta.
It is available in retail shops in Atlanta for around $5 a bottle and eventually will be sold nationwide.
More information can be obtained by calling (800) 878-7808.
Flakes of Old
Here is one antidote to high-priced name-brand cold cereals.
The D'Agostino supermarket chain is selling an unusual new cereal, President's Choice Ancient Grains, in 13-ounce boxes for $2.79, considerably cheaper than the big brands.
The large flakes, which hold up nicely in a bowl of milk, are made from a combination of organic spelt, millet, kamut, barley and quinoa -- grains cultivated in ancient times -- plus more common wheat and oats.
The cereal, sweetened with honey and barley malt, is fat-free.
There are 110 calories and 3 grams of fiber in three quarters of a cup of Ancient Grains, and only 100 milligrams of sodium, relatively low as cereals go.
Off the Menu Coming to TriBeCa
In November, Mos'Quito, at 179 Franklin Street (near Hudson Street) in TriBeCa, will add French-creole cooking to a block that already offers contemporary American fare at TriBeCa Grill and innovative Japanese cooking at Nobu.
Among the owners of Mos'Quito -- so named because mosquitoes do not discriminate in whom they attack -- is Allen West, who was the manager of Kwanzaa, a restaurant with African dishes.
The partners are negotiating with a chef from Louisiana.
The restaurant will seat 200 people and will have a skylighted atrium, a waterfall and a sculpture garden.
It is being designed to evoke old New Orleans, but without the humidity -- or the mosquitoes. . . . and to West 58th Street
A new vegetarian-Chinese restaurant, with an emphasis on Tibetan-Buddhist food, is expected to open in November at 145 West 58th Street.
The restaurant, to be called Vajrayana Garden, is being designed by James Rossant and will use Chinese calligraphy in the decor.
Mr.
Rossant's wife, Colette, is the food consultant.
The restaurant is owned by Ngan Fung Chum, a former Chnese opera singer who studied with Vajrayana, a Buddhist philosopher.
Benefits at One City
A series of seven benefit dinners featuring dishes by cookbook authors will be held in coming months at One City Cafe, the restaurant run by the Food and Hunger Hotline at 240 West 14th Street.
The first dinner, on Sept. 13, will have a menu from the Union Square Cookbook, by Danny Meyer and Michael Romano, who will supervise the cooking.
All dinners begin at 7 P.M. and cost $70, including wines and gratuities.
Complete schedule and reservations: (212) 533-7600.
Changing the Oil
Wine lists.
Beer lists.
Water lists.
Cigar lists.
Now there is a restaurant with an olive-oil list.
Follonico, at 6 West 24th Street, has a menu of nine olive oils priced from $1.50 to $2.75 for a one-ounce taste.
The house olive oil will still continue to be poured free of charge.
Vong Comes to London
Vong will open a branch in London in November.
It will replace a French restaurant in the Barclay Hotel in Knightsbridge and will be designed by Keith Hobbs, who has Quaglino's to his credit, among other Terence Conran properties.
Tom Dimarzo, a chef at Vong in Manhattan, will be the chef in London.
There is also a Vong in Mexico City.
Nosmo King Chef to Leave
Alan Harding, the chef at Nosmo King, in TriBeCa, is leaving.
He is unsure about his future plans.
Steve Frankel, the owner of Nosmo King, said the restaurant will close for vacation on Aug. 18 and reopen on Sept. 7, but he has not determined who will replace Mr.
Harding.
Village Changes
The Village Corner, which occupied a spot on the corner of Bleecker Street and La Guardia Place in Greenwich Village for more than 36 years, has closed and will reopen in September as Village Grill.
Among the owners of Village Grill, at 518 La Guardia Place, are Bruce Goldstein, who had owned Central Falls in SoHo; Griffin Dunne, the actor, and Robert F. Colesberry and Jeff Ross, film and television producers.
The owners expect Village Grill to attract a late-night crowd.


No Rezoning for Retail Complex
Saying that he wanted to avoid the appearance of impropriety, Mayor David J. Dwork vetoed a zoning change yesterday that would have allowed development of a 460,000-square-foot retail and office complex on Route 17.
The Township Council had voted 4 to 3 on July 27 to approve the change, but the Mayor said he was concerned about a $250,000 contribution that the developer, Troll Associates of Mahwah, had agreed to make to the township's general fund if the project were approved.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.63
5.76
4.23
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.37
5.41
4.41
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.37
5.40
4.91
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.45
6.45
7.30
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.88
6.89
7.57
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.73
7.73
8.36
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.25
6.26
6.41
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Claire's Stores (CLE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Territories Take Colonialism Seriously
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 1 U.N.
Journal on the Special Committee on Decolonization carefully hews to the efforts by certain major powers to denigrate the committee and, if possible, to abolish it.
These efforts refuse to recognize certain realities.


Plea of Not Guilty in a Killing
A homeless woman pleaded not guilty yesterday to the fatal stabbing and bludgeoning of a man who may have taken her in because he felt sorry for her, the authorities said.
Lydia Frederick, 42, was arrested on Monday after the body of Marcos Rodriguez, 53, was found in his apartment.


Brazil Looks North From Trade Zone in Amazon
Years ago, the black-and-white photograph undoubtedly drew chuckles from business executives in Brazil's industrial south.
Gathered under a banner hailing the Amazon's new duty-free industrial zone, perspiring men stood solemnly in a freshly bulldozed jungle clearing in front of a thatched hut.
Today, no one is laughing.


Thorn to Union's Leader Is Awarded Damages
For four years, Carlos Guzman fought a lonely battle against one of the biggest unions in New York City.
An office building porter, Mr.
Guzman said he felt that the union he belonged to, Local 32B-32J of the Service Employees International Union, charged too much in dues and awarded its leaders six-figure salaries that were much too generous.


Global DirectMail Corp.(GML,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Fearing Attack by Hutu Exiles in Zaire, Rwanda Bolsters Its Defenses
As the United Nations withdraws its peacekeepers from this tortured country, the Rwandan military is massing troops along its western border in defense against what many fear may be a reprise of last year's civil war.
United Nations officials, who have already pulled their troops back from major border towns in preparation for a final pullout by the end of the year, believe the mainly Tutsi Rwandan military has mustered as many as 50,000 soldiers in anticipation of an attack by rearmed remnants of the exiled Hutu military based in refugee camps in neighboring Zaire.


Simpson Defense Lawyers Decide, for Now, Not to Present Testimony by DNA Expert
Testimony in the O. J. Simpson trial stumbled to a stop today as the long-anticipated face-off between an unorthodox Nobel Prize-winning chemist and a prosecutor publicly determined to undo him was postponed, or perhaps sidestepped altogether.
Mr.
Simpson's lawyers had said they would call Dr.
Kary Mullis, originator of the method of DNA testing called polymerase chain reaction, or P.C.R., that was used to analyze blood samples in the case.
Dr.
Mullis, who shared the Nobel Prize for chemistry in 1993 for that work, is known to be critical of the use of such technology in this case.


Kenetech Corp.(KWND,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Goldman Partner Leaves Seat on Rockefeller Center REIT Board
Daniel M. Neidich, a partner at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, has resigned from the board of Rockefeller Center Properties Inc., the real estate investment trust that holds the mortgage on Rockefeller Center.
Goldman and its Whitehall Real Estate Fund, which lent the trust $225 million last year to bail it out of a cash squeeze, resigned the board seat as negotiations toward a sale of the property heated up.


Sara Lee Corp.(SLE,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 1


Vietnam's Budding Market: What Role for U.S.?
The American flag finally flies in Hanoi now, over a new embassy that symbolizes the end of the argument in Washington over whether and when to recognize Vietnam.
Hanoi, stultifying and lifeless just five years ago, is suddenly the new magnet for entrepreneurs seeking one of the few frontier cities left in Asia.
Gracious but decrepit French town houses are suddenly fetching prices in the millions, and already ads for Carrier air conditioners and Caterpillar tractors are popping up in villages that American pilots once bombed.


Johnson Seems a Lock To Win at 400 Meters
Michael Johnson is well aware that little is going according to plan at the world track and field championships.
Old stars are fading, favorites are being routinely upset.
The latest to fall today was Javier Sotomayor of Cuba, the world-record holder in the high jump, who lost to Troy Kemp of the Bahamas.
Kemp took the gold medal on fewer misses with a jump of 7 feet 9 1/2 inches, as Sotomayor, the silver medalist, continued to be bothered by an ankle injury.


Chinese Couple Held 13 Days In International Ransom Plot
Two Chinese immigrants held captive for 13 days in a Brooklyn basement closet were freed and their abductors were captured on Monday night, the police said, after an around-the-clock investigation of an international kidnapping-for-ransom plot.
Kidnappings of Asians in New York by members of Asian gangs have risen in the last two years and account for more than half of the 30 kidnappings in the city this year, Capt.
George Duke of the Police Department's major case squad said.
What made this case unusual, the authorities said, was that the immigrants who were abducted were here legally and the ransom was sought from the victims' relatives in China.


AT WORK WITH: The Art Guys; In Performance: Life Imitates Art Imitating Life
MEET the Art Guys. Here in Houston, it's impossible not to.
There they were one recent day, working as clerks for 24 hours straight at the Stop N Go convenience store in Houston's museum district.
They sold lottery tickets.
They asked for patience when a customer couldn't get the gas pump to work and neither could they.
"Hey, we're new at this," said Michael Galbreth, an Art Guy.
They mopped the floor.


Bolt Beranek &amp; Newman Inc.(BBN,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Mayor Sees a Truce On Student Transit
Mayor Giuliani said yesterday that New York City and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority were close to a temporary truce that would save transit passes for almost 500,000 students, at least for the first few months of the coming school year.


Moscow Journal; To the Business Risks in Russia, Add Poisoning
The unusual thing about the mysterious death of Ivan K. Kivelidi, a prominent Russian businessman who died on Friday, was neither the victim's wealth nor his influence.
It was the macabre 14th-century way in which he died -- poisoning.
Unlike the many businessmen who have been stabbed, shot or blown up this year, Mr.
Kivelidi, 46, the head of the Russian Business Round Table, was killed by cadmium, a heavy metal, the police said.
His secretary also died of poisoning.


Unabomber's Works
To the Editor:
As a writer who keeps struggling to get serious work published, I find it almost funny (were it not so grotesque) that a freelance terrorist could publish 3,000 words in The New York Times ("Excerpts From Manuscript Linked to Suspect in 17-Year Series of Bombings," Aug. 2) on the basis of killing 3 people and maiming 23 others.
Maybe my strategy of sending writing samples and a self-addressed stamped envelope is foolish, and I should try something stronger -- at least a brick through a window?
Perhaps force really is the only language editors understand.


Justice and Treasury Officials Hindered Whitewater Inquiry, Investigator Says
An investigator who the Republicans hope will put an appealing human face on the complicated and numbers-riddled issue of Whitewater told a House panel today that officials in the Justice and Treasury Departments, as well as in the Resolution Trust Corporation, sought to block her as she pursued the case.
L.
Jean Lewis, a 41-year-old Federal banking investigator from Kansas City, gave her first public account of her experiences in testimony today before the House Banking Committee.
Ms.
Lewis said that she encountered resistance at all turns as she looked into the dealings of a failed Arkansas savings and loan association.
The savings and loan association, Madison Guaranty, was owned by James B. McDougal, Bill and Hillary Clinton's partner in the Whitewater real estate development.


New York Officers Incur Wrath of Southampton Officials
Alanson Lane here is a quiet, sun-baked street with airy wooden houses that give summer refuge to retirees and young people from Queens and other middle-class parts of New York City.
It is a place where raucous parties are not the norm, where the police are quick to issue summonses to residents for having too many cars parked outside their houses or for leaving beer cans or paper cups strewn on their lawns.
Most of the time, town officials say, violators get the message after a couple of parking tickets or a littering fine.


Loewen Group (LWNGF,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


National Convenience Stores Inc.(NCS,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Severe Water Crisis Ahead for Poorest Nations in Next 2 Decades
In many of the world's poorest countries, a combination of industrialization without pollution controls, persistent population growth and the continued subsidizing of the cost of water for farmers is hastening the onset of a severe water crisis over the next decade or two, a World Bank study reported this week.
The report said 80 countries with 40 percent of the world's population already have water shortages that could cripple agriculture and industry.


New York Needs to Enforce the Tobacco Act
To the Editor:
That stores near California schools are plastered with tobacco ads (news article, Aug. 3) will come as no surprise to New Yorkers, assaulted with storefront cigarette ads every day, some across from schools and playgrounds.
Major tobacco manufacturers have instituted a voluntary code to keep advertising billboards 500 feet from schools and playgrounds.


Crown Life Insurance Co. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Warehouse Caught Fire When Gloves Combusted
The spectacular fire that gutted a warehouse at the Brooklyn Navy Yard last week, sending a pall of smoke over the East River and injuring 67 firefighters, began when thousands of latex gloves packed closely together caught fire by spontaneous combustion on a 96-degree day, fire officials said.
At least 1,000 cases of the medical examination gloves, imported from China, have been shipped around the country by a company in California through distributors in Alabama, Chicago and New Jersey, said the city's Fire Commissioner, Howard Safir.
He said there were three other known instances when the gloves either smoldered, burst into flames or gave off a pungent odor.


Calendar: Exhibitions, Tours And Crafts Sales
Crafts at the Seaport  South Street Seaport, South Street and Fulton Street; (212) 866-2239.
The American Arts and Crafts Alliance will sponsor a crafts sale by more than 150 artists on Saturday and Sunday and again on Aug. 19 and 20, from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
No charge for admission.
Manhattan History  Merchant's House Museum, (212) 777-1089.
On Saturday at 1 P.M., the museum will sponsor a walking tour from City Hall to the South Street Seaport.
The tour, from two and a half to three hours, will explore neighborhoods including Five Points, Chatham Square and part of Chinatown.
Reservations are required.
Fee, $10; members, $7.
Metalwork Underground  New York Transit Museum, Boerum Place and Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn Heights; (718) 330-5839.
An exhibition of metal objects and decorative metalwork designed for the subway system, including gratings, lanterns, lamp posts and railings, will be on display through Sept. 9.
Open Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission is $3; those 62 or older, or under 17, $1.50.
Crafts in New Jersey  Wheaton Village, 1501 Glasstown Road (off Wade Boulevard), Millville, N.J.; (800) 998-4552.
A crafts sale featuring the works of 160 artists will be held on the grounds of Wheaton Village, the site of the American Glass Museum and the T. C. Wheaton Glass Factory, tomorrow and Saturday, from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M., and Sunday, from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $6; those 55 and older, $5.50; students, $3.50; families, $12; no charge for children under 6.
American Portraiture  Hudson River Museum of Westchester, 511 Warburton Avenue near Phillipse Road, Yonkers; (914) 963-4550.
"Making Faces: American Portraits," an exhibition tracing more than 200 years of portraiture, continues through Aug. 27.
In addition to paintings, sculpture and photographs, the show includes stamps, magazines, baseball cards, posters, ceramic works, currency and ID cards.
Open Wednesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. (Friday until 9 P.M.); Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission is $3; those 12 and younger or 62 and older, $1.50.
Garden Exhibition  Longwood Gardens, three miles northeast of Kennett Square, Pa., on U.S.
Route 1; (610) 388-1000.
A new permanent exhibition about the history of Longwood Gardens, including photographs, film, plans, artifacts, maps and documents, opened last month at the Peirce-du Pont House, a historic building that dates from 1730, with the addition of a conservatory in 1919.
The exhibition examines the horticultural collections of the garden, stages of its landscape design, and the story of the Peirce and du Pont families.
Hours in the house museum are 10 A.M to 6 P.M. daily.
Admission to the gardens and the house is $8 (Tuesdays only, $6); those ages 16 to 20, $4; those 6 to 15, $1.


Scientists Find Human Gene Linked to Adult Diabetes
Scientists have found the first human gene associated with adult onset diabetes, a disorder closely tied to obesity.
The gene is also associated with increased body weight among the obese.
But researchers cautioned that the findings were preliminary.
Mutations of the gene do not by themselves cause either obesity or diabetes and the discovery does not immediately lead to treatments or genetic testing that would show whether a person was at risk of developing either condition.


Cinemark USA Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Red Sox Sweep the Indians for 7th Straight
Red Sox 9, Indians 5
Pinch-hitter Matt Stairs singled home the go-ahead run in the eighth inning last night and the Boston Red Sox beat the Cleveland Indians, 9-5, at Fenway Park for their seventh straight victory.


International Briefs; In Brief
*
Glaxo India Ltd. said its joint managing director, H. R. Khusrokhan, will take over as managing director at Burroughs Wellcome of India Ltd. beginning Sept. 1.
In India, the two companies have remained separate despite Glaxo P.L.C.'s takeover of Wellcome P.L.C. for $:9.4 billion.


Athletes (and Atlanta) Test Pre-Olympic Mettle
In the year before an Olympics, the host city traditionally puts on major international events in Olympic sports.
The idea is to allow potential Olympic athletes to acclimate to the facilities and, at the same time, allow the organizers to head off problems before they arise in the Games.
Atlanta, which will stage the 1996 Olympics, is testing -- and being tested -- in a major way.
In the first 20 days of this month, the city and environs are staging major competitions in 16 sports.
This weekend alone, the schedule includes championships in world freestyle wrestling, United States Open badminton, World Team Cup table tennis and World Cup modern pentathlon.


Market Place; Tobacco Road Still Beckons On Wall St.
Nothing seems to sour Wall Street on the tobacco industry -- not lawsuits, not scientific research, not the prospect of Federal regulation, and not even Presidential denunciations.
To be sure, shares of the Philip Morris Companies fell $1.375 yesterday after President Clinton uttered tough words in Charlotte, N.C., about cracking down on smoking by teen-agers.
The decline may have been fueled by the expectation that Mr.
Clinton will announce today that the Food and Drug Administration will regulate tobacco as an addictive drug.


KN Energy (KNE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


True North Communications Inc.(TNO,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Boston Banks Lend More To Minorities, Study Finds
Six years after a series of studies portrayed Boston as rife with racial discrimination in lending, banks there have greatly improved their records in lending to minorities and residents of low-income neighborhoods, a study released today finds.
The study, by James T. Campen, an associate professor of economics at the University of Massachusetts at Boston, was financed by a grant from the Massachusetts Community and Banking Council, a group of banks and community groups.
The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, which produced critical studies in 1989 and 1992, cautiously endorsed today's report.


Steinberg Had Mild Stroke
Reliance Holdings Group Inc. confirmed yesterday that its chairman, the takeover strategist Saul P. Steinberg, suffered a stroke in June.
Mr.
Steinberg's stroke, first reported on CNBC on Tuesday, was mild and "not material" to the big insurance company's operations, a Reliance Holdings spokesman said.
Mr.
Steinberg is recuperating at home from some minor paralysis.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  PANEL DENOUNCES A PATHMARK DEAL
The City Planning Commission voted to denounce a deal the City Council struck with Pathmark Stores last month to build a large supermarket in Springfield Gardens, Queens, in which the company agreed to donate more than $400,000 to other merchants and to youth groups in the area.  [ Page B3. ] M.T.A.
TO RETREAT A BIT ON SERVICE CUTS
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority board will retreat slightly from planned service cuts, including keeping the Franklin Avenue Shuttle in Brooklyn running around the clock.
But the board will go ahead with broad reductions in subway and bus service.  [ B3. ] GROUP TO LAUNCH H.I.V.
TESTING PROGRAM
The Gay Men's Health Crisis plans to begin its own testing program for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, offering counseling and support not only for those who have the virus but also, in a departure from common practice, for those who do not.  [ B2. ] DEFENDANT REFUSES TO TAKE MEDICATION
The Town of Southampton is filing a civil action against two New York City police officers and eight others in State Supreme Court in Riverhead, L.I.
Officials said the officers are part of a group that has continued to hold large, noisy gatherings in Hampton Bays, L.I., despite several summonses and fines.  [ B5. ] SCHOOL BOARD RESTRICTIONS BECOME LAW
Governor Pataki signed into law a measure that would bar local school board members from serving again for three years after being removed from office for malfeasance.  [ B5. ] DESPITE OBJECTIONS, PRIMATE LAB IS SOLD
Over the objections of animal-rights advocates, New York University Medical Center transferred ownership of its highly regarded primate research laboratory to a New Mexico-based center that has been charged with violating Federal animal-welfare rules.  [ B5. ] PATAKI BROADENS A DROUGHT WATCH
Governor Pataki expanded a drought watch in New York City and Westchester County to almost the entire region south of the Adirondacks.  [ B5. ] 3 ACCUSED OF FIXING HARNESS RACES
Three harness race drivers were charged with throwing races at Yonkers Raceway for a gambling ring that took in up to $500,000 a day.
The authorities said that ring members also placed illegal bets on races at the Meadowlands and on professional baseball, hockey, basketball and other sports events.  [ B5. ] HEALTH DEPT.
CLEARS WATER SUPPLY
The New York State Department of Health concluded that tests of New York City's water supply were not manipulated to avoid potential detection of bacteria.  [ B4. ]


Frightened and Jeered At, Serbs Flee From Croatia
Thousands of defeated and visibly frightened Serbs streamed out of Croatia today, jeered in their flight by crowds of bitter Croats who lined the roads to witness the latest chapter in the ethnic division of the Balkans.
Under a cease-fire brokered by the United Nations, Croatian Serb civilians who had been trapped in the aftermath of a Croatian offensive were allowed to leave the region.
In turn, Serbian rebels agreed to surrender the heavy weapons they had used to cover their retreat.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Becker Loses in ATP  Third-seeded Boris Becker, playing his first singles match since his loss to Pete Sampras in the Wimbledon final, lost to Jan Siemerink of the Netherlands, 7-5, 7-6 (9-7), yesterday at the ATP Championship in Mason, Ohio.


Security-Connecticut Corp.(SRC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Yankees Stung by Left-Handed Dealing
After Wade Boggs deposited Jamie Moyer's first pitch over the right-center-field fence to swiftly and sweetly initiate the first inning for the Yankees yesterday, the immediate presumption was that this would be another glorious game for them.
The blue seats would continue filling, the gorgeous weather would remain and the Yankees would bruise the Orioles again.
Forget the presumption.


The Mets Blessed By Rookie Magic
His best friend on the team might be the most excitable Met.
But Jason Isringhausen is calm and cool when it comes to his turn on the mound.
"I try not to get overexcited very often," said Isringhausen, whose demeanor stands in contrast to that of quirky Billy Pulsipher, the other prize rookie on the Mets' pitching staff.
"When I got called up, I started shaking. Other than that, it doesn't happen too often."


Bobsled on the Boardwalk
It was an odd sight amid the T-shirt shops and shooting galleries: people wheeling a 300-pound bobsled from the 1992 Olympic Games down the boardwalk.
The sled, stripped of its runners, was the centerpiece of a five-day promotional event staged by the United States Bobsled Team that began yesterday.
The team hopes to drum up interest in the sport and attract new participants, the A.P. reported.


Tandycrafts Inc.(TAC,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


St. Michaels Journal; In an Old Town, a Bell-Ringing Event
This was history in the making, all right.
Maybe not on the scale of what happened in the early morning of Aug. 10, 1813, when British barges were shelling shipyards along the Chesapeake Bay and people here hung lanterns from distant trees, causing enemy cannons to overshoot their targets.
That is when St.
Michaels became known as "The Town That Fooled the British."
Still, finding a new town bell ringer after searching for 11 years was cause for celebration, and Town Commissioner Fred M. Mowbray beamed tonight when he announced at the twice-a-month town meeting, "I'm pleased to report we have a new volunteer bell ringer."


Serb First Lady Plays Powerful Political Role
Always cryptic and endlessly Machiavellian, the President of Serbia, Slobodan Milosevic, is the undisputed ruler of what remains of Yugoslavia.
But a growing body of evidence suggests that when Mr.
Milosevic closes his doors to make decisions, the person who holds the greatest political influence over him is his wife.
After years in the shadows, the Serbian first lady, Mirjana Markovic, 53, is emerging as an important power broker.


Griffey Is Progressing Well From Injury
Seattle Mariners center fielder KEN GRIFFEY Jr. will not play for the Class AA Wilmington (N.C.) Roosters as part of a rehabilitation assignment.
JIM BEATTIE, director of player development for the Mariners, said yesterday that Griffey, who broke his left wrist May 26, is progressing faster than expected.
He may rejoin the Mariners as early as next Monday, Beattie said.


U.S. Leather Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Joy of an Alternative
To The Home Section:
To each her own birth choice.
My 25-year-old daughter chose to give birth at home in Oregon with the help of three midwives -- despite a sonogram that showed "high risk" twin fetuses, with one in the breach position.
To induce stronger contractions, one of the midwives took her on a three-hour walk.
The breach baby came first, a perfect 6 1/2 pounds with red hair.
Five hours later, his brother arrived, caught by his father's loving hands.
For those of us in the room, the feeling was indescribable.
NORMAN WASSERMAN  Brooklyn


Lexus puts a new spin on the rundown image of used cars, giving leased cars a second life.
IN Beverly Hills, garages are sometimes called "auto reception areas." So it's no surprise that Lexus, Toyota's luxury car line, calls its used cars "certified pre-owned vehicles."
But there is a purpose behind the pomposity.
Used-car sales totaled nearly three million vehicles last year.
And more of these were leased cars, especially at Lexus.
So more car companies will have to find innovative ways to market the growing flood of used cars.


Ally &amp; Gargano Loses BMW Work
Ally &amp; Gargano, the troubled New York agency, has lost one of its remaining accounts and has agreed to sell its health services division.
The metropolitan New York BMW dealers association has ended its relationship with Ally after almost three years.
As a result the account, with billings estimated at $5 million, has been placed in review.


Ruling on Blood Is a Setback for Simpson
Denting the defense's theory of a police conspiracy, Judge Lance A. Ito ruled today that lawyers for O. J. Simpson had failed to prove that a disclosure in the press about blood evidence was material to the case.
He said the defense could neither see a police report about the disclosure nor ask two news reporters about it.
The decision, made in an abbreviated court session, means that lawyers for Mr.
Simpson, who is accused of murdering his former wife and her friend, will not gain access to an internal police investigation of the disclosure, which the defense maintains would help establish that the police set up Mr.
Simpson by planting blood on a sock found in his bedroom.


COMPANY BRIEFS
C-COR ELECTRONICS INC., State College, Pa., said it had received a contract to provide video and television transmission equipment to Pacific Bell, San Francisco, a subsidiary of Pacific Telesis Group.
The terms were not disclosed.


Going Beyond Bugs, and Getting Down to Germs
FAR-FLUNG HUBBELL  By Sue Hubbell  187 pages.
Random House. $21.
A FIELD GUIDE TO GERMS  By Wayne Biddle  Illustrated. 196 pages.
Henry Holt &amp; Company. $22.50.


Politics, This Is Art. Art, This Is Politics
For all the natural instinct of artists to want to change the world, it is rare for their works to be displayed in a setting where government officials must take note of them.
But an unusual exhibition at the United Nations complex in Geneva does just that: it forces art and politics to coexist.
Organized to mark the 50th anniversary of the foundation of the United Nations, "Dialogues of Peace" brings together paintings, sculptures, video art and installations by 60 contemporary artists from around the world.
Almost all the works have been created specifically for the show, which opened on July 3 and runs through Oct. 26.


CHRONICLE
What a way to end "Aloha From Hawaii": after singing "Can't Help Falling in Love," ELVIS PRESLEY ended the 1973 concert in Honolulu by tossing his rhinestone-studded cape into the audience.
Bruce Spinks, a sportswriter, made the catch.
Later he sold it to ANDREW KERN, an Elvis memorabilia collector from Miami.


Revival of Economic Growth Is Scant So Far, the Fed Reports
While the sluggish American economy may be poised for a rebound, the much-anticipated return to higher rates of economic growth in the second half of the year has not yet happened, the Federal Reserve said in a report issued today.
Although the report does not specifically address interest-rate policy, its slightly pessimistic tone about growth, coupled with the playing down of inflation risks, suggests that the central bank will have room to cut rates further later this year.
But most economists expect Fed policy makers to leave short-term interest rates unchanged at their next meeting on Aug. 22, waiting for more data to become available in September.


Head Trainer Picked for Tyson
JAY BRIGHT, a longtime friend of MIKE TYSON, will be the former heavyweight champion's head trainer.
The appointment, made by Tyson's managers, JOHN HORNE and RORY HOLLOWAY, was announced after Tyson appeared at a news conference Tuesday in Los Angeles to promote his comeback fight against PETER McNEELEY on Aug. 19 at the MGM Grand Garden in Las Vegas, Nev.
Bright has been working with Tyson. (AP)


Detroit Paper Is Ready to Replace Strikers
A year ago, The Detroit Free Press editorialized in favor of a Federal law banning the use of replacement workers during strikes.
Now The Free Press is threatening to start permanently replacing its striking journalists if they do not return to work by 10 A.M.
Thursday.
This is a sign of how severe the struggle has become in the month-old strike here against The Free Press and The Detroit News by six unions representing 2,500 pressmen, drivers, maintenance workers, reporters, and others.


Bridge
It was past midnight Sunday, and 700 players who had completed play in the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals in New Orleans were intently watching the Vugraph screen.
Three deals remained in the finals of the Spingold Knockout Team Championship, and the defending champions headed by Richard Freeman of Atlanta had a lead of 19 imps.
It seemed over.
The commentators reported that in the closed room on the diagramed deal South for the Freeman team had played in four spades, scoring 480.
On Vugraph, the bidding was more dynamic.
Eric Rodwell, East for the Freeman team, opened two clubs, showing a six-card suit in his methods.
Zia Mahmood as South bid four spades, and Jeff Meckstroth tried five diamonds as West.
Michael Rosenberg raised to five spades, and surprised the commentators by continuing to six spades when his partner doubled Rodwell's six-diamond bid.


White House Counsel Acted Within Law
To the Editor:
Re "Foster's Papers: What Executive Privilege?" (Op-Ed, Aug. 2): It does not seem possible that the issues surrounding the papers of Vincent W. Foster Jr., the deputy White House counsel who committed suicide, could become more confused.
Lester Brickman goes so far as to suggest that Bernard W. Nussbaum, the former White House counsel, is guilty of obstruction of justice.


Uneasy Riders; In Battle Over Transit Passes, Students Wait, and Worry
Adenike Cumberland, who hopes someday to manage a pharmaceutical company, sees her free transit pass as the ticket to a dream.
It enables her to study at the High School for Health Professions and Human Services near Stuyvesant Town in Manhattan, one hour by subway from her home in Far Rockaway, Queens.
Tarin Switzer of Elmhurst, Queens, a sophomore at St.
John's parochial school in Astoria, said she was counting on her transit pass to save her family $450 this year -- money that could come in handy with her father injured and unable to work.


Decades-Old U.S. Bombs Still Killing Laotians
The bombs that the United States Air Force dropped in profusion over the vast, mountainous stretches of this country that adjoin Vietnam are continuing to kill and maim Laotians more than two decades later.
Scattered all over eastern Laos are unexploded cluster bombs.
Smaller than tennis balls, they are tempting as playthings to children who find them on or just below the surface -- in schoolyards, vegetable patches or paddy fields, or on the dirt tracks of this underdeveloped country.
They are taking a belated toll of those not even born when they were dropped.


Accounts
*
Miller Brewing Co., Milwaukee, a unit of the Philip Morris Cos., to Bates USA, New York, a unit of Cordiant P.L.C., to introduce Miller Genuine Red beer in 11 states.
Bates already handles advertising for the Miller Genuine Draft and Genuine Draft Light brands.
The billings were not disclosed.


Communing After All These Years
JERRY BROWN, the former Governor of California who has worked with Mother Teresa, campaigned with Jesse Jackson and slept in shelters for the homeless, is a firm believer in communing -- with everyone.
Now he has put his money where his mouth is, not to mention the rest of him.
In June, Mr.
Brown, 57, moved into a commune -- his commune -- a new 17,500-square-foot building at 200 Harrison Street, two blocks from the historic Jack London Square.
He shares it with four other people, including a computer expert who happens to be a recovering drug addict.


R-B Rubber Co. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A Folk Art Defense Fund, Built of Paper
IN the two years since the Golden Venture ran aground off Queens, more than half of its Chinese refugee passengers have been held at various prisons and detainment centers, awaiting official settlement of their appeals for political asylum.
They are incarcerated, yes, but not daunted.
To raise money for their legal defense, the refugees at the York County Prison in York, Pa., have been making picturesque, often operatically ornate folded-paper art -- pagodas, mythical beasts, baskets and exotic fruits like the pineapple below -- from old magazines.


Leaving Children With Their Abusers
The deaths of three abused children in Connecticut and a grand jury investigation in Long Island's Suffolk County have raised doubts about the effectiveness of programs that try to keep abused children with their troubled families instead of removing them to foster care.
Both approaches are valid, and decisions about which to choose can only be made on a case-by-case basis.
But neither can succeed without adequate resources.
Most abused and neglected children are placed, at least temporarily, with foster parents or in foster boarding homes.
But in recent years about 35 states, including New York and Connecticut, have tried to decrease the number of children taken from their parents by providing support services, intense counseling and close monitoring to troubled families in an effort to help them remain intact.
The rationale is that families can provide better care and, over time, that the state can save money.


INSIDE
5 Million in Criminal System
The Government said the number of Americans under the control of the criminal justice system reached 5 million last year.
Page A14.
Timber Bill, Timber Ties
Members of a House panel considering a measure to require logging in an Alaska forest have a number of ties to timber businesses.
Page B6.
Airports Tighten Security
Airports increased security as the Government took steps to counter what it called an increased threat of terrorist attacks.
Page A14.
Time Warner Weighs Sale
Time Warner is in talks to sell its stake in Interscope Records, which has drawn fire for offensive lyrics in its gangsta rap music.
Page D1.
Troubled Park Buildings
Preservation specialists fear that thousands of historic structures in national parks are deterioriating beyond repair.
Page C1.


Gift to TV Networks
To the Editor:
Re "Media Mergers" (editorial, Aug. 2): Under pressure from the television networks, Congress and the Federal Communications Commission will soon reward these megacorporations with a multibillion-dollar deal to double their share of the airwaves free.
The broadcasters were to use this spectrum for the transition to high-definition television.
However, they are reneging on that deal -- to provide more "quality" television.
They will also use the airwaves for paging, and voice and data services.


Clarice Blackburn, Actress, Dies at 74
Clarice Blackburn, an actress and television writer, died at her home in Manhattan on Saturday.
She was 74 and also had a home in Cutchogue, L.I.
The cause was cancer, said Marge Berson, her friend and executor.


Pomeroy Computer Resources Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 5


George N. Lindsay, 75, Lawyer Active in Human Rights Groups
George N. Lindsay, a New York lawyer who was active in politics and human rights in the United States and abroad, died on Tuesday.
He was 75.
Mr.
Lindsay, a brother of former Mayor John V. Lindsay of New York, lived in Syosset, L.I., and in Manhattan.
He died of a heart attack while playing tennis on Long Island, according to representatives of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton, the law firm in which he was a former presiding partner.


Governor Hangs On to Vouchers
State Senator Richard J. Codey, Democrat of West Orange, said yesterday that he had been trying for two months to obtain itemized vouchers of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's traveling expenses but had been stonewalled by the administration.
Mr.
Codey, the assistant minority leader, said that the Governor not only travels out of state too often but also takes too many people with her.
He said that without the vouchers, lawmakers cannot properly monitor the Governor's spending.


Trilon Financial Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Post-Marxist Hungarian Bus Maker Takes to Capitalist Road
In a factory here that once made buses for the Communist world, new buses are being welded together, outfitted with some American parts and then moved by train, ship and truck to Alabama for completion.
The result is Hungarian buses at competitive prices for mass-transit fleets in American cities like Buffalo and Washington, jobs for Hungarians and Americans, and profit for the company that dreamed up the plan.


Jorgensen (Earle M.) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Scitex Corp.(SCIXF,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Godina Ignores Injury To Win Shot-Put Title
During warm-ups today, John Godina of the United States hyperextended his right elbow, which did not bode well for a guy who makes a living throwing a 16-pound shot-put.
"I didn't know how well I would do," the 23-year-old Godina said.


Dinkins Now Faces Surgery for Bypasses
Doctors scheduled former New York City Mayor David N. Dinkins for triple bypass surgery today at a Charleston, S.C., hospital after discovering significant blockages in three coronary arteries.
Mr.
Dinkins, 68, fainted on Sunday after playing tennis and underwent a stress test that showed a blocked artery.
An angiogram yesterday revealed a more serious problem.
Article, page B1.


Tributes in Concert and by Candlelight
Wildflower bouquets lay on the steps of 710 Ashbury Street today, and a small group of people gathered quietly to mourn the death of Jerry Garcia, with the sound of ritual drums rising from the intersection at Haight Street a few blocks away.
Only the faithful knew that the neat blue Victorian house was where the Grateful Dead started in 1965.
Some mourners wore tie-dyed shirts and black armbands, while others who had left their jobs after hearing the news and were still in office attire.
They all came to talk about the passing of an era and a man who made a community with his music.
Bob Meola, 43, of Grosse Pointe, Mich., who said he had been a fan of the band since 1971, said it meant "the guru coming off the strings."


Banner Aerospace Inc.(BAR,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Atmos Energy Corp.(ATO,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Ethan Allen Interiors Inc.(ETH,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


At K.K.R., the Glory Days Are Past
Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company.
In the late 1980's, the name became synonymous with corporate gtakeovers and all the glory and terror they implied.
Representatives of some of America's largest companies jetted into New York to seek an audience at the firm.
Some came to seek its help in buying control of companies from their shareholders, and the $30.6 billion buyout of R.J.R.
Nabisco in 1989 made Kohlber, Kravis the king of the huge deal.
Others came merely to urge the firm to leave their company alone.
The firm's name partners became celebrities of sorts, symbols of the pressure on American managers to make their companies more profitable or yield to someone who would.
How times have changed.


Yellow Pages in Spanish, Too
Bell Atlantic plans to test its first bilingual Yellow Pages next year in six northern Hudson County municipalities that are heavily Hispanic, the A.P. reported yesterday.
Phone books in Spanish as well as English will be introduced in Guttenberg, North Bergen, Secaucus, Union City, Weehawken and West New York.
Stephanie Hobbs, a Bell Atlantic spokeswoman, said that if the directory is well received, other communities may also get bilingual books.
Other companies have already published similar directories in northern New Jersey in an effort to reach immigrant groups.
TERRY PRISTIN


United Retail Group (URGI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


David Dinkins To Undergo Triple Bypass
Doctors today scheduled former New York City Mayor David N. Dinkins for triple bypass surgery after discovering that he had significant, life-threatening blockages in three coronary arteries.
Surgeons at the Medical University of South Carolina Medical Center here plan to begin the four-hour operation on Thursday morning and said they are optimistic that Mr.
Dinkins will make a full recovery.
But for the 68-year-old former Mayor, who suffered a heart attack in 1985, the surgery is the latest development in a week that began on Sunday with a mild fainting spell beside a sweltering tennis court and has grown progressively more distressing.


Aloha, Circa 1968
WITH its bold print and retro colors -- including sunflower yellow and lipstick red -- "Sigourney," a cotton and linen fabric (right), recalls chic, circa 1968.
Designed by the decorator David Salomon, who died last November, it was based on a Hawaiian quilt owned by Sigourney Weaver.
It costs $57.50 a yard and is available to the trade at Quadrille: (212) 753-2995.


Oklahoma City Bomb Case Is Built on Onetime Friends
Federal prosecutors building their case against Timothy J. McVeigh in the Oklahoma City bombing have turned most of the taciturn loner's tiny circle of friends into witnesses against him in a series of deals over the last week.
These deals have helped to bolster a case once built primarily on scientific and circumstantial evidence and is now more likely to offer a fully detailed account of what the Government portrays as months of conspiring to blow up the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building.


More in U.S. Are in Prisons, Report Says
The number of Americans under the control of the criminal justice system reached 5 million last year, including a record 1.5 million inmates in Federal and state prisons and local jails and 3.5 million convicted criminals on probation and parole, the Justice Department said today in the most comprehensive report ever done on the scope of law-enforcement network.
If the current trend continues -- as law-enforcement experts and criminologists interviewed today predicted it would -- the number of Americans behind bars or on probation or parole will soon approach the six million students enrolled full-time in four-year colleges and universities nationwide; within a decade the number of people behind bars will exceed the entire New York City population, currently about 7.3 million.


CompUSA Inc.(CPU,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 24


Monarch Development reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Man in the News; Plain-Spoken Innovator: Richard Paul Mills
When Richard P. Mills took over Vermont's schools in 1988, his first day on the job was a whirlwind of visits with state lawmakers in Montpelier followed by coffee sessions with teachers and a visit to a school in Waterbury, where he chatted easily with children.
"He wanted to meet as many people as he could," Martha O'Connor, who was chairwoman of the Vermont Board of Education when Mr.
Mills was hired, recalled yesterday.
Looking back on it, she said, that first day was symbolic of his management style.


Barber Eyes More Than Job Security
Just before last season's final exhibition game, the one that often determines who makes the opening-day roster, one of the Jet assistant coaches approached Kurt Barber with this chilling message: "If you don't have a good game, you're going to get cut."
Barber, a 6-foot-4-inch, 260-pound defensive end who had been with the team for two seasons, was crushed like a paper cup.
He is still haunted by the words that day.


Humanizing the Law's Forbidding Face
IT was high noon, the temperature in the 90's, and the only sound that broke the weekday silence of the tidy neighborhood in Westerly, R.I., was the whirr of a hand-powered lawn mower.
Police Officer Steve Iacoi greeted the 70-year-old man behind the mower, who led us toward the white-frame house he shares with his 93-year-old aunt.
The nephew had called Officer Iacoi to report that his aunt had injured her hip and was bedridden.
But when we walked into the house, she was seated in the living room.


Gay Men's Group to Start H.I.V. Testing Program
The Gay Men's Health Crisis plans to begin its own testing program for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, offering counseling and support services not only for those who have the virus but also, in a departure from common practice, for those who do not.
The new testing center will make use of a $2.5 million gift from the David Geffen Foundation, which is also to give $1.5 million to God's Love We Deliver, which prepares meals for homebound people with AIDS.


Maxim Integrated Products Inc.(MXIM,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Don't Expect the French to Be Like Us
To the Editor:
"To Parisians, Nice Is a Place, Not an Attitude" (Week in Review, Aug. 6), while anecdotally correct, misses the underlying element of what has mistakenly come to be called Gallic arrogance.


Vermont Official Is Picked as State Education Chief for New York
The State Board of Regents today selected Richard P. Mills, Vermont's top education official, to be New York State's new Commissioner of Education.
Mr.
Mills, 51, was unanimously elected to the $136,500-a-year job by the Regents late this afternoon.
The decision ends an almost seven-month search to replace Thomas Sobol, who stepped down as Commissioner on June 30 after eight years in the job.


Pep Boys-Manny, Moe &amp; Jack (PBY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Reliance Group Holdings (REL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Auctioning Off the Lauren Look
FOR the last decade or so, Ralph Lauren has interpreted the blue-blooded American look and all its Social Register trappings.
Now, briefly, he is selling the real thing.
On Oct. 11, Sotheby's will auction 428 lots of American and European art, furniture and accessories, some antique, some merely vintage, but all remnants of Mr.
Lauren's lush advertising campaigns and store displays.


Sports of The Times; Pinstriped Perspectives Of Mantle
HE was a demure rookie in 1976, a Brooklyn kid the Yankees had traded for and sent right out to second base.
The manager, Billy Martin, immediately had an affection for Willie Randolph that would last.
And that first time in the Yankee clubhouse, which happened to be the very day the remodeled Stadium was opened for business, Martin sent one of his old drinking buddies to Randolph's stall.
Willie Randolph looked up and Mickey Mantle's hand was outstretched.


No Headline
"This isn't the result of a system from the Middle Ages, of progress not reaching here yet. It is a result of a modernism, to produce charcoal, to produce steel, to produce sugar cane, alcohol for cars, sugar for export. We should have some more modern system, not using slavery to produce these things." THE REV.
ALFEO PRANDEL, describing forced labor in Brazil.  [ A6:1. ]


Westinghouse Chief Visits CBS but Is Vague on Plans
In an attempt to establish some rapport with the CBS News division, Michael H. Jordan, the chairman of the Westinghouse Electric Corporation, visited the studios of both the "CBS Evening News" and "60 Minutes" yesterday for the first time since announcing the company's pending $5.4 billion purchase of CBS Aug. 1.
The announcement of the merger agreement had generally met with a singularly cool reception from CBS employees, Wall Street and news media organizations in part because Mr.
Jordan's speech last week did not give much sense of Westinghouse's plans for CBS or how it expected to merge and increase the growth of the two companies.


CHS Electronics Inc.(CHSE,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Head of Craft Museum
Barbara Tober has been named chairwoman of the American Craft Museum in Manhattan.
Ms.
Tober has been a member of the museum's board since 1989.
She succeeds Jerome A. Chazen, who will remain as honorary chairman.


Johnson Wins 400, but Can't Catch History
He was running for history now, not merely for first place, and when Michael Johnson crossed the finish line after 400 meters today at the world track and field championships, he glanced at a clock to find his place in the record books.
He did not like what he saw, his face creasing with a grimace instead of a grin.
The clock said 43.39 seconds, a tenth of a second off the world record.


Albany Decides New York City's Water Tests for Bacteria Were Thorough
After a six-month review, the New York State Department of Health concluded yesterday that tests of New York City's water supply were not manipulated to avoid potential detection of bacteria.
The review of water-sampling procedures used by the city's Department of Environmental Protection was begun last January after a former D.E.P. chemist, Thomas Georgian, said senior department officials repeatedly skewed results of water-quality tests in recent years by ordering workers to avoid taking samples from potentially contaminated sites.


Security Is Tightened at Nation's Airports
Airports and airlines around the country began stepping up security yesterday, in response to what Government officials described as an increased threat of terrorist attacks following the arrests in New York City of Palestinians accused of terrorism.
The higher surveillance and tighter security was barely noticeable yesterday for passengers at major airports.
Still, airlines began questioning people more closely about their luggage and airport police kept a closer watch for abandoned suitcases or unattended cars.


U.S. Enlisted Stalin's Aid for War End Game
To the Editor:
"Hiroshima, 50 Years Later" (editorial, Aug. 6) reminds us that 50 years ago there was no controversy over the decision to use the atomic bomb.
I was in Navy boot camp, and I remember very well how we rejoiced at the new weapon that would save our lives.
But we did not know everything that was going on, and I am disappointed that you omit one significant fact.


Brockway Standard Holdings Corp.(BWAY,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 2





TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  DETROIT TIGERS -- Recalled Milt Cuyler, outfielder, from Toledo of the International League.
Optioned Danny Bautista, outfielder to Toledo.
Acquired Mike Myers, pitcher, from the Florida Marlins to complete the Buddy Groom trade and assigned Myers to Toledo.


Chimp Research Laboratory Is Taken Over by Foundation
Over the objections of animal-rights advocates, New York University Medical Center yesterday transferred ownership of its highly regarded chimpanzee research laboratory to the Coulston Foundation, a New Mexico-based primate center that has been charged with violating Federal animal-welfare rules.
The Laboratory for Experimental Medicine and Surgery in Primates, or Lemsip, situated on a fenced tract in Sterling Forest in Orange County, has played an important role in the development of hepatitis vaccines, in tests of AIDS vaccines, and in other areas.
However, Dr.
David Scotch, associate dean of N.Y.U.'s School of Medicine, said it no longer meshed with the school's research priorities.


Panel Denounces Council Over Deal With Pathmark
The City Planning Commission yesterday voted to denounce a deal the City Council struck with Pathmark Stores last month to build a large supermarket in Springfield Gardens, Queens, in which the company agreed to donate more than $400,000 to other merchants and to youth groups in the area.
The commission's view was bolstered by a letter from the city's Corporation Counsel, which calls the deal an illegal tax on Pathmark because the $400,000 fund has no connection to the zoning changes Pathmark wants from the city.
The Mayor appears prepared to veto the deal if it goes forward.


Changes for the Santa Fe Opera
The prospect of change is always worrying at a distinctive institution.
Indeed, it can call into question precisely what it is that makes the institution distinctive.
The Santa Fe Opera, which John Crosby founded in 1956, has a solid record of musical achievement, in its fostering of young artists, its encouragement of new music and its unearthing of neglected repertory.
An early forum for summer opera in the United States, it has been widely influential, not to say imitated.


Four Season Hotels Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Watts Industries(WATTA,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


A Mother's Fear
To The Home Section:
Lucy Danziger ("Natural Birth vs. On-Time Delivery," Aug. 3) is choosing a repeat Caesarean out of fear.
I can empathize with her anxieties about the health of her infant.
I'm expecting my third no less nervously than I expected the first two.


Rugby Going Pro, but Will the English Like It?
Something most un-English is happening in England, and it is happening on that most hallowed of English turf: the rugby field.
Rugby, as every schoolchild used to be taught, is not so much a game as a theology -- a moral guide to life's scrimmages rooted in the notion that sport imparts character and decency and values, virtue and valor.


Lowe Awarded Virgin Islands Job
The United States Virgin Islands Department of Tourism in St.
Thomas named Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS in New York and its sibling, Martin Public Relations in Richmond, to handle its advertising and public relations account, with billings estimated at $7 million to $10 million.
The account was previously handled by Greengage Associates in New York, for advertising, and Barker, Campbell &amp; Farley in Virginia Beach, Va., for public relations.
Lowe and Martin, both units of the Interpublic Group of Companies, were awarded the account after a monthlong review that also included the M &amp; C Saatchi Agency in New York and Wells Rich Greene BDDP in New York, a unit of BDDP Worldwide.


Marcia Cayne, 57, Head of Association Of Reform Zionists
Marcia Cayne, president of the Association of Reform Zionists of America and a member of the Conference of Major American Jewish Organizations, died on Saturday at Tarzana Medical Center in Los Angeles.
She was 57 and lived in Los Angeles.
The cause was cancer, the association said.


Treasuries Off Despite Better Auction of 10-Year Notes
Prices of Treasury securities were lower yesterday, as the effects of the poorly bid Tuesday auction continued to hound the market, despite a better-than-expected sale of the 10-year notes.
Traders said it was not unusual for the market to trade down following a disappointing auction.
In this case, there is concern that Japanese money managers will not flock to this week's auction of $42.5 billion in notes and bonds, even after an announcement last week by the Japanese Ministry of Finance relaxing regulations on overseas investment.


Giants Extend General Manager's Contract
The San Francisco Giants extended the contract of General Manager BOB QUINN through the 1996 season yesterday and promoted BRIAN SABEAN to the new position of senior vice president for player personnel.
Quinn and Sabean, who had been assistant to the general manager and vice president of scouting and player personnel, joined the Giants in 1993.
The Giants' executive vice president, LARRY BAER, said the moves should be considered a vote of confidence in the two men, despite the team's poor record and a significant drop in attendance this season. (AP)


Richfood Holdings Inc.(RCHF,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 22


Mr. Gingrich's Broken Promise
Two months have now passed since House Speaker Newt Gingrich shook hands with President Clinton in New Hampshire on creating a commission to address political reform.
The handshake held out the promise that, between them, the President and the capital's most outspoken Republican could break the cycle of resistance that has defied previous efforts to clean up a system of campaign financing that gives special interests a dominant role in shaping elections and legislation.
Mr. Clinton has taken that handshake seriously. Mr. Gingrich, sadly, has not.


Alan L. Weiner, 53, the Owner Of Store Selling Old Books, Dies
Alan L. Weiner, who catered to scholarly bibliophiles as purveyor of sometimes rare, generally out of print and often dusty books at his Academy Bookstore on West 18th Street, took his life on Aug. 2 at the Gramercy Park Hotel.
He was 53 and lived in Manhattan.
His sister, Linda Rosenfeld, said her brother, who had a history of depression, took a room on an upper floor and jumped out of a window.


The Casualties of Chechnya
The fighting is virtually over in Chechnya, but it is far from clear that either side is ready for a durable peace, or that Russia's President, Boris Yeltsin, has learned much from this wasteful war.
The agreement to end the shooting earlier this month included a commitment to negotiate a political settlement, but the promise quickly dissolved into renewed recrimination.
Wisely, Russians and Chechens, exhausted by eight months of brutal combat, decided to put the political issues off for another day and proceed with the disengagement of military forces.


M.T.A. Expected to Retreat Only a Little on Service Cuts
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority board will retreat slightly from the service cuts it is to vote on today, including keeping the Franklin Avenue Shuttle in Brooklyn running around the clock, officials said yesterday.
But the board will go ahead with broad reductions in subway and bus service.
The news of the restoration came as city officials and the M.T.A. worked to close a deal to save transit passes for almost 500,000 students.
The passes, service cuts and a set of toll and fare increases will all be on the board's agenda today.


Parker &amp; Parsley Petroleum Co.(PDP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


China's Anti-Graft Drive Grows; So Does Graft
On a rainy Sunday morning this week, 10 rusting luxury cars were lined up in a parking lot outside Beijing's Municipal Library and auctioned off.
The presiding official, Yang Baojing, called it a shining moment in China's fight against corruption.
The cars, Mr.
Yang said, were confiscated from senior officials in a display of the leadership's determination to rein in excesses in the upper ranks of the Communist Party, which long ago lost its reputation for purity.


Toward a People's Park: Public Buildings, Private Enterprise
TO get to Sperry Chalet, a National Historic Landmark, follow the shale trail up to the point where clouds graze the roof, the wind whistles and every muscle grimaces.
Built by the Great Northern Railway in 1913, Sperry is one of two remaining back-country chalets in Glacier National Park.
They are lone reminders of the early years of American national parks, before bumper-to-bumper loop roads, when intrepid travelers laden with marmalade and Blue Willow china arrived by train and then set out for wild mountain passes on horseback, lunching amid the glaciers and then overnighting at rustic chalets.


May It Please the Audience: Kunstler Does Comedy
Ba-DUM bum.
William M. Kunstler, the flamboyant civil rights lawyer whose rhetorical posturing has led to his being characterized as more performance artist than jurist, made it official last night, making his debut as a stand-up comedian.


Russel Metals reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  EVIDENCE OF SERB ATROCITY  The Clinton Administration said spy photographs showed an apparent mass grave near Srebrenica, where thousands of Muslims are missing since Bosnian Serbs took over the enclave last month.
A1  SERBS FLEE CROATIA  Thousands of defeated and visibly frightened Serbs streamed out of Croatia, jeered by crowds of bitter Croats who lined the roads to witness the latest chapter in the Balkans' ethnic division.
A8  FORCED LABOR IN BRAZIL  Reports of forced labor have grown so numerous in Brazil that President Fernando Henrique Cardoso has opened an investigation.
A1  CORRUPTION IN CHINA  China's anti-corruption campaign is netting bigger fish than ever before, but officials and Western businessmen say it indicates corruption's pervasiveness rather than determination to stop graft.
A3  SLOW DEATH IN LAOS  The bombs that the United States dropped over the vast, mountainous stretches of Laos's border with Vietnam continue to kill and maim more than two decades later.
A12  MEXICAN DONATIONS DEFENDED  Mexico's governing party acknowledged yesterday that the chairman of the country's largest airline supported the party financially last year, but insisted that the donations were all legal.
A9  A struggle for the soul of English rugby.
A6  Madrid Journal: Bird-watching at the city dump.
A4  National A14-17, B6-7  CLINTON TO MOVE ON TOBACCO  The President has decided to let the Food and Drug Administration declare cigarettes a drug, thus making way for the most significant tobacco regulations in the industry's history.
A1  A TURNING AWAY OF FRIENDS  Federal prosecutors building their case against Timothy J. McVeigh have turned most of his friends into witnesses against him, possibly providing a much more detailed account of what the Government portrays as a conspiracy.
A1  ONE HOT PROPERTY  Netscape Communications, an Internet software company, made a stunning debut, jumping $30.25 a share to close at $58.25.
The trading showed how the rush to commercialize the Internet has created an investor frenzy.
A1  A RISE IN THE NUMBER OF INMATES  In a comprehensive report on the scope of law-enforcement network, the Government said the number of Americans under the control of the criminal justice system reached five million last year.
A14  AIRPORT SECURITY TIGHTENED  Airports began stepping up security as the Government took steps to counter the increased threat of terrorist attacks after the arrests in New York City of Palestinians accused of terrorism.
A14  A SETBACK FOR SIMPSON TEAM  The judge in the O. J. Simpson case ruled that Mr.
Simpson's lawyers had failed to prove that a leak to news organizations was material to the case, and could not either obtain a police report on the leak or ask two reporters about it.
A16  DIABETES GENE IS DISCOVERED  Scientists have discovered the first human gene associated with adult onset diabetes, a disorder related to obesity.
A16  GAINS FOR TIMBER INTERESTS  The chairman of a Senate panel considering a measure to require logging in an Alaska forest has stock in a timber business.
B6  MOVEMENT ON WELFARE BILL  Senator Bob Dole said he was picking up additional Republican support for his bill to overhaul the nation's welfare system.
B6  MORE MONEY FOR THE ARTS  The Senate voted to raise the House allocation for the national endowments for the arts and for the humanities by $11 million each.
B6  NUSSBAUM DEFENDS ACTIONS  Bernard W. Nussbaum, the former White House counsel, told the Senate Whitewater committee that he had been duty-bound to prevent investigators from going through Vincent W. Foster Jr.'s files.
B7  St.
Michaels Journal: A town finally finds an official bell ringer.
A14  The Citadel asked the Supreme Court to bar a female cadet.
A17  Metro Digest B1  Business Digest D1  Obituaries B7-8  JERRY GARCIA IS DEAD  Jerry Garcia, the singer and guitarist who embodied the psychedelic benevolence of the Grateful Dead for three decades, died in his sleep at a residental drug treatment center in California.
He was 53.
A1  Across the nation, Grateful Dead fans mourn.
B7  Frank Maya, comedian.
B8  Arts/Entertainment C11-18  U.N. exhibition in Geneva brings art and politics together.
C11  Changes at Santa Fe Opera.
C11  Hong Kong film festival.
C11  Theater: "Hunger and Lightning," by Kestutis Nakas.
C12  Music: The Pop Life.
C14  Sabalon Glitz in concert.
C18  Books: Sue Hubbell goes beyond the bugs.
C16  The Home Section C1-10  Crumbling 'parkitecture.' C1  Toward a people's park.
C6  Eudora Welty, still telling stories.
C1  Jerry Brown communing.
C1  Sports B9-14  Baseball: Oriole left-hander stymies Yankees.
B9  Mantle takes turn for worse.
B9  Mets shut out Phillies.
B11  Columns: Araton on Mantle B9  Football: A slow start for Wheatley at Giants camp.
B9  Jets' Barber fights for job.
B14  Track: Michael Johnson wins 400-meter race.
B9  Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials  The casualties of Chechnya.
Mr.
Gingrich's broken promise.
Leaving children with abusers.
Letters  Maureen Dowd: The two Mrs.
Clintons.
Lisa Schiffren: Penalize the unwed dad?
Fat chance.
Joel Millman: The city subsidy we don't need.
Chronicle D20  Bridge C16  Crossword C16


Carrols Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Mexican Party Denies Charges by Aeromexico's Former Chief
Mexico's governing party acknowledged yesterday that the chairman of the country's largest airline supported the party financially last year, but insisted that the donations were all legal.
The Institutional Revolutionary Party joined with Aeromexico in denying claims by the airline's former chairman, Gerardo de Prevoisin, that his donations were made with corporate funds and with the knowledge and consent of the airline's board of directors.


Caldor Corp.(CLD,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


WOODWARD &amp; LOTHROP WORKERS GET PENSION GUARANTEE
The 10,530 workers at the Woodward &amp; Lothrop and John Wanamaker department store chains will get their pensions in full under an agreement reached yesterday between A. Alfred Taubman, the chairman and owner of the parent company, Woodrop &amp; Lothrop Inc., and the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation.
A bid by the May Department Stores Company and the J. C. Penney Company for most of the company's stores was approved on Tuesday in a bankruptcy court proceeding.
Mr.
Taubman, through the Taubman Investment Company, will guarantee the pensions, the benefit guaranty corporation said.
The Government has estimated that the pensions are worth $30 million more than the pension plan's assets.
The agreement means the Government will not have to take over the plan.


Combustible Gloves
The spectacular fire that gutted a warehouse at the Brooklyn Navy Yard last week began when latex gloves were ignited by spontaneous combustion, fire officials said.
Article, page B4.


Gulf Canada Resources Ltd.(GOU,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


The Pop Life
Singing Under Siege
"There is shelling, there are snipers in the streets, there is chaos, and all the time the radio still goes on." Srdan Vuletic was speaking by telephone about the radio station where he works, Radio Zid.
One of a handful of private stations in Sarajevo, Radio Zid caters to the city's youth, sending a nonpartisan mix of alternative-rock and educational programs across the war-torn Bosnian capital.
Radio Zid, founded by Zdravko Grebo, a lawyer, is supported by local and international charities and staffed by volunteers in their late teens and early 20's.
Most of the station workers must cross either a dangerously exposed park (in which the trees have all been cut down for firewood) or a soccer field (which has been converted into a graveyard) on their way to the station.
"People who are working on the radio are real heroes," Mr.
Vuletic said, "because most of them risk their lives just to get there."


Mexican Peso Fall Leads To Auto-Sales Standstill
In the aftermath of the peso crisis, Mexico has turned into an incredible shrinking market for new-car sales, and world auto companies are scrambling to adjust.
Mexicans are not buying cars.
The peso's slide cut deeply into their buying power while interest rates on car loans hover around 46 percent.
In the first half of this year, new vehicle sales dipped by 70 percent from the corresponding period in 1994.


U.S. Enlisted Stalin's Aid for War End Game; Cities of Shrines
To the Editor:
You've published quite a bit about Hiroshima, Nagasaki and the atomic bomb.
Kyoto and Nara are Japanese cities with very different fates that should be remembered too.


Timber Industry Ally Wields Power in Senate
Senator Frank H. Murkowski has long been an advocate for the timber industry in his home state of Alaska.
As the new chairman of the Senate's Natural Resources Committee, he is in a position of influence over the nation's forests unimaginable for a Republican when the Democrats controlled Congress.
Mr.
Murkowski has seized the opportunity to introduce legislation that would increase logging in the Tongass National Forest, the vast expanse of islands and lush valleys that covers most of the Alaska Panhandle.
The bill would also give a financial lift to a company in which Mr.
Murkowski has a personal financial interest: the Ketchikan Pulp Company.


Time Warner Seeks to Sell Stake in Gangsta Rap Label
Time Warner Inc. is negotiating to sell its 50 percent stake in Interscope Records, the music label whose gangsta rap performers landed the company in a politically charged controversy three months ago.
Executives at Interscope, which is based in Los Angeles, said they had been in discussions with Michael J. Fuchs, the chairman of the Warner Music Group, for three weeks about buying back the stake.
The two companies came close to a deal late last week, the executives said, but the talks have since bogged down.


Attorneys Want Counseling for Rider
Attorneys for Minnesota Timberwolves guard ISAIAH RIDER said they will try to get him into an anger-management counseling program before an Aug. 23 court hearing.
A warrant for his arrest was rescinded Monday on the condition he show up for the court hearing in Minneapolis.
Rider's appearance, however, might not keep him from serving a jail sentence for violating terms of his probation for a fifth-degree assault conviction last September.


Western Star Trucks Holdings Ltd. reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Pacers' Smits Treated and Released
Indiana Pacers center RIK SMITS was released from a hospital yesterday after being treated for injuries suffered when he was thrown from an all-terrain vehicle, the state police said.
Smits sustained a concussion in the accident, which happened Tuesday on his property near Walton, N.Y., about 45 miles west of Binghamton, state police Sgt.
JOHN ELMS said.
Smits, 28, was driving when he hit an object in the trail and was thrown from his vehicle.
He was wearing a helmet, Elms said.
Smits told the police he did not recall the accident, said a state police spokesman in Albany.


CareLine Inc.(CRLN,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Bring on the Pomp


Testing Embryos Before Implant
Saint Barnabas Medical Center unveiled a new program yesterday to detect genetic abnormalities in embryos fertilized outside the womb.
The hospital's Institute for Reproductive Medicine and Science said its program would enable doctors anywhere in the United States to have in-vitro fertilized embryos tested for disorders like Down's syndrome before they are implanted in a woman's uterus.
Until now, hospital officials said, such defects could not be detected until the second trimester of pregnancy.


Sports Authority Inc.(TSA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 23


N.B.A. Owners Settled Rather Than Risk More
When he announced the deadline-beating deal between the National Basketball Association and its union, Commissioner David Stern said the agreement was riskier for the owners than the first deal the two sides made in vain in June.
The economic risks Stern sees for the owners, though, would appear to be potentially less damaging than other risks they would face without an agreement.
If the league and the union can sell the six-year agreement to a majority of their players, it would kill decertification and antitrust litigation, two roads fraught with uncertainties larger than New York potholes in the winter.


Frank Maya, 45, Performance Artist And Solo Comic
Frank Maya, a comedian and performance artist who was one of the first openly gay male comics to gain a foothold in mainstream stand-up comedy, died on Monday at his parents' home in Manhattan.
He was 45.
The cause was heart failure related to AIDS, said his sister Janet.


Jolie Hammer Kinsolving, Government Affairs Adviser, 62
Jolie Hammer Kinsolving, a government affairs adviser and a former deputy borough president of Manhattan, died on Monday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
A resident of the Upper East Side, she was 62.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


Financial Guaranty InsuranceCo. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


State Prisoners in Local Jails
New Jersey was one of eight states that kept more than 10 percent of its state prisoners in local jails last year, the United States Justice Department said in a report released yesterday.
New Jersey ranked sixth among the states, with 13.6 percent of its inmates in local jails.
Local jails, which are intended to detain people awaiting trial or serving sentences for misdemeanors, are not adequately equipped to accommodate convicts for longer periods, a spokeswoman for the American Civil Liberties Union told The Associated Press.
The study by the Bureau of Justice Statistics also showed that New Jersey's inmate population was 142 percent of capacity.


Starrett (L.S.) (SCX,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Corrections
A film review yesterday about "The Brothers McMullen" misidentified the actress who plays a character referred to as "a bossy young woman." She is Shari Albert; Jennifer Jostyn plays the character called Leslie.


Budget Boost for Arts
The Senate voted to increase the House's allocation for the arts and humanities endowments but with strict limits on spending.
Article, page B6.


Economic Scene; Selling the family silver cheaply just to pay for tonight's dinner.
NOTICE: Going out of business.
Debt-ridden Government seeks buyers for dams, power plants, irrigation canals.
No unreasonable offer refused.
Well, it may not be quite that bad.
But in their search for gimmicks to balance the budget, both Congress and the White House are contemplating the sale of California's Gargantuan Federal water system for pennies on the dollar.
For those who have spent years struggling to balance the interests of farmers, urban water districts and the state's heavily stressed wildlife, it couldn't be a worse idea.


Pataki Addresses Gambling Issue
Gov.
George E. Pataki spent today at Saratoga Race Course, meeting owners and trainers and the trustees of the New York Racing Association, and promised them that "we are going to try to work cooperatively to make racing No. 1 again in New York State."
The Governor avoided the confrontational tone often adopted by his predecessor, Mario M. Cuomo, in his dealings with the N.Y.R.A. officials.
He spoke mostly in generalities, but said that casino gambling in the state was "inevitable" and repeated his belief that it would be approved by the Legislature and the voters.


Elan Energy reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Berlitz International (BTZ,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


With Internet Cachet, Not Profit, A New Stock Is Wall St.'s Darling
A 15-month-old company that has never made a dime of profit had one of the most stunning debuts in Wall Street history yesterday as investors rushed to pour their money into cyberspace.
The Netscape Communications Corporation became the latest -- and hottest -- company in the Internet business to list shares on the nation's stock exchanges.
Shares of Netscape, which had been priced at $28 before trading began at 11 A.M., opened far higher -- at $71.
The shares soon surged to as high as $74.75.
By noon, money managers at big mutual funds and other institutional investors fortunate enough to be in on the ground floor could have cashed in a profit of more than 150 percent and gone to lunch.


Oxford Health Plans Inc.(OXHP,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Revving Up Computers With New CD Drives
EVERY textbook author knows that a new edition is needed every three years or so to make all the copies in print obsolete, thereby dampening used-book sales.
The march of technology sometimes seems to have much the same effect.
Every few months there's a new generation of something -- hardware or software that increases the speed or power of a computer system.
Advertisements trumpet each breakthrough and it's left to consumers to determine whether the additional power is worth the investment.


Sisal: The Next Generation
BACK in the 1980's, sisal was the Model T of floor coverings: available in any color as long as it was beige.
Then, along came the stenciled variety, painted to mimic everything from gingham to Aubusson tapestries.
Not satisfied with that esthetic evolution, Patterson, Flynn &amp; Martin has unveiled sisal's next generation -- floor coverings (above) whose multicolored pattern is woven in, not merely applied to the surface.
The stiff, recalcitrant fiber is dyed, then worked on looms, carpet style, by weavers who doubtless dream of the days when scratchy wool was their fingers' only worry.
The custom rugs begin at $54 a square foot and are available to the trade only.
Information: (212) 688-7700.


A Painfully Slow Start For Wheatley With Giants
Tyrone Wheatley, fresh off signing a five-year, $5.2 million contract, took the field this morning to run sprints.
Coach Dan Reeves and several of his assistants watched closely.
It would be the beginning of a bizarre day for Wheatley.
First, he strained a muscle, then teammates made fun of him dropping kicks.
Finally, Wheatley made a gutsy run in the afternoon despite being hurt.


Dole Courts Conservatives With Changes On Welfare
Senator Bob Dole said today that he was picking up additional Republican support for his bill to overhaul the nation's welfare system, would call it up again soon after Labor Day and would probably tack it onto sweeping legislation to balance the Federal budget.
While Democrats celebrated their success in forcing the majority leader to postpone action on welfare, Mr.
Dole, the front-running candidate for the Republican Presidential nomination in 1996, was negotiating today with conservative Republicans, hoping to attract their support with tougher measures to discourage out-of-wedlock births.


Spy Photos Indicate Mass Grave At Serb-Held Town, U.S. Says
The United States said today that it had spy photographs that it planned to make public of what appears to be a mass grave outside the Bosnian town of Srebrenica, where thousands of Muslim men and boys have been missing since they were rounded up after Bosnian Serbs seized the area last month.
The photographs, from spy satellites and U-2 planes, coupled with interviews with Muslim refugees who fled after Srebrenica's capture, provide the most compelling circumstantial evidence that Serbian troops executed at least several hundred military-age men and boys as part of an ethnic-cleansing campaign, Administration officials said.


Lam Research Corp.(LRCX,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Nu-Kote Holding Inc.(NKOT,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Madrid Journal; Save the City Dump! Home Sweet Home to Birds
Luis Basanta has a very particular way of looking at Madrid's garbage dump.
Where others see only a coarse and foul-smelling wasteland, Mr.
Basanta sees life.
The other morning Mr.
Basanta focused his binoculars on a flock of large kites gliding overhead, prospecting morsels for breakfast.
A family of storks and a dozen egrets and teals flapped nearby.
Soon a lone sparrow hawk appeared.


Zurich Reinsurance Centre Holdings Inc.(ZRC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Handy &amp; Harman (HNH,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Singing of Spaces, With Technological Help
Sabalon Glitz, a band from Chicago that performed on Monday night at Brownie's, makes music about distances.
The quartet began the concert with a taped interview about U.F.O.'s and angels, and went on to sing about physical distances (outer space), temporal distances (time travel) and even emotional distances (failed relationships).
The band's music emphasized this theme.
Carla Bruce played one of her instruments without even touching it.
It was a compact model of the theremin, one of the world's first electronic instruments.
Moving and vibrating her hands in the magnetic field over the theremin's two metal antennae as if she were pulling invisible taffy, Ms.
Bruce added eerie sliding pitches and high, piercing shrieks to the band's cosmic jams.


Midas Picks Finalists In Agency Review
The Midas International Corporation said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on its $23 million national advertising account to five agencies, from 13.
For the last 25 years the Chicago office of Wells Rich Greene BDDP has handled the account until that agency resigned it last month, declining an invitation to participate in the review.
The finalists included: the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago; DDB Needham Chicago, a unit of the Omnicom Group; Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis, and McCann-Erickson New York, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies.
An office of the J. Walter Thompson unit of the WPP Group, either the Chicago or Detroit office, will also be included.
The five shops will make presentations during the week of Oct. 9 and a decision is expected by Oct. 16.


Liberties; The 2 Mrs. Clintons
To read Hillary Rodham Clinton's new column, you would think everything was peachy keen.
She writes about the letters she gets asking about Socks' feeding schedule.
She writes about jumping behind the wheel of a car in Little Rock to freshen her driving skills.
She writes about "anxious mom" phenomenon -- mothers calling home to make sure children have arrived safely from school.


Senate Increases Arts Money, But Also Imposes Strict Limits
Raising the prospect of an ideological brawl with the House, the Senate voted today to increase by $11 million each the House allocation for the national endowments for the arts and for the humanities.
But in an effort to win conservative support, the Senate measure also included some of the strictest provisions yet on how the money can be spent: barring financing of any project deemed obscene or pornographic or denigrating religion.
No guidelines are included on how to determine what may be held objectionable.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Frenzy for Netscape Sends Stock Skyward
Netscape Communications, an Internet software company, made one of the most stunning debuts in Wall Street history, jumping $30.25 a share to close at $58.25, more than double its offering price of $28.
And even though only 5.75 million shares were available, volume reached almost 14 million, as some shares traded hands more than once.


Ethics Committee Rules Against Coach
The ethics committee of the organization that governs amateur volleyball has ruled that the sport's most successful coach should not lead the United States Olympic volleyball team.
RICK BUTLER, 40, was recommended for expulsion after allegations from some of his former players last month that he had sex with some players 13 years ago when they were minors.
Butler owns and is coach of Sports Performance club of West Chicago.


Hong Kong Films: Fast, Not Subtle
There is a certain type of hero leaping and slashing, wooing and jesting throughout most of the films in Festival Hong Kong, Cinema Village's four-week tribute to the high-speed, high-gloss cinema of one of the world's most prolific film-producing centers.
The hero in the festival, which starts tomorrow, emerges in times of chaos, whether it be the turmoil of a political upheaval or the rubble of a single life.
Stepping alone into the disorder more out of circumstance than free will, the hero is compelled to be a stabilizing force.
The price is loss -- of friends, life or country -- and the rewards are few.
In Hong Kong, which in 160 years has bounced from Chinese to British to Japanese to British control and will be returned to the Chinese in two years, stability is a pipe dream.
In Tsui Hark's "Once Upon a Time in China V" (don't worry if you haven't seen the first four movies; they would not help you understand this one), the turn-of-the-century adventurer Wong Fei-hung (played by Zhao Wen-zhou), tries to save a city and its merchants from plundering pirates.
After more than an hour of typical Hong Kong overkill -- two love interests, four comic foils and hundreds of evil pirates -- Wong defeats the baddies so the Government can reclaim the territory.
The problem is that with the pirates gone, the merchants are now robbing the people and the Government has arrived in the form of two opposing armies, each dead set on seizing control.
Chaos has been vanquished only to make way for more chaos.


U.S. Enlisted Stalin's Aid for War End Game; We Who Were Saved
To the Editor:
The people who are casting doubt on the decision to drop the atomic bomb on Hiroshima would do well to read "The Prisoners of the Japanese," Gavin Daws's book.
I speak from experience.


Bundesbank Allows a Rate To Decline
Germany's central bank allowed a closely watched money market interest rate to decline yesterday, but analysts and traders said they did not expect the bank's policy-making council to announce a broader easing of monetary policy today.
Yesterday, the central bank, the Bundesbank, accepted a rate as low as 4.45 percent for 14-day securities repurchase agreements, down from 4.5 percent a week ago.
The rate on securities repurchase agreements, known as the repo rate, is what commercial banks pay for short-term borrowing in the money market.


Of Modern Bondage -- A special report.; Brazilians Chained to Job, and Desperate
Desperate as they were, Rosangela and Clemente Pereira rue the day they heard a radio commercial promising steady wages driving for a company called Carmig, in the distant brushlands of Mato Grosso do Sul.
Without money for food, they rode 18 hours on the back of a truck.
Bellies empty, they encountered their new life at Agua Clara, a one-street town that has neither doctor nor hospital to tend laborers, but does have a funeral home to bury them, run by the local police chief.


World News Briefs; U.N. Team Says Iraq Filed Incomplete Report
Iraq has submitted an incomplete report on its biological weapons program and will have to provide more information, the leader of an inspection team monitoring Iraqi arms said today.
Full accounting of the program stands in the way of easing United Nations sanctions against the Government of Iraq.
The inspector, Rolf Ekeus, told reporters before meeting with this month's president of the Security Council, Nugroho Wisnumurti of Indonesia, that Iraqi documents submitted last week had failed to satisfy expert analysts.


Flying Nuns, Chili Fields And Fire Ants
Dangerous, seductive women roam the New Mexican desert in "Hunger and Lightning," a performance piece by Kestutis Nakas being presented through tomorrow at Dixon Place, 258 Bowery, in the East Village.
Some also fly through the night sky around Los Alamos, along with lightning bolts and fireballs.
And it does no good to kill them; they just come back.
The adventure begins for the protagonist when he gets a job as "the pastor of prayerful postures" at the Melancholy Woman Farm.
There he meets a woman whose rejection of him drives him to murder; the Robin Hood Madonna, who hovers in the air and weeps fire ants onto oppressive landlords, and a young woman who flies over chili fields but who also makes love with him and turns him into a chicken before she becomes a nun.
Another flying nun rescues him when he is lost in the sands, but her lust overwhelms both of them, and when they finally go their own way the sound of their souls ripping apart shakes mountains.


New Law Closes Loophole In School Board Elections
Gov.
George E. Pataki yesterday signed into law a measure that would bar local school board members from serving again for three years after being removed from office for malfeasance.
The bill, sponsored by two Bronx lawmakers, was aimed largely at Bronx school boards 9 and 12.
Mr.
Pataki cited instances in which several school board members who had been removed for corruption ran again in 1993, some successfully.


Samuel Manu-Tech reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sins? Clinton Confesses a Couple
Reflecting on sin before an audience of several thousand rapt Baptists, President Clinton today toted up a few transgressions of his own.
"We were, most of us, raised to know what the seven deadly sins were," Mr.
Clinton told a meeting of the Progressive National Baptist Convention here.
"Remember that? Pride, lust, gluttony, sloth, avarice, anger, envy.


America's Crumbling 'Parkitecture'
IT is all a ruin now: the ballroom separated by french doors, the coffered ceilings, the flocked wallpaper, the parquet floors.
Not so long ago, the officers' club at Fort Hancock on the New Jersey coast was a boisterous place where two-star generals dined in splendor and lieutenants and captains whirled their sweethearts on the dance floor.
To stand in this elegant wreckage, one of 19 abandoned Victorian mansions that once were the proud sentinels of New York Harbor, is to recognize the fragility of history.
Fort Hancock was commissioned in 1895.
But since the National Park Service took it over in 1972 as part of the Gateway National Recreation Area, time has not been kind to the Greek Revival mansions of Officers' Row or the fort's 193 other historic buildings.
The magnificent officers' club chimney is now an osprey nest; the most frequent visitor is the wind.


CHRONICLE
This is one of those what's-in-a-name stories about the Fashion Cafe, the new "models-are-us" restaurant in Rockefeller Center in midtown Manhattan, which is not to be confused with the Fashion Cafe in Milan.
TOMMASO BUTI, the chief executive of the one in Manhattan, has gone to court, asserting that he -- not GIORGIO SANTAMBROGIO, the owner of the one in Milan (as well as another one there called the Fashion Grand Cafe) -- has the legal right to the name.
Mr.
Santambrogio is arguing that his Fashion Cafe came first.
It opened eight years ago.
He said that Mr.
Buti, an old friend, not only knew about it but also dined there often with his wife, the model DANIELLA PESTOVA.


Stocks End Day Mixed, With Dow Retreating by 21.83
Stocks were mixed yesterday, as blue chips faltered in response to a weakening in the bond market.
But once more, technology issues bounced ahead.
Though the Treasury Department's auction of 10-year notes had better-than-expected results, there was little follow-through and prices slipped.
The 30-year Treasury bond dipped 12/32 and its yield rose to 6.91 percent, from 6.88 percent on Tuesday.


Soy Protein Can Cause An Allergic Reaction
To the Editor:
Re your Aug. 3 front-page article on health benefits from soy protein: You suggest there is no apparent downside to the addition of soy protein to foods.


Flight System Fails In San Francisco Area
An air traffic control center near Oakland, Calif., lost nearly all electricity yesterday morning, and controllers lost radar and radio contact with dozens of airplanes in flight.
The failure, the fourth of its kind in the country in the last year, occurred when two power supply systems failed while a third was out of service for testing; then the emergency generators failed to start.


Panamerican Beverages Inc.(PB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Dinkins Surgery: Common, but Major, With a 3% Death Risk
The heart surgery that former New York Mayor David N. Dinkins is scheduled to undergo this morning has become one of the most common operations performed in this country since it was developed about 30 years ago.
More than 309,000 patients underwent the operation, known as a coronary bypass, in hospitals in this country in 1992, the latest year for which Federal health officials have figures.
Over all, the patients had 468,000 coronary arteries repaired.
Some had a bypass of one damaged artery while others had two or more arteries repaired.
Mr.
Dinkins, 68, is due to have bypasses for three coronary arteries.


Rogers Cantel Mobile Communications Inc.(RCMF,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Things Invisible to See: A Nick Price Victory
Something is missing from the program cover for the P.G.A. Championship.
In the beauty shot of Riviera Country Club's legendary 18th hole, framed through a clubhouse window, there is no sign of the defending champion.
The tee is off in the distance.
The pine, sycamore and eucalyptus trees line the fairways.
Part of the green is visible below the wrought-iron, Mediterranean balcony.


Despite Rain, Pataki Broadens a Drought Watch
A spate of recent rainstorms has failed to make up for months of dry conditions in southeastern New York State, prompting Gov.
George E. Pataki yesterday to expand an existing drought watch in New York City and Westchester County to almost the entire region south of the Adirondacks.
In a drought watch, the least urgent of four stages of alert, the state calls on local officials to promote voluntary water conservation measures and to review contingency plans that will take effect if the water shortage worsens.


Nordstrom Inc.(NOBE,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


New Education Chief


The Global View


Jerry Garcia of Grateful Dead, Icon of 60's Spirit, Dies at 53
Jerry Garcia, whose gentle voice and gleaming, chiming guitar lines embodied the psychedelic optimism of the Grateful Dead for three decades, died in his sleep yesterday at Serenity Knolls, a residential drug treatment center in Forest Knolls, Calif.
He was 53.
A spokesman for the band, Dennis McNally, said the cause was a heart attack.


Larizza Industries (LII,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Microorganisms For Windows?
WHILE other hardware manufacturers continue to dress windows as blandly as possible, Blome (pronounced BLOW-muh) continues to astonish.
The latest release from this inventive German company is "Magic Metal," doodlelike curtain-rod finials (left) that seem a cross between calligraphy and the creatures in a microscope.
For use on one-half- or five-eighths-inch rods, the steel or brass finials range from $106 to $435 each.
At Klaff's, in Norwalk and Westport, Conn., (203) 866-1603 and (203) 222-7939, respectively, or through Blome, (800) 875-0042.


Nussbaum Appears Before Whitewater Panel and Defends Handling of Foster's Files
Facing a barrage of criticism and hostile questions, Bernard W. Nussbaum, former White House counsel, told the Senate Whitewater committee today that he had been duty-bound to prevent investigators from going through the files of his deputy, Vincent W. Foster Jr., after Mr.
Foster's suicide two years ago.
"Looking back, despite the hue and cry, despite the media frenzy, despite this hearing, if I had it to do over again, facing the same circumstances, I would do it essentially the same way," Mr.
Nussbaum said.
"It may sound arrogant, but I tell you, on the big calls -- and I had to make a lot of big calls -- I was right. I made the right calls."


Sheik on Trial In Conspiracy Is in Hospital
Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the Muslim cleric being tried on bombing conspiracy charges, was taken to a hospital yesterday after refusing to take medicine for his diabetes and heart condition, prompting a dispute over his motives and a judge's threat to have his lawyer arrested.
Mr.
Abdel Rahman, 57, was taken from the Metropolitan Correctional Center in Manhattan yesterday morning to a jail unit at the Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla after refusing the medications since at least Monday, his lawyer, Lynne F. Stewart, said in Federal court in Manhattan yesterday.


Officemax Inc.(OMX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 22


Clorox Co.(CLX,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


CLINTON TO SEEK NEW RESTRICTIONS ON YOUNG SMOKERS
President Clinton has decided to let the Food and Drug Administration begin the process of declaring the nicotine in tobacco an addictive drug, a step that would clear the way for the most significant Government regulations in the history of the tobacco industry.
Clinton Administration officials said the President's decision stemmed from his judgment that the F.D.A. had successfully made a scientific and legal case for the addictive nature of nicotine.


Chaney Joins Knicks' Staff
The Knicks yesterday named Don Chaney as an assistant coach.
A former head coach with the Pistons, Rockets and Clippers, Chaney is a longtime friend of Don Nelson, New York's head coach.
Chaney and Nelson were roommates as players with the Celtics, and Chaney was one of Nelson's assistant coaches for the United States team during last year's world championships in Toronto.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.69
5.70
4.19
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.37
5.37
4.32
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.38
5.37
4.85
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.50
6.45
7.33
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.91
6.88
7.57
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.75
7.73
8.36
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.26
6.25
6.42
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Atlanta arrest of Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin, who went by the name H. Rap Brown as leader of the Student Non-Violent Co-ordinating Committee in the 1960's, referred incorrectly in some editions to a phrase that became closely associated with him.
He once said that "violence is as American as cherry pie," not apple pie.


Security Industrial for Sale
The Security Industrial Companies, a privately owned conglomerate with a life insurance company, 15 funeral homes, two cemeteries and a floral and limousine service, is looking for a buyer, the company said yesterday.
Security, which is based in Donaldson, La., is owned by E. J. Ourso, who founded the company 47 years ago with his wife, Marjorie.
The company said it had revenue last year of $74 million but it did not disclose its profits.
Its Security Industrial Insurance Company has been consistently profitable, earning $2.1 million last year, with premiums of $38.8 million.
It specializes in small policies often intended to pay for burial expenses for low-income families.


Birmingham Steel (BIR,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal National Mortgage Association, is selling $350 million of medium-term notes due in 2000 through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The noncallable issue is priced at par to yield 6.36 percent.


Stater Brothers Holdings Inc. reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 25


Guilty Plea in Heroin Smuggling
A former Colombian police officer pleaded guilty yesterday to importing drugs into the United States by swallowing 68 pellets of heroin.
Rodrigo Alberto Villa-Zuleta, a member of Colombia's national police force from 1989 until 1994, was taken into custody when he arrived at Newark International Airport on May 14.
Mr.
Villa-Zuleta said yesterday in Federal District Court that he had been offered $10,800 to bring the heroin into the United States and deliver it.


Snyder Oil Corp.(SNY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Presidential Palace in the Philippines Is Badly Damaged by Fire


Gail Beckenstein Sovern, Investment Analyst, 39
Gail Beckenstein Sovern, a former investment analyst for Metropolitan Life Insurance Company and legal librarian for the law firm of Paul Weiss Rifkind Wharton &amp; Garrison, died on Tuesday at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center.
She was 39 and lived in Kew Gardens, Queens.
The cause was breast cancer, said her husband, Jeff Sovern.
She was the daughter-in-law of Michael I. Sovern, president emeritus of Columbia University.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about parole officers in New Jersey reversed the identities of the two shown.
Steve Jordan, wearing sunglasses and a blazer, was at the left; Thomas V. Petito, in shirtsleeves, was at the right.


Mantle Worsens as His Cancer Spreads
Mickey Mantle's cancer has spread beyond his lungs and his condition has worsened, the hospital treating him said today.
Baylor University Medical Center downgraded his condition from stable to serious today but limited further details about his illness at his request.
A family friend said cancer had been detected in other parts of his body, including his pancreas and bowels.


Investigating a Stabbing Death
A man who was cutting up a frozen chicken during a family quarrel has been arrested for fatally stabbing his 24-year-old son, the police said yesterday.
But family members say that the son, Shawn Simmons, who worked as a kitchen's helper at Seton Hall University in South Orange, may have been killed accidentally on Tuesday when he took a swing at his father and then came in contact with the knife.


Premdor Inc.(PI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


AT THE MET AND THE MODERN WITH: Richard Serra; One Provocateur Inspired by Another
THE sculptor Richard Serra, intense and determined, as always, is moving headlong through the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
He wants to see Jackson Pollock's big drip painting of 1950, "Autumn Rhythm," and then more Pollocks at the Museum of Modern Art.
He doesn't plan to be distracted.
"When I come here," he says, "I look at one thing, and then leave."
Navigating the dense crowds in the Met ("a big unwieldy ship," he calls it), Mr.


Officer Snatches Gun From a Robber
A police officer surprised a holdup man in the middle of a robbery in Queens, snatching the robber's gun from his hand before arresting him, the police said.
Officer Michael Murfitt, 28, was on foot patrol outside the Long Island Rail Road station in Jamaica yesterday morning when a passer-by told him that a robbery might be occuring on the second floor of 146-19 Archer Avenue, said Deputy Inspecter Frederick Britton, comander of the 103d Precinct.


M.T.A. BOARD KEEPS STUDENTS' PASSES FOR MASS TRANSIT
City, state and transportation officials struck a last-minute deal yesterday to save transit passes for almost 500,000 students after Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani reversed himself and agreed to provide a $45 million city subsidy.
The deal was completed shortly before the Metropolitan Transportation Authority gave preliminary approval to a broad package of fare and toll increases intended to cover a nearly $400 million budget gap in 1996.
Under the plan, the price of a subway and bus token would rise 25 cents, to $1.50, while commuter rail fares would go up 9 percent and bridge and tunnel tolls would rise 17 percent.


For Newark Schools: 1,400 Job-Seekers, 130 Jobs


Restaurants
Restaurant critics are very suspicious people.
"Do you think they've spotted me?" I often ask my guests.
A waiter has only to pour the wine a little too often, bring us fresh ice for our water or a new basket of bread to make us certain that my disguise has been pierced.
But after a while, I stopped wondering at Deniz (pronounced deh-NEEZ): I was convinced they were on to me.
Everybody was so kind.
Perhaps this was only because I became one of the restaurant's most constant customers.
Through the hottest days of summer when I thought about what I really felt like eating, an image of the perfectly grilled fish at Deniz would pop into my head.
I'd remember the fine smoky eggplant salad or the irresistible yogurt with cucumbers, and the next thing I knew I'd be pulling up a chair in that large, strangely nondescript dining room.
True, the owner did once snap at me when I asked if the Turkish menu listed any dishes not translated on the English one.
Only a couple was the answer.
But for the most part the staff was extremely solicitous.
Suspiciously solicitous, I thought.


Art in Review
'Under 8 x 10 Inches'  Witkin Gallery 415 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through Sept. 1
Small can be beautiful, as this group show of diminutive works suggests.
Most photographers rely on viewers to enter the imaginary space of the image, no matter what its dimensions; accordingly, this exhibition presents a wealth of work with more impact than size alone might suggest.


Buchanan Hardens Packwood Stand
Patrick J. Buchanan, a candidate for the Republican nomination for President in 1996, said today that Senator Bob Packwood should be expelled from the Senate if the accusation of making sexual advances to a minor proves true.
Mr.
Buchanan said that until now, he thought Mr.
Packwood, an Oregon Republican, should be censured and stripped of his chairmanship of the Finance Committee if accusations that he had made unwanted sexual advances to numerous women and tampered with evidence in his case were proved true.


3 Restaurant Chains Name New Agencies
Three restaurant chains have named new agencies to handle portions of their accounts.
Sizzler International Inc. in Los Angeles said yesterday that it had selected the Los Angeles office of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, to handle the creative work and account management for its Sizzler restaurants, which had been handled by the Dailey &amp; Associates unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies in Los Angeles, for almost three years.


Westinghouse Tries to Soothe CBS Staff
Hoping to fill in some blanks and mend bruised feelings following Westinghouse Electric's deal for CBS Inc. last week, Michael H. Jordan, the Westinghouse chairman, selected a team of executives yesterday to ease the transition between the two companies.
He also apologized to CBS employees for failing to make clear "some very important ideas and feelings" about the proposed $5.4 billion purchase.
Mr.
Jordan said he would lead the transition group, which will include all the other executives who had been expected to be named as managers of the new combined company: Bill Korn, the chairman of Westinghouse Broadcasting; Peter Lund, the president of the CBS Broadcast Group, and Leslie Moonves, the president of CBS Entertainment.
Mr.
Lund said that the transition group had been set up "very casually" by Mr.
Jordan and that it "formalizes something already in place."


Where Legal Help Comes Complete With Guarantee
Fred Campobasso, the president of the American Medical Design Corporation here, said he was sorting through his mail recently when he discovered the written service guarantee of Coffield Ungaretti &amp; Harris, one of the law firms that his company uses.
"If Coffield Ungaretti &amp; Harris does not perform to your satisfaction, inform us promptly," the guarantee stated.
"We will resolve the issue to your satisfaction, even if it means reducing your legal fees."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Clinton to Push Rules To Cut Teen Smoking  President Clinton proposed sweeping regulations intended to curtail smoking among teen-agers, including a ban on vending-machine sales, new limits on tobacco companies' sponsorship of sports events and advertising aimed at young people, and a requirement that all buyers of cigarettes show proof that they are at least 18.
The President also accepted F.D.A. findings that the nicotine in cigarettes should be declared an addictive drug.  [ Page A1. ] Five tobacco companies sued to block the F.D.A. from regulating the sale, promotion and distribution of cigarettes.  [ A18. ] Humana to Buy Emphesys  Humana has agreed to buy the Emphesys Financial Group, a health insurance company, for $650 million in cash.
Emphesys stock rose sharply after the announcement.  [ D3. ] G.E.
Settles Whistle-Blower Suit  General Electric agreed to pay $7.18 million to settle a company engineer's claim that it sold about 7,000 jet engines to the Defense Department without proper testing for resistance to electrical interference.  [ D6. ] Household to Sell Insurer  Jefferson-Pilot has reached an agreement to buy Household International's insurance unit for $575 million.
The purchase of Alexander Hamilton Life Insurance would nearly double Jefferson-Pilot's assets.  [ D3. ] Nymex Seeks Coffee Exchange  The New York Mercantile Exchange submitted a formal merger proposal to the Coffee, Sugar &amp; Cocoa Exchange.  [ D3. ] G.M.
Move Would Cut Jobs  General Motors said it planned to cut the cost of developing its vehicles 25 percent by blending design and manufacturing.
Market Place.  [ D6. ]


Clinton Refuses Pledge on Cigars
As determined as he is to keep teen-agers from taking up smoking, President Clinton refused today to promise to give up the occasional cigar he himself enjoys.
When he was first asked about the matter at his news conference today, he replied: "Well, first of all, as you know, I'm allergic to cigars, so I don't smoke many anymore, but I smoke a handful a year, probably. And I probably shouldn't. And I try not to do it in any way that sets a bad example, but I plead guilty to that."


Art in Review
Chaim Gross 'Fantasy Drawings'  Salander-O'Reilly Galleries 20 East 79th Street Manhattan Through Sept. 1
Sculptors are often superb draftsmen.
Striving to visualize three-dimensional forms, they employ line and shading with precision; unlike painters, they are rarely tempted to dissolve the motif into a pleasing two-dimensional pattern.
The beautiful draftsmanship of these "Fantasy Drawings," done between 1940 and 1957 by the sculptor Chaim Gross, is less surprising than their range of thematic and formal invention.


Artist in the Hamptons
To the Editor:
Re "Art in the Hamptons: More Is Clearly More" (Arts pages, Aug. 8): In describing mid-20th-century painters like Fairfield Porter, Jackson Pollock and Willem de Kooning as the "early settlers" of the Hamptons art scene, you overlook an earlier pioneer, the American Impressionist William Merritt Chase (1849-1916).


New Witness Comes Forward, Saying Journalist Is Not Killer
Thirteen years after Mumia Abu-Jamal was condemned to die for the killing of a police officer here, defense lawyers seeking a new trial today questioned a petty criminal who said he had witnessed the shooting and did not see Mr.
Abu-Jamal fire a shot.
At a hearing, prosecutors attacked the witness, William Harmon, for not coming forward until today and on his long criminal record, which dates to the early 1960's.


Huairou Journal; Dressing Up for an Unconventional Convention
It is unlikely that the rulers in Beijing gave much thought to the name of this ordinary-looking town when they selected it to hold the nongovernmental part of the United Nations Conference on Women.
The meetings here open on Aug. 30.
Then again, given the already bristling relations between Chinese officialdom and the delegates, who knows?


Extendicare Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


World News Briefs; China Plans War Games Off Coast Near Taiwan
China announced today that it plans to fire guided missiles and live artillery off its southern coast near Taiwan, the second round of military exercises in a month.
Apparently intended to intimidate Taiwan, the exercises are scheduled to take place between Aug. 15 and Aug. 25.
In July, China tested six surface-to-surface ballistic missiles by firing them at targets about 80 miles north of Taiwan.


Join the Women in Beijing
Early next month as many as 50,000 people from around the world will go to Beijing to attend the United Nations' Fourth World Conference on Women and a parallel gathering of grass-roots women's organizations.
The two meetings will discuss subjects like women's access to health care and education, their role in economic development and politics and problems such as family violence and abuse of human rights.
These issues matter deeply to Americans, and many have been special concerns of the Clinton Administration.
The United States should be a conspicuous participant at the Beijing conference, with the First Lady, Hillary Rodham Clinton, leading the official delegation.


Dog Is Sentenced to Death
While animal rights advocates and other supporters sat in the courtroom wearing badges reading "Let Biggie Live," a dog who attacked a 68-year-old Weehawken woman was sentenced to death yesterday.
Judge Kimberly Glatt of Municipal Court said she had no choice.
As a result of an April 26 attack by Big Head, who is part pit bull, Dorothy Petrozelli's left arm was disfigured and rendered partly useless.
David Gruber, the lawyer for the dog's owner, Evelyn Smith of Hoboken, said that he planned to appeal.


Elco Industries(ELCN,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Central Reserve Life (CRLC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Milton Katz, Teacher, Dies at 87; Was Law Expert and U.S. Envoy
Milton Katz, a teacher and scholar of international law at Harvard Law School and former administrator of the United States Marshall Plan in Europe, died on Wednesday at Beth Israel Hospital in Brookline, Mass.
He was 87 and lived in Cambridge, Mass.
Professor Katz joined the school in 1939 as a lecturer and served as the Henry L. Stimson Professor of Law from 1954 to 1978, when he reached emeritus status.
During one of his leaves of absence for Government service he was made an Ambassador and Special United States Representative in Europe in the early 1950's, succeeding W. Averell Harriman.


Horses Miss Man on Track
A man authorities described as "attempting self-destruction" ran in front of the field of horses in today's eighth race at Del Mar, but the jockeys maneuvered the horses around him and he was was captured by the race track's security officers.
Russell Caputo, identified as a 38-year-old from Beverly Hills, Calif., leaped the fence abutting the outer rail of the main track about 70 yards before the finish line, then ran in front of the approaching horses.
All eight horses avoided Caputo, who then leaped the inside rail, ran across the turf course, and finally was cornered by authorities near an infield fence.
He was turned over to the San Diego County Sheriff's department,


Holdup Suspect Is Arrested
Jeffrey Wolf, the jewelry store owner who fatally shot his wife during a botched robbery attempt last March, expressed relief yesterday that Avram Gottlieb, the man suspected of masterminding the holdup, has been arrested.
"He set this up, and I hope he goes away for a long time," Mr.
Wolf said.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the TV Sports column on Wednesday, about the ability of General Electric and its subsidiary NBC to handle a $1.27 billion payout for Olympic rights, misattributed a quotation.
It was Neil Pilson, former president of CBS Sports -- not Dick Ebersol, president of NBC Sports -- who said:


Alan S. Bridge, 50, Conceptual Artist
Alan S. Bridge, a Conceptual artist and magazine publisher, was killed on Saturday when he was struck by a craft, possibly a jet ski, while diving in Shinnecock Inlet off Southampton, L.I.
He was 50 and lived in Manhattan.
In 1980, Mr.
Bridge started what he called his Apology Line, a free telephone confessional service, as a Conceptual art project.
He posted leaflets and placed advertisements urging wrongdoers of all stripes to "get your misdeeds off your chest" by placing anonymous calls to the apology number, where their words would be recorded.
At first Mr.
Bridge played the confessions in art museums and galleries, then to other confessors, interspersed with his own commentary.
The line eventually drew participants nationwide and at the time of his death was receiving some 100 calls a day.


Judge Wood Stays Calm (and Silent) Under Media's Glare
When Judge Kimba M. Wood of Federal District Court in Manhattan left for a vacation in Italy three weeks ago, she was best known as the distinguished judge who sent the financier Michael R. Milken to prison and was once President Clinton's candidate for Attorney General of the United States.
Yesterday, as the judge returned to the bench, her fame had taken on another dimension: as the third party in a sensational divorce case that has dominated the tabloids and television news.
The judge seemed all business yesterday, but there were distractions.
In the morning, marshals had to restrain a photographer who lunged at her maroon car as she pulled into the judges' garage.
Later, she smiled easily as she walked into her courtroom at 500 Pearl Street in lower Manhattan, where several reporters awaited her, pens in hand, ready to record any sign of her personal life.


Teen-Agers Scoff at Ban On Tobacco For Youths
Wedged between her boyfriend, who was smoking a Dunhill down to the filter, and one of her best friends, who had just lighted a Newport, Cheryl Picard waved her hand through a cloud of smoke and said she doubted that the Government's effort to curb teen-age smoking would make much difference.
Miss Picard, an 18-year-old summer student at La Guardia High School in Manhattan, said she had tried smoking once -- for half an hour.
She coughed, felt sick and gave it up, she said.
But she estimated that 90 percent of her friends, many of them under 18, were smokers.


Gap Inc.(GPS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


U.S. Seeks to Prove Mass Killings
The Clinton Administration showed classified spy satellite photographs to the United Nations Security Council today to support accusations of atrocities by Bosnian Serbs who overran a United Nations-protected enclave in Bosnia last month.
Madeleine K. Albright, the chief United States delegate to the United Nations, told a closed session of the Security Council that 2,000 to 2,700 missing Bosnians from the Srebrenica enclave might have been shot by the Bosnian Serbs.


Affirmative Action Was Handy Scapegoat
To the Editor:
Re "Affirmative Action, on the Merit System" (Op-Ed, Aug. 7):
Prof.
Orlando Patterson of Harvard wonders why affirmative action has become the most contentious issue in the nation.


Alabama Fan Says He Did Players Favors
One week after Alabama was placed on National Collegiate Athletic Association probation, a businessman claimed he did financial favors for Crimson Tide football and basketball players.
BOYD SUTHERLAND told The Associated Press that he sold thousands of dollars worth of custom wheels and tires to players on credit without collecting the debts.
He also said he has paid overdue notes for players, given them special treatment by guaranteeing loans with finance companies and given away merchandise out of his devotion to the athletic program.


Griffin Gaming &amp; Entertainment Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Corrections
An article yesterday about heart surgery for former Mayor David N. Dinkins referred imprecisely to the procedure in some editions.
The operation performed on Mr.
Dinkins, a coronary bypass, is not considered open-heart surgery.


A Conservative Who's Outgrown His Pigeonhole
ONE BY ONE FROM THE INSIDE OUT Essays and Reviews on Race and Responsibility in America  By Glenn C. Loury  332 pages.
Free Press. $25.
For a number of years, especially in the 1980's, Glenn C. Loury was so closely associated with a particular place on the ideological spectrum that he was almost indistinguishable from his label, which was Black Conservative.
Mr.
Loury, a professor of economics at Boston University, was then teaching at Harvard.
He was frequently called on by reporters looking for a reasoned statement that would be at odds with those of representatives of the civil rights mainstream, figures like the Rev.
Jesse Jackson or most members of the Congressional Black Caucus.


Accounts
Fiat of Greece, Athens, a unit of Fiat S.p.A., to Leo Burnett/Athens, a unit of the Leo Burnett Co., to handle its account, previously handled by D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, Athens.
Burnett already handles advertising for Fiat in nine other markets.
The billings were estimated at $4 million to $5 million.


A Poet Without Honor in His Own County; Queens's Answer to Whitman Never Attained the Eminence of Brooklyn's Bard
Another year, another birthday, and still no honor for Bloodgood H. Cutter, the Laureate of Little Neck, the one-man answer to the question, Where is the poetry in Queens?
Cutter was born on Aug. 6, 1817, making him an almost exact contemporary of Walt Whitman's.
But while Whitman was giving voice to the streets of Brooklyn and lower Manhattan, Cutter, a gentleman farmer, found his material in Little Neck, Flushing, Bayside and Whitestone.


Defying Labels in the Messy 1910's
The process of reclaiming photography's history from the mists of neglect continues apace.
The latest overlooked figure to be exposed to the light of art-historical appreciation is Karl Struss, whose dark, atmospheric images are the subject of a major survey organized by the Amon Carter Museum in Fort Worth that is now at the Equitable Gallery in Manhattan.
Struss's pictures are by no means unknown to people in photography, but they have certainly received less attention than the work of such contemporaries as Edward Steichen, Gertrude Kasebier and Clarence White.
At first blush the reason seems obvious: in 1919, after a promising early career in New York, Struss left photography, moving to Los Angeles to became a cameraman in the movie industry, then in its infancy.
Only in the years just before his death in 1981 did collectors and curators once again seek out his photographs.


Top Justice Official Testifies of Limits On Foster Inquiry
As the first rounds of Republican-led hearings into Whitewater broke today, a top career Justice Department official told a Senate panel that the White House had improperly restricted the initial investigation into the 1993 suicide of Vincent W. Foster Jr., thus undermining public confidence in results of that investigation.
The official, Associate Deputy Attorney General David Margolis, gave the special Senate Whitewater Committee an account of the events leading to the search of the office of Mr.
Foster, who was deputy White House counsel, that directly contradicted testimony two days earlier by Mr.
Foster's superior, Bernard W. Nussbaum, then White House counsel.


G.E. Will Pay $7.18 Million to Settle Whistle-Blower's Suit
The General Electric Company agreed yesterday to pay $7.18 million to settle a company engineer's claim that it sold about 7,000 jet engines to the Defense Department without proper testing for resistance to electrical interference.
The settlement was approved by Judge Sandra Beckwith of the Federal District Court in Cincinnati, where the suit had been filed by the G.E. engineer and joined by the Justice Department.


Cagle's Inc.(CGL.A,A) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 1


Bill Is Signed To Subsidize Neutering And Spaying
Gov.
George E. Pataki announced today that he has signed legislation that will provide for low-cost spaying and neutering of animals adopted from shelters, pounds and animal-protection societies.
The new law will create a fund to subsidize spaying and neutering operations for newly adopted animals, bringing the price down to $30.
Now the operations can cost $100 to $200, said John O. Foran, vice president of the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, which supported the bill.


On My Mind; What Is China Up To?
The United States is conspiring to undermine China politically, economically and militarily.
It plots to tear Taiwan from China, to stunt Chinese military growth and economic power, and leads a world campaign to punish Beijing for human rights violations.
These accusations are made constantly now by China's Communist rulers.
From their mouths to God's ear.
But all this is not only untrue but the deliberate reversal of reality.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Sampras Fights Back
Pete Sampras dodged eight break points in the third set yesterday, twice coming back from love-40, to advance to the quarterfinals of the Thriftway ATP Championships with a 6-7 (7-2), 6-4, 7-6 (7-4) victory over Todd Martin in Mason, Ohio.


Canadian Natural Resources Ltd. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Leon's Furniture reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Men's Wearhouse reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 30


METRO DIGEST
M.T.A. BOARD SAVES STUDENT PASSES
City, state and transportation officials struck a last-minute deal to save transit passes for almost 500,000 students after Mayor Giuliani reversed himself and agreed to provide a $45 million city subsidy.  [ Page A1. ]


The Heat Is On


Eclectic Group New to the Limelight
Even in late summer, the Bronx Museum is abloom with activity, with two large group shows under way, ambitious and uneven in different ways.
One is the museum's "Artist in the Marketplace" exhibition, now in its 15th year, the culminating event in the museum's annual workshops for artists on the practicalities of starting a career.
For many of the 36 participants, the show is a first step into the professional limelight, and the group context proves as daunting as it is protective.
Restricted to including just one or two works, everyone gets to concentrate on putting a best foot forward.
At the same time, three dozen voices in one gallery, however subdued, are a lot of voices, and only a few are able to rise above the rest.


Sports of The Times; Judge Stars By the Way They Perform
SOMETIMES it's a pleasure to meet a great performer.
But just as often, distance is the best thing between the public and the star who hits home runs or makes beautiful music.
It's been a difficult exercise for anybody preparing articles on Mickey Mantle in recent days.
The older fans tell the younger fans about the superstar with the discus-thrower's strength and the sprinter's speed, and the golden smile when Mickey Mantle was in a good mood.
But journalists like me, of a certain age, can also remember the snarls and the grimaces when Mickey Mantle was in a foul mood.


The Latest Big Boom: Citizenship
Doing their part in the greatest rush for citizenship in the nation's history, student volunteers are setting out almost every weekend in the Hispanic neighborhoods of this city to fingerprint their immigrant elders, take photographs of them and guide them carefully through Form N-400, Application for Naturalization.
The forms, once completed, become part of a surge of citizenship applications that have poured into the Immigration and Naturalization Service in the last year or so, many from people who lived in the United States for years or even decades before giving citizenship much thought.


Job Safety to Face Congressional Ax Next
To the Editor:
"House of Environmental Horrors" (editorial, Aug. 7) points out how the House has eliminated the need for passing thoughtful authorizing legislation by establishing environmental policy through the appropriations process.
Anthony Lewis's Aug. 7 column shows how the home building lobby was successful in writing appropriations language prohibiting the Occupational Safety and Health Administration from enforcing fall protection standards that it opposed.


Teen-Agers Killed in Car Crash
Two teen-agers were killed and another was critically injured after the car they were riding in veered off the road Wednesday night and struck a tree and a parked car, the authorities said.
In a statement issued yesterday, Charles R. Buckley, acting Prosecutor for Bergen County, said "a high rate of speed" probably caused the accident that killed Kim Lewin of Edgewater and Alex Perez of Cliffside Park.
Natalie Auletta of Ridgefield suffered severe head injuries in the crash, officials said.
The 18-year-old driver, who may face criminal charges, was not identified.


Manhunt Ends in Disney World
A truck driver charged with killing a former girlfriend while she was exercising at her Point Pleasant home has been captured at Disney World in Orlando, Fla., The Associated Press reported yesterday.
Jerry Pascale of Brick Township was arrested Wednesday in his hotel room after the police were told that he had made suspicious statements to hotel workers, said Daniel J. Carluccio, the Ocean County Prosecutor.
Kathleen O'Connor, a controller for a manufacturing company, was working out on her treadmill and wearing headphones when Mr.
Pascale gained entry to her home and shot her once in the head, the prosecutor said.


Electrochem Industries reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Semiconductor Order Index Hit a High in July
The semiconductor industry displayed unexpected strength today, as its leading indicator reached an all-time high in July, driven primarily by a big increase in orders.
The Semiconductor Industry Association, a trade group based in San Jose, Calif., reported a book-to-bill ratio of 1.22, setting a new record and exceeding the 1.20 mark set in May.


Farm Credit System reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sounds Around Town
Songs for Summer
Nancy LaMott, Oak Room at the Algonquin Hotel, 59 West 44th Street, Manhattan, (212) 840-6800.
Nancy LaMott looks and sings like the girl next door who has grown up and discovered that there may not be any pot of gold at the end of the rainbow, but that there is still reason to hope.
Songs are carefully measured for their dramatic arcs in a voice that has a sweet, sorrowful throb.
Her new show, "Something Cool," has a summer theme and ranges from Cole Porter's "Too Darn Hot" to "Cool" from "West Side Story" to steamy hot-weather ballads by Michel Legrand and Alan and Marilyn Bergman.
Shows are at 9 and 11:30 tonight and tomorrow night.
There is a $30 music charge for all shows; the early shows require dinner, and the late shows, a $15 food and beverage minimum.
STEPHEN HOLDEN From Belting to Blues
Nell Carter, Rainbow and Stars, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, (212) 632-5000.
With a piercing powerhouse voice that can shred metal, and the theatrical instincts to go along with it, Nell Carter is a truly larger-than-life musical personality.
She hasn't performed in New York in three years, and her sensational cabaret show includes several blues songs and a medley from "Ain't Misbehavin'," the Fats Waller musical that made her a Broadway star in 1978.
But it also includes introspective numbers like Noel Coward's "If Love Were All," which show her to be a thoughtful chanteuse as well as a naughty baby.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow night at 8:30 and 11; the early show tomorrow is sold out.
There is a $40 cover charge, and dinner is required at the early show.
S.
H.


PROCTER &amp; GAMBLE CO. (PG,N)
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company reported yesterday that its fourth-quarter earnings rose 16 percent on strong overseas sales bolstered by favorable currency exchange rates and continued cost-cutting.
Procter, the maker of Tide detergent, Crest toothpaste and Pampers disposable diapers, said net income for the quarter ended June 30 rose to $472 million, or 65 cents, from $406 million, or 56 cents, a year earlier.
Revenue rose 13 percent, to $8.49 billion from $7.50 billion.


Little Inflation Seen as Producer Prices Are Flat
Inflation was virtually imperceptible again at the producer level in July, and new claims for unemployment benefits stayed fairly low last week, the Labor Department announced today.
The reports provided further evidence that the Federal Reserve was meeting its goal of restraining price increases without setting off a recession.


Pennsylvania Tunes Out
To the Editor:
On Aug. 9 the International Concerned Friends &amp; Family of Mumia Abu-Jamal published an advertisement in The New York Times asking people to express their opinions on the case of the black journalist-activist on death row to the Governor of Pennsylvania and the Chief Justice of the Pennsylvania Supreme Court.


Dole-Helms Bill Asks $100 Million in Arms Aid for Bosnia
Senators Bob Dole and Jesse Helms proposed legislation today to provide Bosnia with $100 million in military aid and to create an international coalition to help arm Bosnia.
The bill would authorize an initial United States contribution of $50 million in cash and $50 million in equipment and services like delivery costs and training from the Defense Department.


Bond Prices Rally Briefly; Data on Inflation Awaited
Successful back-to-back auctions by the Treasury allowed bonds to rally briefly yesterday before traders settled back to await today's Government report on inflation at the consumer level.
Traders said the market quickly bounced off its lows of the day following the bid deadline for the third and final part of this week's $42.5 billion quarterly refunding at which 30-year Treasury bonds were auctioned at an average price to yield 6.906 percent.
That was better than expected, and the number of bids to actual sales was in line with past numbers.


A Big Little Way to Improve Migrant Lives
AFTER spending 10 to 12 hours pulling onions and radishes from the pungent black-dirt fields, the farm worker women are primed for their aerobics class.
Wearing magenta T-shirts and jeans or shorts, they work out in a semicircle in a humid school gym.
It's a fairly rigorous hour.
Twenty minutes of cardiovascular work, some ab and thigh busters, yoga stretches.
The migrants have to be careful to avoid moves that might exacerbate back problems.


Brooklyn Man Is Charged With Abuse of Four Boys
Children on the quiet, tree-shaded block in Brooklyn's Old Mill Basin said they sensed something had been amiss for the last few months in the two-family brick home on East 59th Street.
At night, teen-age boys who hung out at the park and baseball diamond across the street would drop by the apartment and be welcomed by a person neighbors described as a blond woman who introduced herself as Judy.


For Children
Sandy Koufax World Series  Cochrane Stadium Caven Point 1 Chapel Avenue Jersey City (201) 547-5045  Recommended ages: 4 and up Through Monday
You can't count on beer or Paul O'Neill to stir up your baseball juices at these hotly contested games between 14-year-olds, but there are likely to be girls playing on some of the teams, and you certainly can't complain about the ticket price: $3 a person.


Clinton Renews Pledge on Overhauling Welfare and Urges Senators to Seek Consensus Bill
President Clinton today renewed his commitment to an overhaul of the welfare system, asserting that the legislation now stalled in the Senate had gotten "wrapped up" in Republican Presidential politics.
He urged senators to seek a bipartisan consensus bill during the Congressional recess.
At his news conference today, Mr.
Clinton also jabbed once again at Speaker Newt Gingrich, saying Mr.
Gingrich had reneged on his pledge to create a bipartisan commission on campaign financing, lobbying and related issues.


Young &amp; Rubicam Drops Slim-Fast
Citing "broad creative differences," the New York office of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. said yesterday that after only five months it had resigned the Slim-Fast Foods Company's domestic creative, strategic planning and research portions of its account.
The billings are estimated at $30 million.
Several telephone calls seeking comment from Slim-Fast executives in West Palm Beach, Fla., were not returned.


Freight Train Derails


INSIDE
Dinkins Is Doing Fine
Doctors said former Mayor David N. Dinkins came through triple bypass surgery with no complications and predicted a full recovery.
Page B3.
U.S.
Sprinter Disqualified
Gwen Torrence won the 200 meters at the world track championships but was disqualified because she stepped out of her lane.
Page B7.
Major TV Producer for Sale
Spelling Entertainment, producer of "The Love Boat" and "Melrose Place," is for sale and is expected to fetch $1.5 billion.
Page D1.
Change for 'Jane Roe'
Norma McCorvey, the woman whose fight for the right to an abortion led to the Roe v.
Wade ruling, joined an anti-abortion group.
Page A12.


Perini Corp.(PCR,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Keanu Reeves in a Vineyard and a Postwar Love Story
"A Walk in the Clouds," the first American film directed by the Mexican film maker Alfonso Arau, is bathed in the same warm, golden light that suffused his voluptuous "Like Water for Chocolate." But the effect is very different, since Mr.
Arau's stilted new film seems frozen in amber.
Gone are the magic and fancifulness of "Like Water for Chocolate," not to mention the potent culinary wit.
Here, instead, is Keanu Reeves in one of his off roles, sleepwalking dutifully but seeming to share the audience's bewilderment over how he wound up in this awkward, slow-moving story.
Set in 1945 (and adding to Mr. Reeves's stiffness by confining him to the regimented clothing of that era), "A Walk in the Clouds" tells of Paul Sutton (Mr. Reeves), who returns home from military service to find that his wife is a stranger, and a slatternly one at that.
Disillusioned yet still loyal, he embarks on a career as a traveling candy salesman, in a series of events that are staged with far less magical realism than this synopsis suggests.
"A Walk in the Clouds" seldom seems any more lighthearted than an obvious and laborious fairy tale.


Romantic Adventures Of 3 Urban Couples
"Time and the Wind," a show that runs together more than 30 songs with music by Galt MacDermot and lyrics by Norman Matlock, is one of those 1960's-style vest-pocket revues that confuse a desperate perkiness with narrative drive.
Directed by Louis Johnson on a nearly bare stage at the John Houseman Studio Theater, the show calls itself "a New York musical revue," but aside from "Gentle Rain," which compares people to cockroaches, the lyrics include few references to urban life.
The predominant musical style is the gospel-flavored pop-soul that flourished 25 years ago but has long since been usurped by funk, rap and hip-hop.
The songs follow the romantic travails of three unidentified couples.
Christopher Jackson and Carol Denise, two attractive young performers with limited vocal skills, play the youngest and most streetwise pair, whose sexual attraction is electric.
Russell Joel Brown (who has the cast's best voice) and Suzanne Griffin are a slightly older, more yuppified couple.
And Johnetta Alston and Carl Hall portray a quarrelsome middle-aged couple who break up and at the very last minute make up.


Safety Board Cites Robot Pilot That Went Unchecked in Grounding of Cruise Liner
A cruise ship that went aground off Nantucket in June had for hours been under the control of an unsupervised robot pilot that was using a broken navigation system, the National Transportation Safety Board disclosed yesterday.
The safety board also made public an urgent recommendation to all ship operators to watch out for the problem.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  IRAQI LEADER'S RELATIVES DEFECT
Two of Saddam Hussein's sons-in-law who were among the Iraqi leader's closest aides have defected to Jordan with their wives and a number of senior army officers, Jordanian officials said.
A1  REPERCUSSIONS OF CROAT VICTORY
The more than 200,000 Serbs displaced from their native territory in Croatia after the Croatian Army offensive to regain the region may turn a human crisis into a new political crisis for the Balkans.
A1  U.S.
CITES EVIDENCE OF ATROCITIES
The Clinton Administration used aerial photographs and testimony from Muslim refugees to support accusations that Bosnian Serbs may have been guilty of widespread atrocities against civilians.
A3  FRANCE REVERSES NUCLEAR STANCE
France changed its position on a comprehensive nuclear weapons test ban treaty, saying that after its own last tests are completed next year, it would support a ban on all further nuclear explosions.
A3  OLDEST HOMINIDS IN EUROPE?
A Spanish cave has yielded 780,000-year-old fossil traces of ancestors of modern humans, the oldest found by more than 250,000 years.
A7  Officials said 65 people were killed in a plane crash in El Salvador.
A9  Huairou Journal: China braces for an unconventional convention.
A4  National A12-21  BOMBING INDICTMENTS ISSUED
Timothy J. McVeigh and Terry L. Nichols were indicted on charges of blowing up the Federal Building in Oklahoma City.
A1  CLINTON ACTS TO CURB SMOKING
The President proposed regulations intended to curtail smoking among teen-agers, including a ban on all vending machine sales.
A1  NEW ACCUSATION OF INTERFERENCE
A top Justice Department official said the White House improperly restricted the 1993 inquiry into Vincent W. Foster Jr.'s death.
A1  BOOM IN SEEKING CITIZENSHIP
Record numbers of people are pouring into offices of the Immigration and Naturalization to fill out papers for citizenship.
A12  TURNAROUND ON ABORTION
Norma McCorvey, whose demand for an abortion led to the Roe ruling, has been baptized by the leader of an anti-abortion group and said she would oppose abortions.
A12  SIMPSON PROSECUTION SET BACK
A forensic pathologist said that both Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman put up significant struggles before they died, delaying their killer long enough to eliminate O. J. Simpson as a suspect.
A14  NEW TESTIMONY IN OFFICER KILLING
Thirteen years after Mumia Abu-Jamal was condemned to die, a pimp with a long record said that he saw the confrontation that left a Philadelphia officer dead and that Mr.
Jamal never fired a shot.
A14  Law B16  A program financing lawyers for death-row inmates is in jeopardy.
Metro Digest B1  DEAL STRUCK FOR TRANSIT PASSES
In a furious bout of last-minute negotiations, a deal was struck to save transit passes for almost 500,000 students, and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority took its first vote to raise the subway fare by 25 cents, to $1.50, on Nov. 1.
A1  WHEN A TEEN-AGER DIES IN VAIN
Coney Island is struggling to make sense of the shooting of Jason Sowell, a teen-ager who studied hard and dreamed a future and will now never see his 17th birthday, all because he was in the wrong place at the wrong time.
A1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-30  At the Met and the Modern with Richard Serra.
C1  Exploring Mystic, Conn.
C1  For Children C25  Theater: "Time and the Wind." C2  Film: Glamorous spies.
C1  "I Can't Sleep." C3  "Dangerous Minds." C3  "Runaway Brain" and "A Kid in King Arthur's Court." C16  "A Walk in the Clouds." C18  Music: Sounds Around Town.
C24  Dance: Students show off their training.
C27  Restaurants C24  Art: Portraits, anti-portraits.
C30  New York cityscapes.
C20  Young artists in the Bronx.
C25  Karl Struss, photographer.
C11  Art in Review C30  Books: Essays on race and poverty by Glenn C. Loury.
C29  Television: TV Weekend B14  Home Video B14  Sports B6-12  Baseball: Indians catch Yanks.
B7  Mets topple Phillies.
B9  Columns: Vecsey on Mantle.
B7  Football: Hampton's the man.
B12  Racing: A Lukas 2-year-old wins at Saratoga.
B10  Track: Torrence's gold medal taken away.
B7  Obituaries A22  Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29  Editorials  The attack on teen-age smoking.
Join the women in Beijing.
Grateful.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: What is China up to?
Bob Herbert: Good news for the city.
Anthony Lewis: Cruel and reckless.
Gilbert Cranberg: Speaking of ethics.
Chronicle B2  Crossword C30


Marvel Entertainment Group Inc.(MRV,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Fugitive Novelist Gets Prison Term
After a week as a fugitive and fearful of going to prison, Barbara Joslyn, a romance writer convicted of the burglary of a wealthy friend's Park Avenue apartment, failed for a second time to appear in a Manhattan court for sentencing yesterday.
That did not stop Justice Alvin Schlesinger of State Supreme Court from sentencing her in absentia to up to four and a half years in prison on her burglary conviction.


France to Back Ban After Its Atom Tests
France changed its position on a comprehensive nuclear weapons test ban treaty today, saying that after its own last tests are completed next year, it will support a ban on all further nuclear explosions, no matter how small.
The gesture, which could influence other nuclear powers, appeared to be an attempt to defuse growing opposition to the seven to eight underground tests of a new submarine missile warhead that France plans to conduct in the South Pacific between September and next May.


Business As Usual; Tactics on M.T.A. Typical of Mayor
As he submitted to the anger of parents yesterday and reluctantly agreed to pay the city's share of free transit passes for students, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani once again illustrated a ruling principle of his governing style: Propose more than you expect to achieve, and then, as he recently explained, "retreat to a position where you can get it done."
Although he has previously had to back down when others refused to bend to his will, yesterday was one of his quickest and sharpest turnarounds in memory.
Only last Thursday, as he issued a withering critique of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's budgeting practices, he called the $60 million school-pass subsidy that the city normally pays to the agency "a holdup of the city for money." The city might be willing to pay some minuscule amount to the M.T.A., he added, but absolutely no more than $10 million.


A Bradley Leads Assault On Riviera
If you're looking for a working title for what took place in the first round of the P.G.A.
Championship today, "The Ravaging of Riviera" might not be a bad place to start.
Throughout a pristine Southern California day -- no wind, no clouds and no defense -- an army of golfers laid waste to the old course on the hill.
The charge was led by Michael Bradley, 29, who shot a blistering round of eight-under-par 63 to tie the record for the lowest round in a major championship.
Bradley, who has not won a tournament in three years on the PGA Tour, joins an elite list of 18 golfers who have shot 63 in a major.
Johnny Miller in the 1973 United States Open at Oakmont was the first, Vijay Singh in the 1993 P.G.A.
Championship was the last.


Carson Pirie Scott &amp; Co.  (CRP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


The Days When Spies Were Chic, Not Sleazy
IF espionage were one-tenth as romantic an activity as it has traditionally been portrayed in the movies, lines of people eager for the chance to be spies would form around every government office in the Western world.
That glamorous image runs through many of the films in the series "Spies, Moles and Double Agents," an entertaining survey of cinematic espionage presented by the Film Society of Lincoln Center at the Walter Reade Theater.
The series, which begins tonight and runs through Sept. 7, covers 72 years (from 1914 to 1986) but concentrates on the 1930's and 40's, when spying was often depicted as a high-stakes party game played by elegant aristocrats.
In the 1943 film "Above Suspicion," for instance, the affluent newlyweds and amateur spies Joan Crawford and Fred MacMurray traipse around Europe picking up clues to the whereabouts of a missing British agent as though they were on a treasure hunt.
The movie, which will be shown on Aug. 27 and 28, depicts spying as the perfect honeymoon spice.


U.S. Indicts 2 In Bomb Blast In Oklahoma
Timothy J. McVeigh and Terry L. Nichols, two onetime Army buddies harboring a hatred for the Government, were indicted by a Federal grand jury today on charges of blowing up the Federal Building here in April with a rented truck packed with 4,800 pounds of homemade explosives.
The two men, the indictment charged, robbed a gun dealer in Arkansas to help finance their plot, stole dynamite and fuses from a quarry in Kansas, rented a series of storage lockers under false names to hide their preparations, then mixed a deadly brew of ammonium nitrate fertilizer and diesel fuel by a lake in a Kansas park.


At the Bar; After researching a book about DNA evidence, a lawyer has new respect for the police.
Like many other criminal defense lawyers, Paul Mones says he has long had an almost knee-jerk suspicion of the criminal justice system, and especially of the police.
But the four years he spent researching and writing his new book -- the story of the first police detective to solve a serial murder case with DNA evidence -- changed all that.
"What I saw and heard," Mr.
Mones writes in the preface to "Stalking Justice: The Dramatic True Story of the Detective Who First Used DNA Testing to Catch a Serial Killer" (Pocket Books), "expanded my understanding and cracked my long-held prejudices about cops."


Cambridge Shopping Centres Ltd. reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Companies Sue to Prevent Control of Cigarette Sales
The nation's five largest tobacco companies yesterday sued to block the Food and Drug Administration from regulating the sale, promotion and distribution of cigarettes, and in a joint announcement sharply attacked Dr.
David A. Kessler, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs.
The companies seeking an injunction in Federal District Court in Greensboro, N.C., were the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation, whose parent company is the London-based B.A.T.
Industries; the Liggett Group Inc., a subsidiary of Brooke Group Ltd.; the Lorillard Tobacco Company, a joint venture of the Loews Corporation; Philip Morris Companies Inc. and the R.J.
Reynolds Tobacco Company, a subsidiary of the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation.
Also suing was Coyne-Beahmn nc., an advertising agency that said it derived substantial revenue from the promotion of cigarettes.


Abroad at Home; Cruel And Reckless
Monroeville, Alabama, the birthplace of Harper Lee, was the thinly disguised setting of her novel "To Kill a Mockingbird." There in 1987 life imitated her grim story of justice corrupted by racism.
Walter McMillian was charged in 1987 with killing a young white woman.
The white community assumed his guilt.
Even before he was tried, he was held in a cell on death row.


Executive Changes
CARGILL INC., Minnetonka, Minn., named Ernest Micek chairman and chief executive, succeeding Whitney MacMillan, who is retiring.
INTERNATIONAL PAPER CO., Purchase, N.Y., named Marianne Parrs senior vice president and chief financial officer, succeeding Robert Butler, who will retire at the end of this month.


U.S. to Protect Jordan From Iraq, Clinton Says
President Clinton pledged today that the United States would protect Jordan against retaliation from Iraq for granting political asylum to two daughters of President Saddam Hussein, their husbands and children, and high-level military officials.
Speaking at a wide-ranging White House news conference today, Mr.
Clinton praised King Hussein of Jordan for "an act of real courage" in granting asylum.


Senate Votes to Cut $1.6 Billion in Transportation Programs
The Senate today approved a $12.6 billion appropriations bill for the Department of Transportation that makes steep cuts in Federal spending on roads, mass transit, airports and the Amtrak rail system.
Democrats attacked the plan as foolhardy but in the end joined the Republican majority in adopting the measure 98 to 1.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the opening of a golf driving range on Pier 59, part of the Chelsea Piers Sports and Entertainment Complex in Manhattan, described it erroneously.
It was not the first in Manhattan; a driving range already exists on Randalls Island, and another once operated near the World Financial Center.


SENIOR ARMY AIDES TO IRAQ PRESIDENT DEFECT TO JORDAN
Two of Saddam Hussein's sons-in-law who were among the Iraqi leader's closest aides have defected to Jordan with their wives and a number of senior army officers, Jordanian officials said today.
The defections represented the hardest internal blow yet to the iron rule of President Hussein.


An Officer's Son Shoots Himself
The 13-year-old son of a New York City police sergeant was in critical condition today, one day after he took a .38-caliber revolver from his father's locked gun case and accidentally shot himself in the head, the Suffolk County police said.
The victim, Sean Butler, gained access to the metal box in his parents' bedroom where his father, James Butler, kept two licensed handguns, investigators said.
They said the boy removed the loaded .38-caliber revolver and that it went off as he was handling it, shooting him in the forehead.


Stewart to Scratch Surface After His Underwater Flop
Barring a miracle, Mel Stewart's revolutionary experiment to swim much or most of the 100-meter butterfly underwater is over.
He made the decision moments after he swam a disappointing race today in the 200-meter butterfly.
In the 200, Stewart is the 1992 Olympic champion and the world- record holder from 1991 until two months ago.
His time of 1 minute 58.24 seconds in March makes him the third fastest in the world this year.


Carol Sulzberger, 68, Volunteer And Wife of Times Chairman
Carol Fox Sulzberger, the wife of Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, the chairman of The New York Times Company, and an active volunteer with foundations and social-service organizations, died yesterday at her home in Southampton, L.I.
She was 68.
The cause of her death was cancer.


Great Lakes Power reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


International Briefs; In Brief
An official of Hoechst A.G. said the German chemical company planned to invest the equivalent of $48.4 million in a new plant in an industrial development in Rayong, Thailand, about 120 miles southeast of Bangkok.


Fruehauf Trailer (FTC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Yeltsin Calls for Talks
Eager for a central mediating role in the widening Balkan war, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia called again today for an international peace conference to be held here under his direction.
At the same time, though, he warned that further Croatian aggression against Serbs could force Russia to abandon unilaterally the international sanctions that have been imposed on what is left of Yugoslavia: Serbia and Montenegro.


First Brands Corp.(FBR,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


INITIAL OFFERING PROPOSED FOR AMERICAN LIFE GROUP
Conseco Inc. of Carmel, Ind., filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday for an initial public offering of 15 million shares of the American Life Group, an insurance company that is based in Des Moines.
At the $17-a-share price proposed in the filing, the sale would total $255 million and produce a profit of nearly $100 million for Conseco Capital Partners II, the investor group that acquired American Life's predecessor company in September 1994.
About 5.9 million shares are to be sold by American Life and 9.1 million by American Life's owners.


Indians Are Fielding A Complete Package
If the Yankees and the Cleveland Indians played in the same division, the way they played in the same league and same division for 91 years, their standing would look like this after the Indians beat New York twice at Yankee Stadium last night:
W-L
GB
Cleveland
65-30
--
New York
49-47
16 1/2
They represent some of the most unusual numbers in many years.
Who except for people probably too old to remember would have thought the Indians could ever have a better record than the Yankees?
And not just a better record, but a record 16 1/2 games better.
It has happened on occasion, but maybe about as often as Halley's comet makes an appearance.
In the Yankees' 22 years under the ownership of George Steinbrenner, to use a time frame related to the Cleveland native, the Indians have reached the 100-game mark of the season with a better record only three times -- in 1989 and '90, and way back in 1974.
There were seasons, on the other hand, when after 100 games, the Yankees were 25 games better than the Indians, 23 games, 20 better.
In August 1995, though, the games-behind number that counts is not the fantasy number with the Indians, but the one with the Boston Red Sox, who still play in the same division with the Yankees.
The Red Sox ran off with their eighth consecutive victory last night while the Yankees lost both games to the Indians.
The American League East standing now reads:
W-L
GB
Boston
57-39
--
New York
49-47
8
Not even Darryl Strawberry's first home run as a recovering member of the ailing Yankees could keep the number from inflating.
The drive off the facade of the third tier of the right field stands helped give the Yankees a 2-1 lead in the second game, but like the first game, they couldn't hold it and lost, 5-2.
"They seemed to get up for us and play us well," Willie Randolph said.
The Yankees' second baseman-turned-coach, though, was not talking about these Indians.
He was recalling the Cleveland teams he played against.
"I remember we used to go there, they were pretty much holding the league up and they had promotions like 'Beat the Yankees Hankie' night," Randolph said.
"Wherever they were in the standings, they seemed to rise another level. They'd get a kick out of beating us. It wasn't a typical rivalry thing, but they just seemed to be a thorn in your side."
For seven seasons, 1979 through 1985, Mike Hargrove was one of the pillars that helped the Indians hold up the league.
"The teams I played on never had a chance to win," said Hargrove, now the Indians' manager.
"I can remember the Yankees coming into Cleveland and there were more Yankee fans than Cleveland fans. Thurman lived in the Akron-Canton area. There were a lot and still are a lot of Yankee fans who come from Buffalo. There were so many of those fans in the stands. It was a little unsettling and it kind of rankled a little bit. But it was always fun to play the Yankees because they had guys like Reggie who played the game hard and played it well."
The Indians hold a prominent place on the last-time list.
The last time they finished first was in 1954.
"It was frustrating at times," Hargrove related of his playing days, "because there were things you knew could be done but we never had the complete package to get it done. You could see if you had another player, or two or three -- and at times it was much more than that -- it would have made a world of difference to put that part of the puzzle in it."
The Indians came to Yankee Stadium with as complete a package as the major leagues have today.
Through the slow but steady and astute construction engineered by General Manager John Hart, the Indians have reached a plateau that would make their 1954 ancestors proud.
They have the best record in the majors, the best hitting team and best pitching staff in the A.L.
This is the size of the task the Yankees face in this five-game series, overcoming the offensive brigade of Manny Ramirez, Kenny Lofton, Albert Belle, Carlos Baerga, Jim Thome, Eddie Murray and Sandy Alomar Jr., plus the pitching platoon led by Dennis Martinez, Charles Nagy, Orel Hershiser and Jose Mesa.
The first taste of the awesome Indians was distasteful.
On the strength of three home runs and seven runs batted in by Mike Stanley in three consecutive times at bat, the Yankees took a 9-5 lead into the ninth inning of the first game.
But the Indians exploded for five more runs, scoring all five after John Wetteland entered the game, and won the opener, 10-9.
Alomar doubled home the first run, Lofton tripled across the next two, Baerga singled in the tying run and Thome delivered the winner with a sacrifice fly.
"I don't think I remember seeing one team having a good solid young player at every position," Randolph said.
"And these kids play; they play hard and aggressive. They keep coming at you. It's almost like a friendly competition between themselves."
Their relentless play has particularly impressed Randolph.
"With a young team," he said, "sometimes it's easy to lay back and fall off when you have a big lead. You're not used to maintaining that certain edge, that mental aspect."
Hart collected the talent; Hargrove and his coaches have the assignment of making sure it reaches its destination.
"I've had a lot of questions the last couple of weeks about when the playoffs start, are you going to do this and that," Hargrove said.
"I hesitate to talk about that because nobody's written us a letter guaranteeing us we're going to be in the playoffs. Until that happens, we have to pay attention to business, keep our focus on what we're doing. We've talked about focus, not letting the outside detract us from what we're trying to accomplish. It keeps us from getting complacent or coasting."
Their fans help, too.
No longer do fans of the visiting team outnumber Indians fans.
And Indians fans pop up in the strangest places.
"We were in Chicago," Hargrove related, "and one of our guys hit a home run in the first inning. A roar went up from the stands. It's been neat. We had a lot of fans in Anaheim, a lot in Oakland. It really has been fun to watch the reaction."
Holding such a huge lead on the Yankees, even if it doesn't count, makes the fun even merrier.


Market Place; A judge awards legal immunity to a commodities exchange.
PRESIDENTS, judges and Federal agencies get immunity from lawsuits, so why not financial exchanges?
Indeed, the courts have ruled over the years that officers of both the New York Stock Exchange and the National Association of Securities Dealers could be, in certain instances, immune from lawsuits.
Now, in a recent case in Federal District Court in Manhattan, a commodities exchange has been granted similar protection.
In an opinion dated Aug. 1, Federal Judge Allen G. Schwartz said the New York Mercantile Exchange was not a suitable target for a $60 million civil lawsuit because it qualified for immunity from suits.


Knape &amp; Vogt Manufacturing Co. (KNAP,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30





Indians Hand Yankees a Double Dose of Futility
After playing seven agonizing hours and losing a doubleheader to the Cleveland Indians, the Yankees might remember yesterday as the day when they officially became contenders for the wild-card berth and pretenders for finishing first in the American League East.
Overtaking the Red Sox will require a superb, 1978-type spurt, something the Yankees did not seem capable of last night.
About all the Yankees were capable of yesterday, in front of a crowd of 48,155 at the Stadium, was being the latest doormats for the awesome Indians.
Succumbing to the most intimidating team in the major leagues in rather intimidating fashion, the Yankees saw the Indians erupt for five runs after John Wetteland entered the game in the ninth inning to grab a 10-9 victory in the opener and overshadow Mike Stanley's three homers and seven runs batted in.
The Indians won the second game, 5-2, overcoming another deficit and ignoring Darryl Strawberry's first homer as a Yankee.


In America; Good News for The City
New York is a tough town to live in.
I've often gone in search of a legal parking space late at night and ended up so far from my apartment I had to take a subway or a taxi home.
The weather is wicked. There are only about a dozen really beautiful days each year.


Ships, Old Inns and Seafood: A Family Explores Mystic
WAITING for our dinner to cook the old-fashioned way -- in the hearth of a landmark Colonial inn in North Stonington, Conn. -- I leafed through the guest book, my eye caught by this recent entry: "Great, nothing has changed since 1635." Like, I wondered, the writer could know?
Actually, the place, Randall's Ordinary, goes back to only about 1685, but why quibble?
For a millennium-era family of Hypercard-carrying Manhattanites, it was plenty old and authentic enough to set the stage for a weekend tour of the historic Mystic area.
In addition to Mystic Seaport, the re-created 19th-century shipbuilding village, there is the town itself with its quaint drawbridge and, yes, Mystic Pizza, which inspired the movie (although the picture was actually shot in a converted lobster warehouse in Stonington); the Mystic Marinelife Aquarium; Stonington Borough, a sweet town of pastel-hued clapboard homes; Groton with its naval submarine base, and gritty New London with its museums and Whale Oil Row.


Viacom to Put Spelling Stake Up for Sale
Viacom Inc. said yesterday that it was putting its 78 percent stake in Spelling Entertainment Inc. up for sale.
The sale of Spelling, the producer of "The Love Boat," "Melrose Place" and other television shows, could fetch about $1.5 billion, analysts said.


Senate Vote Furthers Plan To Overhaul Penn Station
Plans to transform the post office building across the street from Madison Square Garden into a newer, grander Pennsylvania Station took an important step forward yesterday when the United States Senate approved $25 million in Federal funds for the project.
The Senate appropriation, contained in the far larger Federal Transportation Act for 1996, does not assure that the $315 million project will be completed, but officials in Washington and at City Hall said it provided momentum at a time when the project's finances and political viability had been in doubt.


America Online Inc.(AMER,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


In Lawyers' Duel on Whitewater, No One Emerges the Wiser
As he faced the panel of lawmakers and their scurrying batteries of attentive junior lawyers -- deposition-vetting lawyers, litigation lawyers, coffee-fetching lawyers -- all hovering about the Senate Whitewater hearing, Bernard W. Nussbaum, the embattled former White House counsel, was hardly naked unto his enemies at the bar.
Right behind Mr.
Nussbaum, a vaunted, wily lawyer who displays the self-confidence of a welterweight with fast hands and good cut-men in his corner, sat a brace of lawyers from his own formidable firm, Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen &amp; Katz, plus somber-suited lawyers from Arnold &amp; Porter, his backup counsel.


Big Macs in Camelot (but First, Mickey)
Like Alice down the rabbit hole, the heroes of Disney's double bill take tumbles down long, strange tunnels and emerge in fantastic worlds.
"Runaway Brain," a new seven-minute Mickey Mouse cartoon, begins with the familiar, brightly colored Mickey in up-to-the-minute surroundings.
As Pluto looks on, he plays a "Snow White" video game.
When he needs some quick cash to take Minnie on vacation, he answers a want ad, rings a doorbell on Lobotomy Lane and falls through a trapdoor into the basement, where a mad scientist switches his brain with that of a giant monster named Julius.
Mickey with a monster brain looks as if he'd stuck his tail into a light socket; his fur is ragged, his eyes are bloodshot, his teeth are sharp.
He looks, oddly, like a rodent.
Meanwhile, Mickey's squeaky voice comes out of the newly gentle Julius.
As it races along, "Runaway Brain" is clever and funny.
It's not a brilliant Mickey, but it may seem brilliant next to the live-action feature "A Kid in King Arthur's Court," one of the weakest children's movies Disney has released in a long while.


American Israeli Paper (AIP,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Showtime is pushing for an image that is bold, innovative and edgy.
SHOWTIME, the No. 2 cable-television channel after Home Box Office, has had trouble grabbing the public with its corporate image campaigns.
It has tried a takeoff on a Pointer Sisters song ("We make excitement") and television mano a mano ("We have 'Fatal Attraction,' HBO doesn't").
Beginning this week, the channel presents an elaborate parody of Hollywood.


If Teacher Is Pfeiffer, Can Youths Be All Bad?
There aren't many things that would look better on paper than on Michelle Pfeiffer, but the role of LouAnne Johnson is one of them.
Ms.
Johnson is an ex-marine who wrote about her experiences teaching English to tough inner-city high school sophomores.
Her book is believable and earnest in ways that have no bearing on its screen version.
She appears to have cared more about her students than about how she'd look standing by the blackboard in tight jeans and black leather.
But "Dangerous Minds" is the star-vehicle version of this tale, formatted to match every other account of a dedicated teacher taming rebellious teens. ("If you loved 'Stand and Deliver,' you'll stand up and cheer for LouAnne Johnson and 'Dangerous Minds,' " says the paperback tie-in edition of Ms. Johnson's memoir.) So the movie, with the incongruous slickness of a typical Simpson-Bruckheimer production, turns LouAnne into a visiting beauty queen whose noblesse oblige knows no bounds.
And it lets her upstage everything else about a story you could second-guess in your sleep.


Croatia Takes Its Brutal Turn in a Brutal War
To the Editor:
Croatia's brutal attack on its Serbian minority in the Krajina region is a dangerous development in the protracted civil war in the Balkans.
The offensive by more than 100,000 Croatian troops with their powerful assortment of tanks, artillery, helicopters and jets has resulted in the destruction of cities and the terrorizing of more than 100,000 Serbian civilians.
The sizable centuries-old Serbian community in Krajina has been devastated.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about the debut of shares of the Netscape Communications Corporation misstated the market value of another company, Broderbund Software Inc., in some editions.
It is $1.5 billion, not million.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.68
5.67
4.22
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.38
5.37
4.33
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.39
5.38
4.90
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.50
6.50
7.35
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.95
6.91
7.65
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.80
7.75
8.39
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.26
6.26
6.44
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about a measure authorizing New York City to increase the number of taxi medallions referred incorrectly in some editions to the length of time the number had been frozen.
It was 58 years, not 68.


CHRONICLE
Now some names not in capital letters: Andrew, Elena, Gloria, Hugo and Erin.
They are hurricanes, of course.
As Hurricane Erin skipped across Florida last week, sinking two ships and killing at least two people, JOANNA COLE was preparing to do some traveling of her own, to Atlanta, Boston and Washington.
"When I read this was going to be a bad hurricane season I knew there was going to be a lot of suffering," Ms.
Cole said.
"I also knew my book was coming out."


Kingpin of the Big-Time Loan
When it comes to the multibillion-dollar loan business that is the spine of the current mergers-and-acquisitions boom, one bank and one banker -- Chemical Bank and its hard-driving loan syndications chief, James B. Lee Jr. -- rule the roost.
Mr.
Lee's latest task, shared with bankers at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company, is to raise $7.5 billion to finance the Westinghouse Electric Corporation's purchase of CBS Inc., a deal that lacks broad support from Wall Street and the investment community.


Marginal Areas of New York City's Landscape
In the movies, New York City is usually evoked by a short list of instantly recognizable monuments: the spire of the Empire State Building, the twin towers of the World Trade Center, the upraised torch of the Statue of Liberty.
Film makers like to set private moments on the tree-lined side streets of the Upper West Side or the paths of Central Park.
Traffic moving slowly down Second Avenue signals the passage of time.
It's probably significant that none of these familiar scenes are represented in "New York Now: Contemporary Cityscape Paintings," at the Museum of the City of New York.
The 24 artists selected from the museum's collection by Jan Seidler Ramirez, the curator of painting and sculpture, prefer, on the whole, to evoke the city through seemingly marginal areas: the meat markets around Gansevoort Street in the West Village or the tenements of Washington Heights, a deli on Delancey Street on the Lower East Side or a luncheonette in Hell's Kitchen.
Ambition, pride and tenderness are out; grit and desolation are in.


MERRILL LYNCH REACHING OUT TO SMALLER COMPANIES
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, the nation's largest securities firm, said yesterday that it had established an investment banking group to offer advice on mergers and acquisitions and divestitures to small to mid-sized companies.
The 12-member group will offer its services to companies with market values of less than $150 million, which tend to pay relatively higher fees for investment banking advice than their Fortune 500 cousins do.
CS First Boston Inc. and Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company have also begun reaching out to smaller clients.


International Briefs; Veba Profit Up 41%
Veba A.G., a diversified German energy company, said surging chemical sales lifted first-half net profit by 41 percent, to 636 million marks ($452 million).
Veba said it was confident that net profit in the second half would rise at the same pace as in the first.
Earlier, the company had said it expected net profit growth to slow in the second half, after a 38.4 percent rise in the first quarter.
First-half sales rose 5.8 percent, to 36.8 billion marks ($22.3 billion); pretax profit surged 41.5 percent, to 1.44 billion marks ($1 billion). (Bloomberg Business News)


Newark Lures New Teachers By Hundreds
Colleen Johnson had tried several times to get a teaching job in Newark's public schools, but before the state takeover last month, she had always been turned away.
"When you went to personnel you were told they were not accepting applications and they never advertised," Ms.
Johnson said.
"I always wanted to teach in Newark but I didn't know anyone, so I never made it."


Frontier Insurance Group Inc.(FTR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Fossil Find Shifts View Of Humans In Europe
Fossils and stone tools found in Spanish caves show that human ancestors migrated into Europe at least 780,000 years ago, much earlier than previously thought.
From an examination of the skull fragments and other bones, the Spanish discoverers and other paleontologists are proclaiming this an important find that could lead to an understanding of who were the first Europeans, when they arrived from Africa and how they settled the new land.
The fossils could represent an entirely new species of hominids, or human ancestors.


Managed Care for Auto Bodies?
It may be the latest trend in the care of human bodies, but if New Jersey's Insurance Commissioner, Drew Karpinski, gets his way, managed care will also be extended to the repair of auto bodies.
Under new regulations, auto insurers would be allowed to set up networks of repair shops.
Motorists who had their cars fixed by a shop that was part of their insurance company's network could save $48 to $72 a year on their premiums, Mr.
Karpinski said yesterday.
But the regulations, which are supposed to go into effect on Jan. 1, may run aground before then.
The Assembly has already passed a resolution opposing them.


Cubic Corp.(CUB,A) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Cineplex Odeon (CPX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


International Briefs; Sabena to Buy New Aircraft
Sabena, the Belgian national airline, said yesterday that it would purchase between 15 and 20 aircraft next month in response to a surge in European passenger traffic.
The airline, which has a fleet of 66 planes, said it would like to buy 70- to 80-seat airplanes to fly between European capitals.
It said it was considering Dutch Fokker-70 planes and Avro RJ-85 planes, made by British Aerospace.


Art in Review
'H2 O'  Yancey Richardson Gallery 560 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through today
Overheated New Yorkers can find a watery respite in this above-average summer group show.
What makes it noteworthy is how many photographs deal with water not simply as something to splash in, but as a mysterious fluid with almost magical properties.


Teachers Can't Make It Up as They Go
To the Editor:
Re "The Next Chancellor's Big Chance" (Op-Ed, Aug. 8): I applaud Nathan Glazer's call for more small alternative schools in New York City.
As a former teacher in one of District 4's small, alternative junior highs in East Harlem (180 students), I know firsthand the power of a small school to effect positive change in children and families.


Nymex Formally Offers Merger to Coffee Exchange
Following up an advance it made last month, the New York Mercantile Exchange submitted a formal proposal yesterday to merge with the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange.
The Nymex offer, worth more than $38 million, comes about a month after the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa and the New York Cotton exchanges dismayed City Hall by signing a letter of intent to move their operations to Jersey City.


As Perot Group Gathers for Dallas Convention, Not Everyone Stands United
Just like the Democrats, just like the Republicans, Ross Perot and members of his United We Stand America have a carefully calibrated schedule for their own convention beginning here on Friday.
But just as sometimes happens with those more venerable political organizations, some participants arrived at this United We Stand gathering with agendas of their own.
The protests, splinter-group breakaways and quarrels with the press have already begun.


Two Officers Ordered Evicted From Rented Vacation House
Citing raucous parties, littering and parking violations, the Town of Southampton was granted an order today to evict two New York City police officers and seven other people from an illegal summer rental in Hampton Bays.
In papers filed in State Supreme Court here, the town said the officers, Michael S. Capria, 26, and Gregory A. Kiefer, 26, both of Middle Village, Queens, and other occupants of the house had engaged in conduct that "has or will continue to interfere with neighbors' peaceful enjoyment of their property, due to uncontrolled noise, partying, littering and other inconsiderate behavior."


Croatia Takes Its Brutal Turn in a Brutal War; Relief for Bihac
To the Editor:
With all due respect to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the United Nations and the European Union's much-vaunted rapid reaction force, it would appear that the Croatian Army has accomplished in three days what all of the above couldn't manage in four years -- to bring relief to the long-besieged Bihac pocket and loose the Serbian noose from Sarajevo!


About Real Estate; First-Time Buyers Lift Sagging Market
While much of the residential real estate market in metropolitan New York languishes, one group of buyers is giving the market some momentum.
First-time apartment and home buyers are signing up in record numbers, brokers in New York City and the region say.
"They're here in droves," said Clark P. Halstead, who runs the Manhattan brokerage company that bears his name.
"And studios and one-bedrooms are showing real life for the first time in years because of it."


Thermo Electron Corp.(TMO,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


CHRONICLE
Searchers in a rugged area of southern Arizona wrote the word "Dunne" in big letters on the belly of a helicopter yesterday, hoping that ALEX DUNNE, the son of the author DOMINICK DUNNE, would see it and realize people were looking for him.
The search ended successfully late yesterday.
The Associated Press reported that Mr.
Dunne walked out of the rugged Coronado National Forest south of Tucson, and appeared to be in good health.
Rescuers said he was suffering from dehydration and was taken to a Nogales hospital for an examination.


Humana Agrees to Purchase Emphesys, a Health Insurer
Humana Inc., one of the country's largest operators of health maintenance organizations, agreed yesterday to buy the Emphesys Financial Group, a health insurance company, for $650 million in cash.
Although profits and stock prices of health care companies and health insurers are being squeeezed by rising medical-claims cost, the combination of Humana and Emphesys was widely praised by analysts because it could benefit both companies.


One Face for the Sinister and Benign
"Don't open your doors to strangers; the granny killer is out," a helpful but not exactly reverent radio announcer says, talking about the latest serial murder of old women in Paris.
His voice is the first that Daiga (Katerina Golubeva), a young woman from Lithuania, hears while driving into Paris, but her French barely exists and she can't possibly understand the warning.
Before long, she will unknowingly cross paths with the granny killer himself.
"I Can't Sleep" is based on a murder case famous in France, where a black homosexual and his white lover killed more than 20 elderly women before they were arrested in 1987.
But the film has no intention of grabbing you by the throat, despite one early, gruesome shot of a decaying corpse.
It is directed by the idiosyncratic, intelligent, strong-willed Claire Denis, and like her earlier work, it calmly lures viewers into an ordinary world where the sinister and the benign wear the same face.


Halliburton Picks Cheney To Be Chief
The Halliburton Company, reaching for a political leader with global contacts instead of a business executive, named former Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney as its president and chief executive today.
Mr.
Cheney succeeds Thomas H. Cruikshank at one of the nation's largest oilfield services and contruction companies, the corporate parent of Brown &amp; Root.


Students Display Skills For an Emergency Fund
One of the happiest dance rituals in town is the annual benefit for the Emergency Fund for Student Dancers, which helps students at eight major dance schools in New York.
And the air was filled with infectious youthful optimism and camaraderie on Wednesday night at the Merce Cunningham Studio, 55 Bethune Street in the West Village, where the program will be repeated tonight at 9.
Tyrone Brooks, a principal with Dance Theater of Harlem, gave his seven performers from the company school a chance to show off their sleek ballet training and joyous appetite for movement in "Concerto Grosso," set to music by Ernest Bloch.
Elise Knudson, from the Nikolais and Louis Dance Lab, looked like a creature trapped then released in "Family Photo," which she choreographed and performed to a score by Alwin Nikolais.


Charges Dropped, Michigan Farmer Worries About Reputation
James Douglas Nichols was the one asking the questions today, as soon as he learned that Federal prosecutors had dropped charges that he made explosives on his farm here, saying they could not connect him to the bombing in Oklahoma City.
"Who's going to fix my reputation?" Mr.
Nichols asked reporters clustered at the end of his dirt-and-gravel driveway, between his white farmhouse and his brown oat field.
"Can you fix it?"


The Spoken Word
"BELA BARTOK AND HIS WORLD," Bard College, Route 9G, Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y.
A festival of concerts, panel discussions and pre-concert lectures devoted to the composer will be held this weekend and Aug. 18 to 20.
Tonight at 8, a pre-concert lecture will be given by Leon Botstein and Robert Martin, co-directors of the festival.
Tomorrow at 10 A.M., "Music Pedagogy for Young Musicians" will be the topic discussed by Peter Laki, a music scholar, and Richard Wilson, a composer.
Pre-concert lectures tomorrow feature Sarah Rothenberg, a pianist, at 1 P.M., and Mr.
Botstein, at 8 P.M.
A panel discussion on Sunday morning at 10 will cover "The Development of the String Quartet: Haydn to Bartok." All Panel discussions are free.
Tickets are $15 for concerts in the auditorium, and $20 for tent performances.
Information: (914) 758-3226.
JUDY COLLINS, Barnes &amp; Noble, 2289 Broadway, at 82d Street.
The singer will discuss her novel "Shameless." Sunday at 8 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 362-8835


Clinton Proposes Broad Plan To Curb Teen-Age Smoking
President Clinton today proposed sweeping regulations intended to curtail smoking among teen-agers, including a ban on vending machine sales, sharp new limits on tobacco companies' sponsorship of sports events and advertising aimed at young people, and a requirement that all buyers of cigarettes show proof that they are 18 years of age.
The President's announcement, made in a midday news conference at the White House, accepted the findings of the Food and Drug Administration that the nicotine in cigarettes should be declared an addictive drug.
Together, the measures would amount to the most aggressive Government restrictions ever imposed on the nation's $50-billion-a-year tobacco industry.


No Headline
"It does take a particular ear to appreciate his poetry. He's certainly below Whitman, and I'm sure he's above someone." -- JEFFREY A. KROESSLER, a Queens historian, on Bloodgood H. Cutter.  [ B2:1. ]


Onex Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Mary P. Oenslager, Philanthropist, 98
Mary Polak Oenslager, a philanthropist who supported the city's cultural institutions and helped causes from women's health to the visually impaired, died last Sunday at her home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
She was 98.
She endowed programs at several institutions that provide health care for women, like the Maternity Center Association on East 92d Street and Long Island College Hospital.
The victim of an eye condition that left her nearly blind in midlife, she recovered her sight in one of the first cornea transplants and became a founder of Recordings for the Blind and a sponsor of blind university graduates.


International Briefs; Bayer Profit Jumps
Bayer A.G., the German chemical and drug giant, said second-quarter pretax profit surged 37.9 percent, to 1.4 billion marks ($984 million), from 999 million marks ($714 million) in the comparable period a year earlier.
For the six months through June, Bayer's pretax profit advanced 36.7 percent, to 2.4 billion marks ($1.7 billion), from 1.8 billion marks ($1.3 billion) in the first half of 1994.
Second-quarter sales rose 2.8 percent, to 11.5 billion marks ($8.2 billion); first-half sales gained 4.5 percent, to 23.2 billion marks ($16.6 billion). (Bloomberg Business News)


Backstage at Coney Island


Florsheim Shoe Co. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Boy's Short Life Blends With a Fantasy He Wrote
Christopher Millard was 14 years old in 1972 when he died of cancer.
He left behind a little story called "The Four Diamonds," inspired by the tales of the Round Table, about young Squire Millard, who goes forth "to find and prove his knighthood by some miraculous accomplishment." Chris's stories, the one he wrote and the one he lived, have been movingly blended in "The Four Diamonds," tomorrow night's movie on the Disney Channel.
The idea of art growing out of disease is more frequently encountered in literary quarterlies than on the Disney Channel, but here it is.
The scenes of Chris (Thomas Guiry) at home with Dad, Mom and kid sister, and then, after his tumor has been diagnosed, undergoing the assaults of chemotherapy and radiation, slip believably into the tale of how Squire Millard became a knight: conflict as a metaphor for disease.


COMPANY BRIEFS
MATTEL INC., El Segundo, Calif., the toy company, announced the sale of Corgi Toys Inc. of Britain, a maker of model cars, to Corgi's management for about $20 million.
PAPA JOHN'S INTERNATIONAL INC., Louisville, Ky., which owns and franchises carry-out restaurants, said that it raised $54 million through an offering of 1.35 million common shares at $40 a share.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
NEW YORK YANKEES J-- Recalled Joe Ausanio, pitcher, from Columbus of the International League.
Sent Mariano Rivera, pitcher, to Columbus.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Claimed Eric Gunderson, pitcher, off waivers from the Seattle Mariners.


Corrections
A picture caption on Wednesday about a Queens obstetrician, Dr.
David Benjamin, who was convicted of murder in the death of a woman who went to him for an abortion, reversed the identities of his two lawyers in some editions.
The men were, from the left, Dr.
Benjamin, Mike Doyle and Brad Leventhal.


U.S. Player Is Charged in Burglary
ROY LASSITER, whose goal gave the United States soccer team a victory last weekend, was arrested Wednesday in connection with a three-year-old burglary in Raleigh, N.C., the police confirmed yesterday.
The 26-year-old striker scored in the 68th minute Sunday to give the United States a 2-1 victory over Benfica of Portugal and third place in the Parmalat Cup.
The Raleigh police Lieut.
DENNIS POTEAT said an investigator on his staff, hearing about his dramatic goal, remembered the 1992 case.


Portraits That Beckon To the Cross-Examiner
"Face Value: American Portraits," at the Parrish Art Museum here, is as challenging an exhibition as we are ever likely to see in high summer on the South Fork of Long Island.
As the title suggests, it is about the extent to which portraiture can tell us what we most want to know about other human beings.


Home Video
'Kids' and Video
It's a long way from video release, but Larry Clark's controversial film "Kids" could raise some of the same issues on cassette as it did before its release by Excalibur Films in movie theaters last month.


Hampton Is Still The Man For Giants
It is a fitting image: Rodney Hampton in his Nissan Pathfinder on his way to a team meeting, zooming up a gravel road, rocks and dirt being spit out behind him.
So many times in his National Football League career Hampton has taken on a defender, lowered his shoulder and left him in his dust.
The Giants drafted Tyrone Wheatley as their back of the future, their 230-pound insurance policy, but Hampton is still the man.
That became painfully evident when Wheatley showed up at camp this week with an injury to his buttocks.
Wheatley will no doubt contribute this season, but he is a long way from the Giants being able to depend on him.


Fox Leaves Hospital 10 Weeks After Crash
Ten weeks after a crash in the Indianapolis 500, the race car driver STAN FOX walked out of a rehabilitation hospital in Indianapolis on Wednesday night and returned to his home in Janesville, Wis.


More Charges Of Bribery For a Judge
A Manhattan Housing Court judge who was arrested last December on charges that he accepted bribes to influence his decisions was hit yesterday with new charges of bribe-taking and official misconduct arising from 25 landlord-tenant cases.
The judge, Arthur R. Scott Jr., was arraigned yesterday on an 85-count superseding indictment in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, where he pleaded not guilty.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in Manhattan that are to close soon:  Closing This Weekend "FOR COLORED GIRLS WHO HAVE CONSIDERED SUICIDE/WHEN THE RAINBOW IS ENUF," New Federal Theater, 466 Grand Street, Lower East Side.
A revival of the 1976 play by Ntozake Shange; also directed by Ms.
Shange.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today at 7:30 P.M.; tomorrow at 4 and 8 P.M., and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Moves on Aug. 16 to the TriBeCa Performing Arts Center, 199 Chambers Street, where it will remain through Sept. 24.
Tickets: $15.
Information: (212) 279-4200.


Disqualification in 200 Stings Torrence
She removed her shoes and tossed them into the stands, waved triumphantly, bowed graciously and went on television to say that she had won the world championship at 200 meters -- even after someone had stolen her favorite spikes.
Then Gwen Torrence found out that her gold medal was gone, too.
Her winning time of 21.77 seconds was disqualified today after a track judge ruled that Torrence had stepped out of her assigned lane, thus gaining an advantage over opponents by running a shorter distance around the curve.


Speaking of Ethics
Representative James Leach of Iowa opened the House's hearings on Whitewater with his well-worn observation that the Clintons' real estate deal illustrated "the disjunction between public policy and private ethics." The word ethics was also given a workout in the Senate inquiry.
And the independent counsel investigating Whitewater has added an "ethics counsel" to his staff.
It is thus strange that Congress ignored a misguided court ruling on an ethics issue that had a direct bearing on the Whitewater case.


ABC Executive Dismissed for Transmission
Capital Cities/ABC Inc. has dismissed the manager of on-line services at ABC News for transmitting what an ABC executive said was a sexually explicit photograph over the company's computer network.
ABC discharged the executive, Mitch Davis, last Friday shortly after it discovered the incident, according to Patricia Matson, the senior vice president of communications at Capital Cities.


Sounds Around Town
Two Views of Country-Rock
Son Volt and Blue Mountain, Mercury Lounge, 217 East Houston Street, Lower East Side, (212) 260-4700.
They're in their 20's and 30's, but Son Volt and Blue Mountain sound as if they've been rolling with the punches of the world for 50 or 60 years.
Both bands play country-rock full of wise, weary lyrics delivered with a classic ache and twang.
The difference is that where Son Volt, led by Jay Farrar of Uncle Tupelo, sings about the purity of AM radio and takes its name from the legendary Sun and Stax-Volt record labels, Blue Mountain sings about more current topics, like the power of an FM radio station and the recent history of the underground rock band the Grifters.
The concert is tonight at 9:30.
Admission is $10.
NEIL STRAUSS Working the Crowd
Zapp, S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, at West Houston Street, South Village, (212) 243-4940.
At a recent New Orleans concert, Zapp worked the crowd until it could be worked no more.
Roger Troutman sang solicitations, his voice distorted by a vocoder, as his seven-member backing band worked up marathon 70's funk grooves.
Whether touring the club on the shoulders of an assistant or taking 15 minutes to determine whether the audience is louder on the right or the left side of the stage, Mr.
Troutman puts many of his better-known contemporaries to shame when it comes to showmanship.
The concert is tonight at 8 P.M.
Admission is $15 cover; $10 to $15 cover charge at tables.
N.
S.
Music From Unlikely Gadgets
Homemade Instrument Day, Lincoln Center Out of Doors, Broadway and 65th Street, (212) 875-5108.
From compositional tools to Conceptual art statements, this display of homemade instruments shows just how inventive New York's experimental artists and musicians can be.
The free festival begins on Sunday at 2 P.M. with demonstrations, from the simple (Judy Dunaway's squeaking balloons) to the intricate (Leslie Ross's foot-powered tangle of bellows pipes).
There will also be performances by an eclectic mix, including the Gamelan Son of Lion ensemble, the downtown improviser Elliott Sharp and the visual artist Ken Butler, who is able to make music out of everything from tennis rackets to dental dams.
N.
S.


Victims Put Up Long Fight, A Witness for Simpson Says
A forensic pathologist called by the defense said today that both Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman put up significant struggles before they died, fighting hard enough to have left marks on their killer and occupying him long enough to eliminate O. J. Simpson as a suspect.
The witness, Dr.
Michael Baden, co-director of the forensics unit of the New York State Police Department in Albany, said Mrs.
Simpson was not incapacitated until the moment she died and had not been lying unconscious as the prosecution contends.
And he said Mr.
Goldman could have fought for 5, 10 or 15 minutes after his jugular vein was cut, as well as several minutes beforehand.


Toyota Names President Outside Founding Family
The Toyota Motor Corporation reached outside its founding family today and named one of its liveliest and most outspoken executives as president, charging him with leading the automobile manufacturer through an uncharacteristic period of turmoil.
The executive, Hiroshi Okuda, 62, will replace Tatsuro Toyoda, 66, who has been hospitalized since February and who will become vice chairman.
Mr.
Okuda, until now one of five executive vice presidents, will be the first president since 1967 who is not a member of the Toyoda family.


No Headline


Molson Breweries reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 1


Rowdy Fans Cause Dodgers to Forfeit Game
The Los Angeles Dodgers forfeited a game to the St.
Louis Cardinals in the ninth inning last night after fans at Dodger Stadium threw souvenir baseballs on the field three times.
It was the first forfeit in the major leagues since July 12, 1979, when the second game of a doubleheader between Detroit and Chicago was called off after a raucous anti-disco promotion left the field unplayable.


Vizcaino's Timely Hits Lift Mets Over Phils
Jose Vizcaino is quietly putting together an outstanding second half for the Mets.
Quietly is the key word.
The shortstop prefers not to make too much noise, lest somebody take note.
"I like it that way," Vizcaino said before tonight's series finale against the Phillies.
"I just do my job and stay quiet about it."


Grateful
A fortysomething New Yorker got on a bus last month.
A teen-ager got on afterward, sat next to him and noticed the Grateful Dead logo on his sandals.
"Great concert last night," said the kid.
"I wanted to go again tonight, but I have an algebra test."


Lands' End Inc.(LE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 28


Bullet Claims a Role Model, Leaving Pain in Coney Island
Sometimes the young men of Coney Island's housing projects feel as if their neighborhood were cut off from the rest of the world.
But at least all the faces are familiar, neighbors are like family, and, by an unspoken rule, you stick by your childhood friends, even if they have strayed down the wrong road.
Jason Sowell, 16, lived and died in this far corner of Brooklyn.
He was a basketball star at Lincoln High School, who, friends and teachers said, never got into trouble.
But, despite his popularity and his promise, Mr.
Sowell never turned his back on anyone.
And Joseph Cottingham, 18, who has scrapped with the law, was his friend.


Critic's Choice/Film; The Low-Budget Panache Of 3 Sundance Winners
The best film news in New York City right now is the best of this year's Sundance Film Festival: three small, irresistible, prize-winning films that are not to be missed.
All three are funnier and more entertaining than most of what Hollywood has brought forth this summer.
And each celebrates the kind of attitude and ingenuity that doesn't cost money -- and money can't buy.
Tom DiCillo won Sundance's screenwriting award for his hilarious "Living in Oblivion," in which everything goes wrong for a frazzled film maker (Steve Buscemi) trying to make a low-budget film.
Mr.
DiCillo has a sixth sense for film makers' nightmares, and in James LeGros's performance he has his comic revenge on a hip, self-aggrandizing leading man.


EQUITABLE COS. (EQ,N)
The Equitable Companies Inc. said yesterday that earnings rose in the second quarter on big gains at its brokerage subsidiary, which benefited from a boom on Wall Street.
Net earnings rose 49 percent, to $101.9 million, or 49 cents a share, from $68.5 million, or 31 cents a share, in the corresponding period a year earlier.


Provident Life &amp; Accident Insurance Co. of America (PVA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Croatian Serbs Blame Belgrade For Their Rout
The 200,000 Serbian soldiers and civilians displaced from their territory by the Croatian forces' advance are threatening to turn a human crisis into a fresh political crisis for the Balkan region.
The political consequences of the tide of angry and embittered Serbs that continues to sweep toward the Yugoslav border became clearer today as defeated soldiers, still in fatigues but no longer armed, swore vengeance on the man they say abandoned and betrayed them -- Slobodan Milosevic, President of Serbia, which dominates what remains of Yugoslavia.


Savannah Foods &amp; Industries (SFI,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 2


Hartford Drops Stringent Auto Emissions Test, Saying a Simpler One Suffices
After having delayed a strict new automobile emissions test since April, state officials said this week that they were abandoning it in favor of a simpler test that is less burdensome to drivers but puts Connecticut in compliance with the Clean Air Act.
The announcement adds Connecticut to several states, including New Jersey and New York, that have sought less arduous ways to reduce air pollution from vehicles than the testing method ordered by the United States Environmental Protection Agency.


Dinkins's Doctors Hopeful At End of Heart Surgery
Former Mayor David N. Dinkins came through triple bypass heart surgery today with no complications, and his doctors predicted that he would make a full recovery.
"I would expect him to return to certainly any activities he had before the operation and perhaps to be even more vigorous," said Dr.
Fred A. Crawford, the heart surgeon at the Medical University of South Carolina Medical Center here, who performed the three-and-a-half-hour procedure this morning.


Teen-Age Son Is Shot in a Fight With Father
The 16-year-old son of a correction officer was shot in the throat last night during a dispute with his father inside their apartment in Lefrak City, Queens, the authorities said.
It was not immediately clear whether the 40-year-old officer intended to shoot his son with his .38-caliber service revolver, or whether it went off accidentally during the dispute shortly after 8 P.M., said Officer Robert Samuel, a police spokesman.


Sony Corp.(SNE,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


'Jane Roe' Joins Anti-Abortion Group
Norma McCorvey, the woman whose fight for the right to an abortion led to the landmark 1973 Supreme Court ruling in Roe v.
Wade, said today that she had joined an anti-abortion group and been baptized by its leader.
Ms.
McCorvey, who was known as Jane Roe in the court case, made the announcement on a radio station here.
She said that she was baptized on Tuesday by the Rev.
Philip Benham, a fundamentalist minister and national director of the anti-abortion group Operation Rescue.


Stock Market Trades Lower In Wake of Bonds' Decline
The stock market weakened yesterday, again following bond prices, which sagged despite the Treasury Department's successful auction of 30-year bonds.
All three of the major market indicators finished on the down side.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed at 4,643.66, down 27.83 points; the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index finished at 557.45, down 2.26 points, and the Nasdaq composite index closed at 1,000.61, down 4.49 points.


'Inside Art'
The "Inside Art" column will resume with the new art season in September.


Paramedic Who Received Wrong Blood Dies
A decorated Emergency Medical Service paramedic who received the wrong type of blood in a transfusion at a Brooklyn hospital died yesterday, three weeks after he was critically injured in a car accident.
Officials at Coney Island Hospital, who previously acknowledged the botched transfusion, did not list a cause of death yesterday for the 30-year-old paramedic, Ira Medjuck.


The Attack on Teen-Age Smoking
President Clinton has given the fight against smoking just the push it needed -- the full backing of the White House for a regulatory campaign to curb the sale and promotion of cigarettes to young people.
His proposals are aimed at the right target -- saving youth before they become hooked for life -- and would achieve that goal without limiting the free choice of adult smokers to use a lawful product.
The only questionable element is restrictions on advertising that appear to infringe the commercial free-speech rights of the industry.
If Republicans or tobacco-state senators in Congress do not like the notion of regulatory intervention, as many now complain, they have only their own failure to confront this urgent public health issue to blame.
It would be far better if Congress itself joined the executive branch in a vigorous effort to end the recruitment of a million vulnerable youngsters every year into a nicotine habit that will eventually kill a huge proportion of them.


Art in Review
Richard Tsao  Queens Museum of Art at Bulova Corporate Center 77th Street and 25th Avenue Astoria, Queens Through Aug. 19
Can the kind of painting Richard Tsao is doing -- chromatically opulent, process-intensive abstraction -- have anything fresh to yield?
The answer is yes on the evidence of this show, the first New York solo by an artist born in Thailand and educated in the United States.


Let's Get Serious and Create Manhattan-La Guardia Rail Link
To the Editor:
I was surprised by "A Sort-of Train to the Plane" (editorial, Aug. 5), supporting the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey's proposed link from the A train subway stop in Howard Beach, Queens, to Kennedy International Airport.


Senator Seeks Fee Disclosure By Reporters
Senator Robert C. Byrd today introduced a resolution that would require journalists who cover the Senate to disclose the source and the amount of earned income from anyone other than their primary employer.
Mr.
Byrd said he was acting because news organizations had failed to address speaking fees that prominent reporters frequently receive from a wide variety of groups, many of which routinely have business before Congress.


International Briefs; Reed Elsevier's Profit Rises 11.4%
Reed Elsevier, the British-Dutch publishing company, said first-half pretax profit rose 11.4 percent on a strong contribution from Lexis-Nexis, which it acquired last year for $1.5 billion; higher sales of scientific products, and advertising growth.
Sales increased 20 percent, to $:1.8 billion ($2.9 billion).


Refund for Impotence Pill Buyers
Seven companies in Florida and North Carolina that marketed what the authorities said was a false and possibly harmful cure for impotence have paid a total of $1 million into a fund to reimburse consumers who fell for their advertisement, Faith S. Hochberg, the United States Attorney for New Jersey, said yesterday.
In their settlement with the Government last January, the companies did not admit wrongdoing but agreed to never again try to market products claiming to treat sexual dysfunction.
Customers were able to obtain the pills by writing to 23 addresses, 2 of them in Fair Lawn.


DeBartolo Realty Corp.(EJD,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


The Name Is Carter. The Purpose Is Danger.
The Jets dangerous?
The word does not spring to mind when imagining any player on the team.
The burden for changing that image rests with one of the club's smallest -- but proudest -- players: Dexter Carter.


Body and Jet Ski Found
The Coast Guard said yesterday that it had found a jet ski and a body that may be that of a man who disappeared along with a woman on Sunday.
A pleasure boater found the jet ski about 12 miles south of Jones Inlet about 4 P.M., and the Coast Guard immediately resumed its search for the man and woman, Anthony Zaccaria, 29, and Christina Sebar, 25.


Mercury Found in Rainwater
The state's Department of Environmental Protection issued the results of a study yesterday showing that mercury is found across New Jersey, not only in lakes and fish but also in rainwater.
Mercury is a toxic contaminant that at certain levels of exposure can pose health risks.
"What this more or less confirms, again, is that New Jersey has a serious problem with mercury pollution," said Dolores Phillips, legislative director of the New Jersey Environmental Federation.
There are currently no Federal standards for mercury in ambient air or precipitation.
TERRY PRISTIN


International Briefs; 2 British Utilities End Takeover Talks
South Western Electricity P.L.C. of Britain said yesterday that it had ended talks to acquire Southern Electric P.L.C., which is the target of a hostile takeover bid by the Southern Company of the United States.
South Western Electricity, which like Southern Electric is a regional utility, said regulatory officials had expressed concern about a merger's impact on competition.
The negotiations were announced earlier in the day.
The Southern Company, a utility company based in Atlanta, has offered $:9, or $14.20, a share for Southern Electric, valuing the entire company at $:1 billion, or $1.6 billion.
Before the collapse of yesterday's talks, South Western Electricity had said that its discussions could lead to an offer for Southern Electric of more than $:10 a share.
At that price, the company would be valued at $:1.1 billion.


U.S. Bond Prices Fall On New Data
Against a backdrop of supply concern, prices of Treasury securities turned sour yesterday after reports on consumer prices and retail sales failed to provide enough evidence of a slowing in economic growth and inflation.
Market participants feared the reports did not bode well for another interest rate cut; rather, the Fed could put any cut on hold as long as there is a chance that the economy could pick up steam and raise inflation pressures.


United Industrial Corp.(UIC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Why So Quick to Doubt Police?; More Parking Spots
To the Editor:
Re your Aug. 8 editorial on illegal parking by the police: With Gov.
George E. Pataki's signing of the law allowing New York City Police officers to travel free on the Long Island Railroad in addition to free travel on buses and subways in the city, free parking passes and stickers may be a thing of the past.
Taking advantage of these free mass-transit options, members of the Police Department will make more legal parking spots available, easing congestion and allowing the city to collect the quarters of legal parkers.
WILLIAM RAPAVY  New York, Aug. 8, 1995


Engle Homes Inc. reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


Giuliani Is Gauging Companies' Interest In Operating Jails
The Giuliani administration yesterday began soliciting proposals from private companies for taking over the operation of part or all of the city's jail system.
The initiative, a nonbinding "request for expressions of interest," was mailed yesterday to more than 200 companies, including several that now operate prisons across the country.


In Vietnam, A Venture Has Begun To Flower
Against a wool-gray sky, Rolf Bischoff Tulleken stood in the mud, grumbling about the cabbages that marched away from him in strict, orderly ranks.
Around him, 75 acres of vegetables and flowers, some never grown in this cool, highland area, stretched into the distance: undulating rows of lettuce, broccoli, green beans, parsley, peas and radishes.
Eight greenhouses stood in one corner, bursting with lilies, carnations and tulips.


Cambridge Shopping Centres oei&gt;Ltd. reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


It's a Vacation, Really


What's All the Buzz?


Helmut Gernsheim, 82, Historian of Photography
Helmut Gernsheim, a one-time commercial photographer who helped create the academic study of the history of photography, became one of its most influential and prolific practitioners and assembled one of the most extensive private collections of early photographs, died on July 20 in Switzerland.
He was 82 and lived in Lugano, Switzerland.
When Mr.
Gernsheim turned from taking pictures to studying the history of photography in London in 1945, photography was not taken seriously as either art or acamemic study.
Although Beaumont Newhall had presented a groundbreaking exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art in New York in 1937, there were still no galleries devoted to photography and no photographic auctions.


TransAlta Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Agent Calls N.B.A. Deal 'Awful'
The latest labor agreement between the National Basketball Association and its players union will lead to the end of free agency, an agent involved in the movement to decertify the union said yesterday.
"This deal is designed to force players to stay with their own teams," Marc Fleisher said after reading details of the six-year agreement, which the union sent to players yesterday.
"A player has no leverage with his own team if he can't move. The old deal is a soft cap; this deal is a hard cap. The deal has gone from horrible to awful. It really is the end of free agency."


Veto on Bosnia Arms
President Clinton used his second veto to block legislation to end U.S. participation in the arms embargo against Bosnia, and the White House hopes new peace talks on the Balkans will draw enough support in Congress to sustain the veto.
Article, page 5.


Poll Shows Disenchantment With Politicians and Politics
Profoundly disenchanted by politics and politicians, Americans are simultaneously attracted to and leery of the idea of a third party, according to a new New York Times/CBS News Poll.
The poll, which was completed on the eve of this weekend's gathering in Dallas of supporters of Ross Perot's independent political movement, United We Stand America, suggested that Gen.
Colin L. Powell would run more strongly than other potential third-party nominees against President Clinton and Senator Bob Dole, the Republican front-runner.
In a trial race, the three finished in a virtual dead heat.


Air Canada reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Giants' Offensive Line Pays Dearly for Preseason Victory
Only a matter of days ago, Giants guard Scott Davis signed a two-year deal worth about $770,000.
He told teammates this week how happy he was about his new contract and how optimistic he was about the season.
Then came tonight's exhibition against the New Orleans Saints, a meaningless game that may prove to be one of the most costly the Giants will see all year.
This was not the night to be a Giant offensive lineman.
First, center Brian Williams severely sprained his right ankle.
He will be out until the season opener against Dallas on Sept. 4.
Then Davis, the starting left guard, tore the anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee and damaged the medial collateral ligament.
Team physician Russell Warren said Davis would be out for the season.
The injuries were a brutal blow to a team that thought it might be able to challenge Dallas for the division title.


For Irish Youth, a Rite of Summer; Montauk Offers Sun, Jobs and a Safe Haven From Parents
On the beaches they are the ones with the pinkest, most vulnerable skin.
In the bars they are the ones who shave shamrock shapes on their heads and slide in spilled beer.
And from restaurants to gift shops to ferries, they provide the energy that powers this starkly picturesque land's-end resort through the crucial summer season.
This year, nearly 1,000 young Irish are spending the summer in Montauk (pop. 3,200 in winter; up to 20,000 in season) under a program intended to give poorer college students a chance to experience the world, albeit as viewed from a hot restaurant kitchen.


A Top Player Survives That Sinking Feeling
One of the most successful professional pool players in the world carefully lined up a shot.
Loree Jon Jones placed her cue in the bridge of her left hand, her thumb raised intriguingly.
The 29-year-old champ's light-brown hair fell across her face and her blue-green eyes narrowed as she eased into striking position.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BANK OF NEW YORK CO., New York, sold a mortgage division of its ARCS Mortgage Inc. subsidiary to the ARCS founder Howard Levine and a group of California real estate investors.
Terms were not disclosed.
SUNSTONE HOTEL INVESTORS INC., San Clemente, Calif., a real estate investment trust, said it had sold 5.9 million shares for $56.1 million, or $9.50 a share, through underwriters led by Montgomery Securities, San Francisco.


Terex Corp.(TEX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Transactions
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Traded Luis Polonia, outfielder, to the Atlanta Braves for Troy Hughes, outfielder, and assigned Hughes to Norwich of the Eastern League.
Purchased the contract of Jeff Letourneau, pitcher, from the Albany-Colonie Diamond Dogs of the Northeast League.
BALIMORE ORIOLES -- Purchased the contract of Jim Dedrick, pitcher, from Rochester of the International League.
Designated Mike Oquist, pitcher, for assignment.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Reassigned Don Cooper, pitching coach, as a roving minor-league instructor.
Named Mike Pazik pitching coach.
Called up Larry Thomas, pitcher, from Birmingham of the Southern League.


German Woman Rabbi
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 2 news article on a female rabbi in Germany quotes Sara-Ruth Schumann, chairwoman of the Oldenberg congregation, as saying that before World War II in Germany, "there was a woman rabbi, Regina Jonas."


Southern Electronics Corp.(SECX,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


New York State to Keep Sharp Eye on Hospitals
To the Editor:
Re "New Yorkers Can Expect More Medical Errors" (letter, July 21):


North American Vaccine Inc.(NVX,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Workers in Sweatshop Raid Start Leaving Detention Site
The first of 72 illegal immigrants from Thailand who said they had been beaten and subjected to forced labor here were released from a Federal detention center today and will be allowed to stay in the United States while legal proceedings run their course.
The 19 women and 3 men who were released were taken to private homes arranged through church and community organizations.
Their names were not released.


New Twist for a Landmark Case: Roe v. Wade Becomes Roe v. Roe
It is just one person's opinion about abortion, these shifting feelings of Norma Leah McCorvey, the 47-year-old Dallas woman who describes herself as a reform school dropout, sexual-abuse victim, and lesbian activist as well as former carnival barker, bartender, alcoholic, drug dealer and cleaning woman living on the edge of poverty.
But Norma McCorvey is also Jane Roe, the woman who was at the epicenter of the landmark case that firmly established a woman's right to abortion 22 years ago.
And so when Jane Roe declares that abortion is "killing" and that it is "wrong," that American women "have literally been handed the right to slaughter their own children," people listen.


K-III Communications Corp.(KCC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Neoprobe Corp.(NEOP,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Herve Filion Arraigned In Race-Fixing Case
Herve Filion, described by his lawyer as the Babe Ruth of harness racing, turned himself in to the authorities here today amid charges that he and two other harness drivers threw races at Yonkers Raceway earlier this summer.
Hours after his surrender, Filion, the most successful driver in the history of the sport, was arraigned in Yonkers Criminal Court where he arrived in handcuffs and pleaded not guilty to charges that he had taken part in a scheme to fix the sixth race at the track on June 26.


Chancellor's Post Interests Ex-Finalist
Gerald N. Tirozzi, the former Commissioner of Education in Connecticut, who was the runner-up in the search for the New York City Schools Chancellor two years ago, said yesterday that he had a "sincere interest" in the job, which Ramon C. Cortines plans to leave this fall.
Officials at the Board of Education, who have begun to winnow a preliminary list of more than 150 candidates, said that Dr.
Tirozzi was among several dozen individuals under serious consideration.
Although he has yet to formally apply, Dr.
Tirozzi said yesterday that he was eager to talk to the board.


After Rocky Start, Mets Are Smooth
The Mets have usually lived and died by their starting pitching.
If it was good, they had a chance.
If it was bad, games were lost almost before they began.
If these last remaining weeks of the season are indeed a learning process, then the Mets proved to themselves tonight that all is not lost if their starter throws a stinker.
After Bobby Jones lasted only two innings in the worst outing of his career, the surging Mets used timely hitting and a gutsy effort from the bullpen to scratch out a 7-5 victory over the slumping Astros, extending the respective streaks of both clubs.


Ameridata Technologies Inc.(ADA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Politicians of Every Stripe Troop To a Perot Convention in Dallas
The nation's most powerful politicians, with only President Clinton absent, began trooping to Dallas today for a weekend of paying homage to Ross Perot and the mass of independent voters who may determine the outcome of the 1996 elections.
By just about any political measure, what is under way here at a convention of the Perot-founded organization United We Stand America is a remarkable parade of elected officeholders and would-be officeholders.


2 Views on Bell Contract Talks
There may or may not have been progress yesterday in Bell Atlantic's negotiations with a union representing most of its employees.
Eric Rabe, a Bell Atlantic spokesman, said, "We've had a fairly productive bargaining session." But Jeffrey Miller, spokesman for the Communications Workers of America, said: "I don't know what the company means by progress. There's been very little discussion and no progress on key issues -- job security, wage and benefits and access to jobs." Bell Atlantic is the only one of five regional Bell companies with expired contracts that has not yet reached a new accord.


Cambior Inc.(CBJ,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Agassi Advances, but Not Sampras
There will be no Andre Agassi-Pete Sampras final in the Thriftway ATP championship in Mason, Ohio.
Agassi, ranked No. 1 in the world, advanced to the semifinals in a relative breeze yesterday, beating unseeded Renzo Furlan of Italy, 6-3, 6-4.
But Pete Sampras, ranked No. 2, broiled on the stadium court twice as long as Agassi, losing to eighth-seeded Michael Stich of Germany, 6-7 (7-5), 7-6 (7-3), 6-1.


President's Call for Birth Control Is Dividing Peru
Gabriella Molina, a 27-year-old maid who has seven children aged 1 to 9, said she decided last week not to get pregnant again.
She made the decision, she said, after hearing that a woman from a Lima shantytown killed two of her six children because she could no longer afford to feed them.
So Mrs.
Molina traveled two hours by bus to a private family-planning clinic where she received counseling, a physical examination and birth control pills.


Cracks in Baghdad
The defection to Jordan of two of Saddam Hussein's sons-in-law, both of whom had held powerful positions in the Iraqi dictatorship, marks the most serious split in the inner circle of the Baghdad regime since the Persian Gulf war.
Lieut.
Gen.
Hussein Kamel headed Iraq's secret weapons programs and may be able to provide United Nations inspectors with further information on these programs.
His brother, Col.
Saddam Kamel, was in charge of special forces and presidential security.


Thermo Instrument Systems Inc.(THI,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Sports of The Times; Longevity And the Flesh Market
WHEN Fred Slaughter decided to become a sports agent in 1969, the concept of that job was still evolving.
The war between the National Basketball Association and the rival American Basketball Association would increase salaries, but the multimillion-dollar contracts, and the mega-money to be gained from endorsements, were years away.


While Others Sell Recyclables, New York Pays to Get Rid of Them
Oyster Bay, L.I., sells its recycled metal, glass and plastic for $25 a ton.
Mercer County, N.J., sells its for $9.50 a ton, and Middlesex County, N.J., sells its for a minimum of $20.
New York City, on the other hand, pays recycling operators $40 to $50 a ton to accept the same material.
Last year it spent $8 million to get rid of material that some recycling plant operators are willing to pay for.


Southwest Gas Corp.(SWX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


How Not to Run a Homeless Program
Faced with allegations that its workers had harassed and abused the homeless, the Grand Central Partnership hired Robert Hayes, the founder of the Coalition for the Homeless and now a private lawyer, to evaluate its social services program.
His report, though sugarcoated to avoid criticism of Partnership officials, largely confirms the serious deficiencies that led Andrew Cuomo, an Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, to cancel a $547,000 Federal grant to the Partnership.
The Partnership, a business improvement district authorized to tax and provide services to property owners in midtown Manhattan, now says it will overhaul its program for the homeless, putting its outreach services under the management of an experienced professional social services agency.
This is an encouraging, if belated, step.


No Headline
"As poor as his rating is in the South, he couldn't stoop no lower. Maybe he figured he had nothing to lose and this would take the heat off some of his other problems -- you know, spreading the misery." -- KENNETH DASHER, a tobacco farmer, on President Clinton's proposal to curb smoking by teen-agers.  [ 6:5 ]


Beliefs
Yves Congar, who died in June at age 91, was one of a handful of scholars who utterly changed Roman Catholicism and, with it, the religious landscape of the world.
Father Congar was the last of the thinkers linked to what became known, because they were almost all French, as the nouvelle theologie, or new theology.
The story of the new theology contains a profound lesson about religious renewal, first for Catholicism, but also for other Christian confessions and world faiths.


Grey Advertising Inc.(GREY,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Masons Renege On Camp Offer To Children With H.I.V.
Roberto Dominguez had never known anyone with AIDS or H.I.V., but when he saw a feature on "60 Minutes" last February about H.I.V.-infected children frolicking at a special camp, he found himself moved and inspired.
These were kids with such uncertain destinies, he thought, that "if you had the ability to provide them with one week of happiness, why wouldn't you?"


METRO DIGEST
GIULIANI STUDIES PRIVATIZING JAILS The Giuliani administration has begun soliciting proposals to privatize part or all of New York City's jails.
Under the initiative, a nonbinding "request for expressions of interest" was mailed to more than 200 companies that have sprung up across the nation as private operators of jails.  [ Page 1. ] As America's prison population doubled in the last decade, the private, for-profit prison business exploded along with it.
In fact, Mr.
Brockway, 74, says he's never done much of anything else.
Mr.
White was captured without incident on an Albany street a day after he was let out of jail by mistake because, among the 825 or so inmates, there was another with the first name Lamont.  [ 26. ]


Bridge
Many readers are no doubt aware of the episode of the dog in the night, and of Mr.
Simpson who was accused of committing the crime.
They may not recall that his first name was Fitzroy, and that Sherlock Holmes proved his innocence, and the guilt of the horse trainer, by noting that the dog did not bark.
A similar negative inference was the key to success on the diagramed deal, played about five years ago at the late lamented Cavendish Club in Manhattan.
South was Herb Lavine of Westfield, N.J., and West was Jack Dreyfus of Manhattan, founder of the Dreyfus Funds.


Police Unit To Help Solve Traffic Ills
The Police Department said yesterday that it has formed a new traffic division to develop and carry out a plan to ease gridlock in midtown Manhattan and rush-hour tie-ups on highways around New York City.
The division intends to step up enforcement of regulations prohibiting double-parking, the police said, and to increase ticketing of drivers who block intersections and cabdrivers who clog traffic while picking up pedestrians.
Plans also include deploying helicopters to track traffic flow and increasing the role of the mounted unit, whose traffic duties wwere curtailed in 1963.


Why So Quick to Doubt Police?
To the Editor:
In "New York's Surliest" (editorial, Aug. 8), you refer to Peter Zanikos's statement -- "Why don't cops put a quarter in the meter like I do? Why don't they get tickets like I do?" -- as "criticism that every New Yorker knows is true."


Despite Setbacks, a Boom In Private Prison Business
As America's prison population doubled in the past decade, the private, for-profit prison business has exploded along with it, managing to grow despite a series of setbacks, most recently the uprising at the Esmor immigration detention center in Elizabeth, N.J.
More than 20 private companies now operate prisons around the United States, housing more than 50,000 inmates.
Some states say the private companies have provided better services at a lower cost than prisons administered by states' correction departments.
As one entrepreneur said: "It is the only real estate investment where you're guaranteed 100 percent occupancy, at least."


Packwood Takes Exception to Accusation
Senator Bob Packwood said today that he took "strong exception" to accusations by a woman who has said that he made sexual advances toward her when she was 17.
Her complaint, the first against Mr.
Packwood involving a minor, has renewed calls for public hearings into his case and prompted various people, including Patrick J. Buchanan, who is seeking the Republican Presidential nomination, to call for his expulsion from the Senate.


At The Citadel, a Sign of the Times


F.B.I. SUSPENDS 4 AS INQUIRY WIDENS INTO IDAHO SIEGE
Four high-ranking officials of the Federal Bureau of Investigation were suspended today after the Justice Department opened a broad new criminal investigation into the possibility of a high-level cover-up of what really happened during a deadly 1992 standoff with a white separatist in Idaho.
Among those suspended today by the F.B.I.
Director, Louis B. Freeh, was Larry A. Potts, Mr.
Freeh's close friend whom he had made the bureau's No. 2 official before demoting him recently because of his role in the Idaho shootout.


Germans Are Urged to Let Shops Stay Open at Night
For decades, one rule above all others has been inviolate in German retailing: never on Sunday.
Thanks to the strictest closing hours in Europe, shops in Germany turn off the lights every weekday except Thursday by 6:30 P.M., are open only one Saturday afternoon a month and, of course, stay tightly shuttered on Sunday.
But now, in the most serious assault on this famous German tradition and the powerful retailing union that has fiercely defended it, politicians and industrialists appear to have found the ammunition to finally bring about a major change.


CHRONICLE
Jimmy Carter, himself a best-selling poet, made a pilgrimage yesterday to the birthplace of another versifier of considerable renown, Dylan Thomas.
Mr.
Carter was in Swansea, Wales, to open Ty Llen, the National Literature Centre for Wales, the British news service the Press Association reported.
Swansea, where Mr.
Thomas was born, is the host city for the United Kingdom Year of Literature and Writing, a yearlong festival of which Mr.
Carter is the honorary president.
He was accompanied by his wife, Rosalynn Carter, and the United States Poet Laureate, Rita Dove.


In Store Fight, Mayor Got Tough
After months of pondering whether to support a hotly contested proposal to build a large Pathmark supermarket in East Harlem, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's aides called the project's developers to a meeting last week and issued an ultimatum:
Accept the Mayor's terms for closing the deal -- or take the blame for the project's failure.
The Mayor's people gave the developers just three hours to decide.


PRESIDENT URGES A PERMANENT BAN ON ALL ATOM TESTS
President Clinton called today for a permanent ban on all nuclear testing in an effort to prevent more nations from developing nuclear weapons.
Calling his decision "an historic milestone in our efforts to reduce the nuclear threat," Mr.
Clinton said the move, which comes 50 years after the United States dropped the first nuclear bomb, was intended to speed negotiations for a treaty that would end testing worldwide.


Uniroyal Technology Corp. reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 2


The Oklahoma Indictments
The striking thing about the indictments just issued by a Federal grand jury in the Oklahoma City bombing case is the revelation of how small-time the operation behind this devastating terrorist act may turn out to be.
Immediately after the bombing some investigators -- and many Americans -- assumed it must be the work of Islamic fundamentalists like those who had bombed the World Trade Center in New York.
Then it quickly became clear that this was a home-grown plot, and attention focused on the armed, right-wing militias that are frightening citizens and terrorizing government officials in many states.
Now prosecutors and the grand jury seem to have concluded that the bombing was primarily the work of two drifters who used common, inexpensive materials to pack a rental truck with 4,800 pounds of homemade explosives.
They allegedly robbed a gun dealer to finance their plot, stole dynamite and fuses from a quarry, rented storage lockers under false names and made a bomb from fertilizer and diesel fuel in a public park.
The accused criminals could hardly have been more unremarkable or their weapons more primitive.


Journal; Was Newt Borked?
So much for Rupert Murdoch's loyalty to Newt Gingrich.
When Gail Sheehy's profile of the Speaker surfaced in Vanity Fair this week, no one in American journalism did more to promote it than Mr.
Murdoch -- devoting the front page of The New York Post, where he holds the title editor in chief, to the headline "Who's a Newty Boy?" along with the teaser "Aide: He made whoopee on office desk." And Mr.
Murdoch did this even as Mr.
Gingrich was touring the country hawking "To Renew America" for his own (as well as Newty Boy's) financial benefit.
In case you missed The Post and haven't yet caught up with Vanity Fair, the passage in Ms.
Sheehy's 12,000-word article that most caught Mr.
Murdoch's expert journalistic eye was a brief interlude discussing Mr.
Gingrich's alleged sex life during his first marriage.
You almost have to feel sorry for Newt, especially when his then-young daughters are dragged into one particularly lurid scene.
How did journalism reach this pass?


Corrections
An obituary of Jerry Garcia on Thursday reversed the names of an early financial backer of his band, the Grateful Dead.
The backer was Owsley Stanley.


Marijuana Charge in Fatal Crash
The driver in a single-car crash that killed two teen-age passengers this week has been charged with driving under the influence of marijuana.
Officials said yesterday that Franco Paradiso, 18, of Cliffside Park could face still more charges in the Wednesday night accident that left two other teen-agers injured.


BMTC Group reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Romuald Spasowski, 74, Dies; Polish Envoy Defected to U.S.
F.
Romuald Spasowski, once an ardent Polish Communist and Poland's Ambassador in Washington who then defected dramatically at the height of the Solidarity crisis in 1981, died on Wednesday at his home in suburban Oakton, Va.
He was 74.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


High Marks for Oyster Creek
The latest report card for the Oyster Creek nuclear plant looked good, plant officials say.
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission said that Oyster Creek rated a 1, the best possible grade, in operations and engineering, and a 2, the middle grade, in maintenance and plant support.
The commission staff said in a letter to plant executives that "plant management continued to demonstrate an excellent overall safety perspective with excellent oversight, support of and involvement in all plant activities."


Maple Leaf Foods Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CHRONICLE
In so much pain from a 25-foot fall that he could only roll sideways, ALEX DUNNE, 38, a teacher from San Francisco, lay on an Arizona mountainside for five days without food or drink, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
Finally, after gulping drops of an afternoon rain, Mr.
Dunne, a son of the writer DOMINICK DUNNE, forced himself to walk to survive, his family said.
On Thursday evening, nearly a week after he had disappeared, he emerged from the Coronado National Forest south of Tucson.


Crackdown on Drug Paraphernalia


Bullpen Closing Door on Yankees' East Title Hopes
Maybe the Yankees should purchase simple advertisements to address their latest aggravating problems.
Needed: an effective closer and a right fielder with capable defensive ability.
Starting date: immediately.
Salary: negotiable.
Note: Especially after last night's devastating 5-4 loss to the Indians in 11 innings.
Please hurry.
Because George Steinbrenner is paying John Wetteland $3.375 million to close games, because Darryl Strawberry is making $675,000 this season to blast homers and because Ruben Sierra will earn $12.4 million through 1997 to hit and play right field, the Yankees will not seek help through the classified section.
It only seems like a logical idea after what has transpired at Yankee Stadium for the past two days and nights of baseball oddities.


Aid for Trapped Rebel Muslims Is Blocked by Croats
While the world focused this week on the exodus of tens of thousands of Serbs from the Krajina region into Bosnia and Yugoslavia, a few miles from here 30,000 refugees are trapped, without international assistance or anywhere else to go.
They are renegade Bosnian Muslims, followers of Fikret Abdic, a former Communist with a reputation as a shady businessman, who led them in an alliance with Bosnian Serbs against the Muslim-led Bosnian Government fighting for control of the Bihac enclave in Bosnia.


Rugged, Seaworthy and Lasting
On a hot summer afternoon, with the Connecticut River as his backdrop, Richard Earl Brockway, 74 years old and covered with grease, hammered boards together to finish yet another boat.
Since he was 14 and his father told him it was time to learn the family trade, Mr.
Brockway says, he has spent most of his days in his backyard building wooden skiffs.


Israeli West Bank Isn't Another Selma
To the Editor:
I revere Rabbi Shlomo Riskin; he was my teacher.
He is my friend.
But still. . . .
In your Aug. 7 news article on protests by West Bank settlers in Israel, Rabbi Riskin compares them to the blacks in Selma.
That is inaccurate.
I too was in Selma.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.69
5.68
4.22
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.40
5.38
4.35
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.44
5.39
4.90
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.60
6.50
7.28
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.97
6.91
7.50
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.87
7.80
8.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.30
6.26
6.43
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


14 Arrested in Drug Sweep
Synchronizing their watches as they set out carrying automatic weapons, SWAT teams rounded up 14 suspected crack dealers yesterday morning.
The raid produced the most arrests for a single drug sweep in Bergen County since 38 suspects were rounded up in another Englewood raid two years ago, officials said.
The most serious charges involve distribution of crack cocaine within 1,000 feet of a school, which carries a penalty of three to five years in prison and a $100,000 fine.
Englewood's Police Chief, James Mosley, said he enlisted the help of the narcotics task force from the county prosecutor's office to make drug buys during a three-month undercover investigation.


Caesarean Delivery Didn't Hurt My Babies
To the Editor:
"Caesarean Delivery Can Mark a Child's Psyche" (letter, Aug. 8) suggests that babies delivered by Caesarean are permanently traumatized and that a decision to have a planned birth is made without considering the unborn child.
As someone who has had three Caesarean sections, I was offended.


Southeastern Michigan Gas Enterprises Inc.(SMGS,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


O'Meara and Els Twinkle For Hollywood
Riviera Country Club is a place made for stars.
Always has been.
From the time Douglas Fairbanks and Mary Pickford joined back in the 1920's, to when Clark Gable and Humphrey Bogart and Howard Hughes started hanging around and Ben Hogan began winning golf tournaments here, this place has been awash in glitter.
In today's second round of the P.G.A.
Championship, it just got a little more, courtesy of golf's golden boy, Ernie Els, 25, and Mark O'Meara, 38, the king of the West Coast.
It was this combination of new and old that hung some marquee on the proceedings and set up what promises to be a wild weekend.


Morgan Stanley Establishes A Joint Venture in China
Morgan Stanley Group Inc. and a Chinese partner started China's first international investment banking firm today, saying that it would give them an inside track to grow with the nation's emerging financial markets.
As the only foreign investment bank with a major stake in a China-based investment banking house, executives said, Morgan Stanley would have an advantage over its competitors in winning deals involving project financing, direct investment and equity and bond offerings at a time when China needs to finance enormous infrastructure projects.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Aug. 3 about missing money from teachers' retirement accounts misstated the headquarters location of Access Research, a firm that tracks the retirement market.
It is in Windsor, Conn., not Stamford, Conn.


ARM Financial Group Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


B-Minus? It's Time for a Refund
A graduate student who got a B-minus grade for a psychology course has decided to take the matter to small claims court here.
William Rhoat of Oakland said he wanted a refund of the $1,200 he paid for the 1994 class at Fairleigh Dickinson University in Teaneck.
University officials have described Mr.
Rhoat's action as a nuisance suit.
But Mr.
Rhoat is sure he deserves his day in court; he said that not only was he unhappy with the grade but that the professor had skipped meetings to talk about it.
"Nobody was listening to me, and I was fed up and tired of being unjustly treated," he told The Record of Hackensack.


Observer; The Cyber Soother
Gomer, my cyberguru, brought a load of fresh equipment.
As a result I can make this very machine play Mozart at the same time it processes words.
It is not playing Mozart at the moment, but only because I know from experience that newspaper columns written when Mozart is being played are always lousy.
Gomer told me it would also play Erroll Garner.
That's what sold me.
Anything that will play Erroll Garner is aces with me, and the idea of having Erroll Garner's piano pouring out of a computer that was simultaneously processing my very own words was irresistible.


Excess Revenue of $14 Million
From the State Treasurer's office, a report on the bottom line for the budget year that ended in June:


Okunoshima Journal; A Museum to Remind Japanese of Their Own Guilt
This island is so pretty and green and full of summer vacationers that it is difficult to imagine it as a top-secret military site that was once so sensitive it was removed from all maps of Japan.
Yet Okunoshima, set in the sea near Hiroshima, was where the Japanese Imperial Army made poison gas that was used to kill thousands of Chinese.
By China's count, 80,000 people, many of them civilians, died from gas produced here.


Clinton Vetoes Lifting Bosnia Arms Embargo
President Clinton used the second veto of his term today to block legislation that would end American participation in the arms embargo against Bosnia, and the White House said it hoped new allied diplomatic and military efforts in the Balkans would draw enough Congressional support to sustain the veto.
"I know that members of Congress share my goals of reducing the violence in Bosnia and working to end the war," Mr.
Clinton said in a written statement accompanying his veto message.
"But their vote to unilaterally lift the arms embargo is the wrong step at the wrong time."


Dinkins's Prognosis Is Good, Doctors Say
Former Mayor David N. Dinkins was moved out of the intensive care unit of a hospital in Charleston, S.C., yesterday, a day after triple bypass heart surgery, and appeared well on the road to recovery, hospital officials said.
"He's doing very nicely," said Ellen Bank, a spokeswoman at the Medical University of South Carolina Medical Center.
"He's in a regular room, he ate some solid food and he's sitting up."


Pataki Vetoes Twin Bills Barring Clinic Self-Referrals by Doctors
Gov.
George E. Pataki has vetoed two bills that would have prevented doctors from making referrals to radiation or physical therapy clinics in which they or their families have a financial interest.
The bills would have expanded an existing state law that already bars such self-referrals to laboratories, pharmacies and X-ray and imaging services owned, or partly owned, by doctors.


Clinton's Balkan Envoy Finds Himself Shut Out
As top Clinton Administration officials travel through Europe this week trying to fashion a peace plan for the Balkans, Richard Holbrooke, the State Department's point man for Bosnia, is strolling in the Rockies.
The voice of Mr.
Holbrooke, the Assistant Secretary of State for Europe, has been muted lately in the high councils of state.
That is in part because he has at once spoken for the Administration's policies in Bosnia and against them: he has publicly supported some of the positions he has privately savaged.


An Ad Cashes In on the Bronx's Notoriety
The Bronx, though not rivaling Detroit, has its own lively association with the automobile business: a flourishing trade in stripping stolen cars.
Grimy establishments advertising auto repairs -- some legitimate, others less so -- are on many corners.
Just this week, District Attorney Robert T. Johnson, announcing a new push against the shops that aren't, called the Bronx "the warehouse and workshop of the multimillion-a-year stolen-car industry."


The E.P.A.'s Not Out to Punish Business
To the Editor:
In "Tangling With the E.P.A." (Op-Ed, July 27), Francis Vicino contends that his company's experience with the Environmental Protection Agency in 1987 is justification for House passage of Clean Water Act amendments that would drastically reduce protection of wetlands.
He omits important points.


Sotheby's Holdings Inc.(BID,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Fourstars Allstar Triumphs
Fourstars Allstar, a 7-year-old horse who has run on grass in all of his 44 races, continued his strong 1995 today when he won the Bernard Baruch Handicap at Saratoga by half a length over Turk Passer.
Going into the homestretch, both horses trailed Pennine Ridge.
But the final strides of the mile-and-an-eighth race proved too much for Pennine Ridge, who faded to fourth place.
At the wire, Fourstars Allstar, ridden by Jose Santos, was first in a three-horse finish with Turk Passer next by a head over Compadre.


Policy Management Systems Corp.(PMS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Short-Lived Freedom After a Prison Mix-Up
Lamont White is back in the Albany County Jail after an unexpected day of freedom, and perhaps he is wondering what to call himself next.
Mr.
White was captured without incident on an Albany street yesterday, a day after he was let out of jail by mistake because, among the 825 or so inmates, there was another with the first name Lamont.


Finally, a Fairer Security Test
Federal agencies have for decades wielded an arbitrary power over the careers and good name of civil servants.
The loyalty, stability and competence of any Government worker would come into question upon being denied security clearance.
Worse, access to classified information could be automatically denied if an applicant was a homosexual or was receiving mental health counseling.
An Eisenhower Administration order in 1953 cited "sexual perversion" as automatic grounds for judging an applicant a security risk.
Properly, President Clinton has eliminated this nebulous and objectionable standard in a 13-page executive order that finally establishes uniform Federal procedures for security clearance.
Those denied clearance have the right to appeal, though critics of the old system correctly want to wait and see before judging how fairly these safeguards operate.
Under the new system, officials with full security clearance must allow scrutiny of their credit records and travel expenses, a change justified by the Central Intelligence Agency's failure to check the lavish green trail left by a Soviet mole, Aldrich Ames.


HCC Insurance Holdings (HCC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Milutinovic Chosen As Mexico's Coach
The man who led the United States soccer team to respectability was selected today as Mexico's new national coach.
"I come with a lot of desire to work again in Mexican football," Bora Milutinovic said after he was chosen by the president of the national soccer selection committee, Enrique Borja.


Westinghouse May Be Seeking Partner for CBS Deal
Could the Tiffany Network become the Neiman Marcus Network?
Harcourt General Inc., whose main operating company is the retailer Neiman Marcus, held talks recently with the Westinghouse Electric Corporation about joining Westinghouse in its $5.4 billion bid for CBS, several people familiar with the discussions said yesterday.


Courteous Robert Cray And a Friend: Heartbreak
Robert Cray may be the most courteous man in the soul-blues business.
He constantly thanked the audience for its kindness in his second show at Irving Plaza on Wednesday night, and his microphone was positioned a little low so he appeared to be bowing to the audience when he sang.
As a singer and guitarist, the 41-year-old Mr.
Cray was polite but never overly mannered.
Every element was in place in his songs, every note meant something.
He strummed minor chords on his guitar lightly, almost hesitantly, pausing for crisp blues solos that were everything but showy.
He sang in the smooth, wounded voice of a singer who values pop as much as soul and the blues, like Bobby (Blue) Bland, occasionally switching into rougher, rawer Howlin' Wolf-style phrases.


New Tharp Work to Jazz Classics
Hubbard Street Dance Chicago ought to bottle itself -- and its new Twyla Tharp dance, "I Remember Clifford" -- as a cure for the ills of the era.
The company, founded in 1978 by Lou Conte, a Broadway show dancer and choreographer, delivers a form of jazz dance that could be performed only by dancers who are well trained in ballet and modern dance and are full of infectious delight in moving.
And Ms.
Tharp has given them something more in this first of three new works she is creating for Hubbard Street, which has become a repository for her pieces.
"I Remember Clifford," which was performed on Thursday night at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival and will be repeated tonight, is set to six jazz classics of the 1950's.
The dance is filled with the slithering, quick-shifting, slyly anecdotal movement for which Ms.
Tharp is known.
But there is a new and much less familiar ingredient here.
Winding through the panorama of hot jazz bodies is a character who at first seems a comic odd man out, then a helpless drug addict and finally, befriended fleetingly by one of the crowd, a man at peace with himself and the world.
That redemption is communicated in a closing dance of poignant lyricism, performed to Benny Golson's "I Remember Clifford."


Consumer Prices Rise Only 0.2%; Sales Off a Bit
Consumer prices rose in July, but gently, while retail sales were scarcely changed, the Government announced today.
But the Commerce Department also revised upward its estimates for sales in May and June, and the revised figures suggested that the economy entered late summer in slightly better condition than some traders had previously suspected.


Corrections
Articles in Business Day yesterday and on Aug. 2 and 3 about the previous day's trading in the stock market misstated the closing price of the UAL Corporation each day.
It was $148 on Thursday, not $48; $148.50 on Aug. 1, not $48.50; and $144.125 on Aug. 2, not $44.125.


Ventra Group reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Culp Inc. reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 30


Business Digest
Bond Prices Slump As Economy Picks Up  Treasury securities fell in price as new Government reports indicated that the economy was somewhat stronger than thought.
Market participants said the reports did not bode well for another interest rate cut.
The new 30-year bond lost more than a full percentage point in price, bringing the yield to 6.970 percent, up from 6.906 percent on Thursday.
The market ignored the dollar's new strength, and focused on a big supply of bonds that dragged prices lower.  [ 36. ] Stocks were rocked by the bond market selloff, which undercut favorable economic reports.
The Dow industrials fell 25.36 points, to 4,618.30 -- that was 65.16 points for the week -- but the S.&amp; P. 500-stock index fell less sharply, and technology stocks rose.  [ 37. ] Corn and wheat prices rose on expectations that foreign buyers would snap up larger American corps.  [ 32. ] A Partner for Westinghouse?
Harcourt General held talks with Westinghouse about joining its $5.4 billion bid to buy CBS, several people familiar with the discussions said.
Harcourt General, parent of the retailer Neiman-Marcus, did not proceed very far in the talks, but the fact talks were held indicates that Westinghouse would consider a partner.
Harcourt weighed an approach to CBS last year, various people said, but is unlikely to join in this time, partly because of the deal's high price.  [ 35. ] City May Privatize Jails  New York City asked for proposals to privatize all or part of the city's jails.
When it is clear how much interest private companies show, the city will decide how to proceed.
The city spends almost $750 million a year to run the jail system.  [ 1. ] Tobacco Farmers Fight Back  Tobacco farmers denounced President Clinton's call for regulations to reduce teen-age smoking.
A cooperative in North Carolina representing 180,000 growers in five states joined the nation's five largest tobacco companies in suing to block the plan, that would give the F.D.A. the authority to regulate the sale, distribution and promotion of cigarettes.
Farmers said that state laws already barred the sale of cigarettes to minors, and that the Government should not influence a teenager's decision on whether to smoke.
The regulations proposed by Mr.
Clinton were based on the F.D.A.'s finding that nicotine is an addictive drug and thus subject to the agency's control.  [ 1. ] Morgan Stanley Jumps Into China Morgan Stanley began China's first international investment bank with a Chinese company and other partners from Hong Kong and Singapore.
The investment is expected to give Morgan Stanley an advantage over its competitors in winning deals involving project financing, direct investment and equity and bond offerings at a time when China needs to finance enormous infrastructure projects.
The new firm has a capitalization of $100 million and is headquartered in Beijing.
Ten Morgan executives will be based there, giving Morgan the largest presence in Beijing of any American investment bank.  [ 34. ] A Capitalist Farm Thrives in Vietnam A capitalist showcase is blossoming on a farm in Vietnam.
A Dutch farmer recruited by a British entrepreneur is cultivating 75 acres of vegetables and flowers in the highland area.
Vegetables are being shipped out almost daily, mostly for export to upscale restaurants in Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore and Japan.
The company is the first wholly foreign-owned agricultural and horticultural investment in Vietnam.
One attraction is that costs are lower than elsewhere in Asia.
The farm is headed toward its first year of profit.  [ 34. ] S.E.C.
Internet Service May End  A service offering free Internet access to S.E.C. filings will be discontinued on Oct. 1.
Executives said they hoped the Federal Government would take over the service, known as Edgar.  [ 35. ] In Recycling, New York City Pays  While suburban areas around New York make money by selling recycled metal, glass and plastic -- Oyster Bay, L.I., gets $25 a ton and Mercer County, N.J. $9.50 a ton -- New York City pays recycling operators $40 to $50 a ton to take away such material.
City sanitation officials call it "a fair deal."  [ 23. ]


Tobacco Growers Bemoan Clinton Smoking Proposal
"The man's off his rocker," Claude B. French said of President Clinton, and that was one of the milder reactions today among the tobacco farmers who serve on the board of a cooperative representing 180,000 growers in five Southern states.
Tobacco farmers have long been accustomed to attacks on smoking from health groups and Government agencies.
But Mr.
Clinton's proposed regulations to reduce teen-age smoking, announced on Thursday, provoked an unusual level of anger as the board met here at the Flue-Cured Cooperative Stabilization Corporation offices, where visitors are greeted by a sign: "Thank You for Smoking."


Washington Talk; For Senate, It's August Angst Again
Republicans bristled at the comparison, but it was almost impossible not to have a few flashes of deja vu in the Capitol this week.
It was August, partisanship and simple crankiness were running high, the Senate majority leader had to postpone recess for a week -- and a major piece of social legislation was stalled on the floor.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  APPEAL FOR NUCLEAR TEST BAN  Fifty years after the United States dropped the first nuclear bombs, President Clinton called for a permanent ban on all nuclear tests. 1


N. M. Gerstenzang, A Times Editor, 87
Nathaniel M. Gerstenzang, a former assistant foreign editor of The New York Times, died yesterday at Evanston Hospital in Illinois.
He was 87 and had moved to Wilmette, Ill., in November from Maplewood, N.J.
During his tenure, Mr.
Gerstenzang helped oversee foreign coverage of two Middle East wars, most of the Vietnam War, the 1956 Hungarian uprising and Premier Nikita S. Khrushchev's tour of the United States in 1959, a first for a Soviet leader.


U.S. Delivery Systems Inc.(DLV,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Peres and Arafat Reach Pact On Part of West Bank Control
After five days of exhaustive negotiations, Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel and the Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat announced agreements today on all but the thorniest issues of a plan to transfer control over parts of the West Bank to the Arabs.
The most important issue still dividing the two sides is security in the West Bank town of Hebron, which is sacred to both Jews and Muslims, and where 400 Israeli settlers maintain a stubborn presence among 100,000 Arabs.
The town is also a stronghold of the militant Islamic movement Hamas, and has been the site of violent clashes.


Beame Suffered for Other People's Fiscal Sins
To the Editor:
In "Beame's Goal: Setting History Straight" (Aug. 3), I was quoted as saying that Mayor Abe Beame was "pushed" into accepting state financial oversight control during the 1975 fiscal crisis.
Yes, I said it, but without context the implication was unfair to the man I came to honor that afternoon.
No mayor I know of in the history of the city would voluntarily accept any controls that would -- in fact or perception -- jeopardize the city's cherished traditions of self-rule.


Robertson-Ceco Corp.(RHH,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Noel Group Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Between U.S. and Iraq, Kurds Only Lose
To the Editor:
Your report that the United States says Iraq is still violating United Nations terms for the lifting of sanctions (news article, Aug. 4) disclosed that Madeleine K. Albright, United States delegate to the United Nations, told a Senate Foreign Relations subcommittee that sanctions must continue against Iraq in part because Baghdad has failed to stop repressing the Kurds.


Slater Industries reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Bond Selloff Hurts Stocks, With the Dow Off 25.36
The stock market was rocked by a selloff in the bond market yesterday and fell despite two generally favorable economic reports.
The Government reported that the Consumer Price Index rose only two-tenths of 1 percent last month, while retail sales slipped one-tenth of 1 percent.
Both reports were viewed, at least initially, as indications of subdued inflation.


At Least 4 Die in Austrian Train Crash


Kotite Is Keeping Emotions in Check
There isn't much time to reflect in the National Football League.
At least not in the summer, when 80 players demand attention, when the Jets are being torn apart and put together -- again -- and when questions that appeared to be answered suddenly reappear.
So Rich Kotite said that Saturday night's exhibition game against the Eagles, and the owner who fired him, cannot consume him.


After Months of Punishment, the Dollar Is Behaving Better
After enduring months of abuse, the dollar has begun to strengthen in value on foreign exchange markets in the last few weeks, and many traders and analysts say it may continue to rise.
At the same time, these experts concede that the dollar had become so cheap in comparison with currencies like the Japanese yen and the German mark that some sort of bounce was almost inevitable.
Indeed, yesterday it surged to a five-month high against the yen and a two-and-a-half-month high against the mark.


The Serbs Show Their Knack for Defeat
Defeat, some say, is the Serb form of happy ending.
Rebecca West, who loved the Serbs as only a fellow romantic could, devoted the most profound pages of "Black Lamb and Grey Falcon," her study of the South Slavs, to a meditation on "Kosovo Polye," the Serb national epic.
In that poem, which recalls a battle of 1389, the Serb leader, Prince Lazar, is betrayed to the Turks by one of his followers.
Yet it is not the betrayal that causes the ensuing catastrophic defeat: In the hour of decision, Prince Lazar chooses defeat because nothing is more poignant, more perfect, more heroic than death for a sacred cause.
The Serbs' love affair with defeat, West argued, shaped their entire political culture.


Croatian Soldiers Plunder Area Once Held by Serbs
One week after the Croatian Army launched its offensive against secessionist Serbs, its enemy has been vanquished and the region depopulated, and the army has found new ways to occupy itself -- looting and burning.
The smell of charred wood and dead animals permeates the hills, covered with thick woods here, with tall corn there.
A fire in one house was set so recently the flames were still coming out the windows at midday today.


Time for a New Token?
With the Metropolitan Transportation Authority thinking of raising transit fares, the question arises: Is it time for a new token?
Unlike dollar bills, New York City tokens, like the city they serve, tend to change with the years: there have been four kinds since they were first introduced in 1953, replacing the dimes that commuters were then using to pay their subway fares.
Transit officials are silent on whether they will develop a new token should the fare rise as planned, on Nov. 1.
Keeping the old one would encourage hoarding, draining the authority's revenues.


INSIDE
Iraq's Leader Is Still Strong
The defection of Saddam Hussein's relatives could give the West valuable intelligence, but it does not necessarily mean that he is about to lose power.
News analysis, Page 4.
Paying Them to Take It Away
While many cities make money by selling recycled metal, plastic and glass, New York pays companies to remove the same material.
Page 23.
New Strength in Dollar
The dollar has been rising on foreign-exchange markets, although analysts say it remains a fundamentally weak currency.
Page 33.


Committed to a Threatened Park
Sandy Hook will remain open as part of the Gateway National Recreation Area, if Bruce Babbitt, Secretary of the Interior, and Representative Frank Pallone Jr., Democrat of Long Branch, have their way.


Summers Is Sworn In as Treasury Deputy
The Senate today confirmed Lawrence H. Summers as Deputy Treasury Secretary by a vote of 74 to 21, and he was immediately sworn in.
Mr.
Summers had been serving as the Under Secretary of the Treasury for international affairs.
Despite his reputation as a brilliant economist, he was a controversial choice for the promotion because last winter he oversaw the politically unpopular American bailout of Mexico.
But some of the criticism of the bailout has faded this summer as the Mexican economy has begun to show signs of recovery.


The 'In' Iraqi Who Counted Himself Out
By the time he was 30, Hussein Kamel had risen from a lowly bodyguard with a grade-school education to become the mastermind behind the development of advanced chemical weapons and the long-range missiles Iraq launched in its eight-year war against Iran in the 1980's.
Today, a decade later, Lieutenant General Kamel, with his knowledge of Iraq's clandestine weapons program, could become more valuable to the West than to the Baghdad Government.


Soul and Substance of the Grateful Dead
The trouble for superheroes is what to do between phone booths," said the writer Ken Kesey, referring to the failure of many of his fellow counterculture icons to write second acts to their lives. He would have known; his last good book had already come out by 1965, the year he hired an unknown jug band fronted by a nine-fingered guitarist named Jerry Garcia to provide the live soundtrack for his San Francisco-based, LSD-laced hippie revolution.
Mr.
Garcia, who died this week at 53 in a California drug treatment center, solved Mr.
Kesey's superhero problem by forever staying in the same phone booth in which he had alchemized into the famous Captain Trips of the Grateful Dead.
And though the 1967 Summer of Love died faster then you could say President-elect Richard Nixon, Jerry Garcia just kept playing on with the psychedelic optimism of one who still actually believed that flower children could stop war by sticking daisies into rifle barrels of National Guardsman.


Bargain Basement On the Main Deck; Deals Ahoy! Cruise Industry Fights Slowdown in Bookings
Thinking about taking your mate on a weeklong Caribbean cruise this fall?
You're in luck.
Carnival Cruise Lines has knocked down the price of some cabins to $534.50 a person, from $599 last fall, on one of its ships, the Celebration.
And, oh yes, you can bring three others with you (if you don't mind sharing the cabin) at no extra charge.
From the Caribbean to the Mediterranean to the waters off Alaska, the new math is rolling into shore: during the last year, fewer people have been boarding cruise ships, and they are often paying less when they do.


Pathologist For Simpson Stands Fast
The prosecution today attacked the theory of an expert witness for O. J. Simpson that the two victims fought long and hard for their lives at 875 South Bundy Drive.
But the expert, Dr.
Michael Baden, largely fended off the attack, making frequent references to the decades he had spent dissecting the mechanics of murder.
Deputy District Attorney Brian Kelberg tried to re-establish the prosecution's account of how the crime occurred, which Dr.
Baden disputed: that Nicole Brown Simpson was unconscious when her throat was fatally slashed; that the killer placed his foot on her back when he inflicted the fatal wound, and that Ronald L. Goldman also died quickly, before he could fight back.


Enter MTV And a New Idea
President Clinton, the quintessential policy wonk, found himself one-upped today by an unlikely source: Tabitha Soren, an MTV reporter who interviewed him in the Oval Office about his crackdown on teen-age smoking.
"Right now, advertising is written off as a business expense," Ms.
Soren said, "and that means the public pays in some fashion for all advertising, including cigarette advertising. Would you consider getting rid of the tax deduction for cigarette advertising?"


Old-Time Hippie Dancing, Watched Over by a Turtle
There was no moshing when the Horde Festival came to Jones Beach Theater here on Tuesday.
Horde (Horizons of Rock Developing Everywhere), with six hours of music by eight bands, calls for old-fashioned hippie-style dancing.
During Blues Traveler's set, its lead singer, John Popper, announced that a centuries-old sea turtle had died on the beach nearby, and that its "spirit is now permeating" the event.
The tour, now in its fourth year, was organized by Blues Traveler, which used to play extended psychedelic jams for late-1980's club audiences.
By bringing together kindred bands, along with vendors of things like hemp clothing, New Orleans beignets and pro-choice bumper stickers, the Horde festival now fills arenas with fans who want an afternoonlong vacation in the bucolically imagined late 1960's.
Yet behind the tie-dye, there was discipline.
Bands alternated on two stages, one beginning within a minute after the other finished its set.


North Fork Village Eases Taxes by Voting Judge Out of Office
Nine months after having voted to disband their nine-member police force, residents of this small fishing and tourist village on Long Island's North Fork have taken another step to reduce the size and cost of government.
By a vote of 453 to 103, they decided on Tuesday to abolish the village court and unseat a part-time justice whose term does not expire for two years.
The referendum was authorized in a state law that was adopted this year over the objections of the State Office of Court Administration.


Cooper Cameron reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


The Flight From Hussein's Camp
While the defection of members of Saddam Hussein's family, including a son-in-law who supervised weapons procurement, could be an intelligence treasure chest for the West and another sign that the Iraqi President's power base is shrinking, it by no means spells the imminent fall of the Iraqi Government, Arab officials here cautioned today.
The dominant impression was that the most influential member of the group, Lieut.
Gen.
Hussein Kamel, who has been integral to the Government's repressive machinery, is not likely to have the strength or desire to bring down Iraq's leaders.


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page on Tuesday about Broadway Books, a new division of Bantam Doubleday Dell, misstated the probable timing of its first books.
They will appear in the fall of 1996 or the spring of 1997, not 1995-96.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
FM PROPERTIES INC., New Orleans, named Richard C. Adkerson, its chairman, to the additional positions of president and chief executive.
JAMES RIVER CORP., Richmond, named Norman K. Ryan president of the food and consumer packaging division in Milford, Ohio.
OMNI USA INC., Houston, appointed Rob Moore executive vice president and chief financial officer.


Douglas &amp; Lomason Co.(DOUG,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


An Identity Change, Just to Win a Film Role
"Clare? Georgina?" Clare Woodgate -- or was it Georgina Cates? -- giggled nervously.
"Georgina, I think," the 20-year-old English actress replied.
"My parents still call me Clare. My boyfriend still calls me Clare." But, she added, she has changed her name legally: "I guess I'm Georgina now."
Well, why not?
As a child in a staid middle-class home in Essex, she often became someone else.
"I'd pretend to be American and have millionaire parents or pretend to be French and be very exotic or pretend to be deaf," she recalled.
"I couldn't see the point of spending every day just being me."


Esco Electronics (ESE,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


D.M. Bullard Jr., 66; Led Psychiatric Unit
Dexter Means Bullard Jr., who expanded psychiatric care for children and adolescents at the mental hospital that his grandfather founded in Rockville, Md., died on Thursday at Suburban Hospital in Bethesda, Md.
He was 66 and lived in Chevy Chase, Md.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


wo Mozarts, Laid Back and Full Speed Ahead
By the time the four-week Mostly Mozart festival concludes next Saturday, 12 different pianists will have dropped by to play a concerto or two.
It cannot be easy for the Mostly Mozart Orchestra and its conductor, Gerard Schwarz, to adjust to such a rotating roster of artists, especially this week.
Two pianists who played concertos on successive nights could not have been more different.
Musicians who know Eugene Istomin, who turns 70 this year, report that he can play on the spot almost any of the Mozart Piano Concertos, including piano reductions of the orchestral parts.
On Tuesday, as the orchestra began the exposition of the rousing first movement from the Piano Concerto No. 14 in E flat, Mr.
Istomin looked as though he could hardly restrain himself from joining in.
He fidgeted on the piano bench, fingered passages silently on his lap, even conducted now and then, waiting for his part to begin.


Man Is Accidentally Shot by Police Officer
A police officer aiming at a man who was threatening him with a knife missed and instead shot a bystander on a street corner in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, yesterday, the police said.
The bystander, a 34-year-old man on a bicycle, was listed in stable condition last night at Kings County Hospital Center.


A One-Mile Swim for Charity


Mantle Treated Only for Pain
Doctors are trying to keep Mickey Mantle pain-free and they have suspended chemotherapy treatments to fight the cancer spreading through the 63-year-old former Yankee star, a hospital spokeswoman said today.
"Right now, he's pretty weak, so anything beyond just pain treatment would be difficult to try," said Denise Kile Walton of Baylor University Medical Center.
"We're trying to let him rest and we're observing him closely."


Tarrant Apparel reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Johnson Adds Gold in 200 to His Collection
His mission accomplished, an unprecedented pair of world sprint titles and two Mercedes-Benz automobiles taken as prizes, Michael Johnson could finally relax.
He tumbled backward on the track after today's 200-meter victory, the pressure escaping from him like air from a valve.
He had matched his personal best of 19.79 seconds -- equaling the fifth-fastest time in history -- and if another world record had eluded him, he had met his own expectations.


Protesters Demand Retrial for Radio Reporter
The protests and passions of the 1960's made a comeback here today as more than 3,500 people rallied against the death penalty and demanded a new trial for a condemned radio journalist and former Black Panther, Mumia Abu-Jamal.
In the 13 years since he was sent to death row for the 1981 murder of a police officer here, Mr.
Abu-Jamal has become an international symbol for the movement against the death penalty, and several other demonstrations on his behalf were scheduled today in cities across the country and in Europe.


Bank Abetted Nazis
To the Editor:
Re your Aug. 5 Business Day article on the Bank for International Settlements, which the United States Federal Reserve joined last year: The bank was inspired by Hjalmar Schacht, who later became Nazi Minister of Economics.
With intimations of war on the horizon in 1930, the bank was designed as a conduit for international money transfers across enemy lines.
In World War II, some American corporations did business with both sides.
Thus, the bank was used by the Nazis to funnel payments to American businesses that furnished goods and services to the Nazi war machine.
WILLIAM M. ERLBAUM  Kew Gardens, Queens, Aug. 8, 1995 The writer is a judge in New York City Criminal Court.


Aug. 6-12: Abortion Symbolism; 'Jane Roe' Switches Sides; Is Anybody Thrilled?
After a series of highly publicized setbacks, the anti-abortion movement pulled off an unlikely victory last week: It welcomed to the fold Norma McCorvey, the plaintiff known as "Jane Roe" in the case that led to the 1973 Supreme Court ruling that legalized abortion.
Ms.
McCorvey, baptized in a swimming pool, quit her job at a Dallas abortion clinic and announced that she would join Operation Rescue to "save babies." Still, she says she still believes in a woman's right to an abortion in the first trimester; Operation Rescue, on the other hand, is opposed to any abortion.


Mummies Back on View, But Not Without Debate
SHORTLY after he became president in 1970, Anwar el-Sadat banned the viewing of mummies at the Egyptian Museum here.
His concern was not so much the preservation of relics of ancient times but the sanctity of the dead.
Mummies, however, are back in full view now at Cairo's museum.
President el-Sadat's decree was annulled in the push to attract tourists and make up for the hard blow dealt to Egyptian tourism by Islamic fundamentalists who targeted tourists in a campaign two years ago to embarrass the Egyptian Government and deprive it of nearly $3 billion in revenues.


Joanna Wahl, Nicholas Feffer
Joanna Wendy Wahl, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Wahl of Roslyn, L.I., was married on Thursday to Nicholas William Oliver Feffer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Feffer of New York.
Rabbi Richard S. Chapin performed the ceremony at the Muttontown (L.I.) Club.
Mrs.
Feffer, 26, graduated from Rollins College and received a law degree from Hofstra University.
In May, she received a master of laws degree in international business and trade law from Fordham University.
The bride's father is the chairman and chief executive of Howard Marlboro Group Worldwide, a marketing and advertising firm in New York.


How Managed Health Care Will Allow Market Forces to Solve the Problems
ONE of the problems that has dogged attempts at health care reform is that the health care sector simply does not follow the laws of economics.
Consumers pay little or nothing for services, so they give no attention to prices.
Physicians serve as the buyers of services for patients, but they are not the payers.
Insurers pay for the services, yet they have historically had little say in purchasing decisions.
Within a small community there is often wasteful duplication of expensive equipment and services, and yet the less efficient provider is almost never forced out of business.
With managed care, much of this is changing.


How 27 Teachers Spent Summer Vacation: Net-Surfing
It may be years before every school in New Jersey has access to the Internet, but some teachers are preparing now.
This summer, 27 teachers from around the state learned how to cruise the Internet and take advantage of its offerings at the Information Superhighway Academy.


100 Years in Austria
Swarovski, the Austrian manufacturer of full-cut crystal, celebrates its 100th anniversary this year by exploring the many facets of the product that made it famous.
In October, it will open Swarovski Crystal Worlds, a multimedia look at the medium of crystal, at its headquarters in Wattens, in the Austrian Tyrol.


In Fresh Air a Special Bond Grows Between 2 Girls
Etonia Wilson-Davis and Therese Cavalari, both 9, are unlikely friends.
Etonia lives on East 97th Street in Manhattan and rarely leaves the five boroughs.
Therese lives in rural Orange County and rarely makes the 1 1/2-hour trip to the city.


Valerie Fitch, William Thomas
Valerie Lynn Fitch, an associate at the law firm of Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam &amp; Roberts in New York, was married yesterday to William Frederic Thomas, the director of public affairs at the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers in New York.
Louise F. Brown, a justice of the peace, officiated at the couple's home in Norfolk, Conn.
Ms.
Fitch, 37, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Smith College and received her law degree from Brooklyn Law School, where she is an adjunct professor of legal writing.
She is the daughter of Stona J. Fitch and the stepdaughter of Barbara J. Fitch of Cincinnati.
The bride's father, who retired as a vice president of manufacturing at Procter &amp; Gamble in Cincinnati, is the president of the Cincinnati Playhouse in the Park.
Her mother, Dorothy S. Wachter, lives in Carmel, Calif.


Frances McCord, Timothy Krongard
Frances Murphy McCord, an assistant vice president of European art at Christie's in New York, was married yesterday to Timothy Lion Krongard, the director of finance at Advanced Imaging Concepts in Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Henry Parsley performed the ceremony at All Saints Episcopal Church in Linville, N.C.
The bride, 28, graduated from Hollins College.
She is the daughter of Dr.
Max Worrel McCord, a retired otolaryngologist, and of Mrs.
Hugh A. Ragsdale, both of Tuscaloosa, Ala.


Tired of Endless Driving Duty, Parents Turn to Van Services
There were times when Judith London felt like a human pinball, ricocheting between her job as an advertising executive and her role as chauffeur for her two children.
"I was like a nut case, just like a lot of working mothers," said Ms.
London, who lives in Cherry Hill.
"It's hell for your kids because you're always looking at the clock, and it's a weak spot in the workplace because supervisors look at the demands of children as interruptive."


Hertz Is Adding Cars With Computer Maps
Hertz, which had expected to offer cars with computer navigational systems -- which it calls Neverlost -- in December 1994, now has them in Detroit, Los Angeles and San Francisco.
The cars, linked to the global positioning satellite, have dashboard monitors that show where the car is and a map of how to get to a selected destination.
By mid-August, the company expects to have the special cars available in Atlanta, Chicago, Miami and New York and by the end of the month in Orlando and Washington, although the company will not specify how many it has available.
Until Sept. 30, Hertz is not adding a surcharge for these cars, which may be requested on a first come, first served basis.
Hertz's equipment is available on three models: Ford Contours and Tauruses and Lincoln Town Cars.
Information: (800) 654-3131.


Karen E. Steinig, Jeffrey J. Stewart
Karen Elyse Steinig, a daughter of Renee and Stephen Steinig of Dix Hills, L.I., is to be married today to Jeffrey John Stewart, the son of Jewell Flint-Stewart of Ellsworth, Me., and Kenneth W. Stewart of Maxfield, Me.
Rabbi Arthur Schwartz is to perform the ceremony at the Crescent, a beach club in Bayville, L.I.
Ms.
Steinig, 26, will keep her name.
In September, she will teach English at the Nyack (N.Y.) High School.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a master's degree in education from Columbia University.
Her father is a senior vice president and the chief actuary of the New York Life Insurance Company in New York.


Rich Tract, Poor Tract


Just Call Missile Defense America's Money Pit
To the Editor:
Re "Star Wars, the Sequel" (editorial, Aug. 7): Congressional proponents of increased spending for a nationwide ballistic missile defense system should be required to review the history of our previous costly efforts in this arena before giving the military hundreds of millions of dollars it did not request.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LIVE FROM DEATH ROW  By Mumia Abu-Jamal. Addison-Wesley, $20.
Mumia Abu-Jamal is a 41-year-old radical journalist sitting on death row in Greene County, Pa., convicted 13 years ago of murder in the shooting death of a Philadelphia police officer.
The heady mixture of a black political activist, the killing of a white police officer and the imposition of the death penalty -- Mr.
Abu-Jamal is scheduled to be executed on Aug. 17 -- has made the case a cause celebre.
Last year, National Public Radio announced plans to broadcast commentaries by Mr.
Abu-Jamal, a decision speedily reversed following expressions of outrage from Philadelphia police organizations.
Those commentaries, along with other jailhouse writings, are collected in "Live From Death Row," and except for the inherent pathos associated with a prisoner facing death, Mr.
Abu-Jamal's jeremiads against the American justice system are strangely banal -- angry but shallow, the rant of a caged animal staring at extinction without any gain of comprehension.
Those already converted to Mr.
Abu-Jamal's cause will, no doubt, enjoy the sermons; skeptics are likely to remain so.
MICHAEL ANDERSON


MY GUY'S COMING HOME
To the Editor:
As one of the 1 in 4 New Yorkers (your figure) who recalls that wonderful night the Times Tower signaled the end of the war in the Pacific, I reveled in your article.
It really caught the mood and emotion of that fabulous best of times.
I'm remembering now with so much joy everything I felt then: the seemingly endless war was finally over and my guy was coming home.
In the middle of that August afternoon, a friend called me at Doubleday, where I was an editorial assistant.
"Something's going on," he said.
"Let's go over to Times Square." He picked me up, we latched onto some wine and off we went.


Nina Marie Facas, Lawrence Restieri
Nina Marie Facas, a daughter of Andrea Pizzuti of Greenwich, Conn., and Charles Facas of West Milford, N.J., was married yesterday to Lawrence Joseph Restieri Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Restieri of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
The Rev.
Michael Moynihan officiated at St.
Michael's Roman Catholic Church in Greenwich.


Explorations of Angst, Though Not Hamlet's
WHATEVER'S in a name, a Shakespeare festival often isn't just Shakespeare.
In Madison, this summer's celebration is taking in Pinter, Wycherley and Ostrovsky.
Ruben Carbajal and Joan Rater, too.
In its Other Stage, founded by Bonnie J. Monte when she took over as artistic director five years ago, the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival means to "experiment with classical texts in counterpoint to the main stage, in a more intimate forum, a chamber space," in Ms.
Monte's words.
"This is the only professional theater in New Jersey with a second stage completely devoted to experimentation."


ALSO INSIDE
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 2
A New Yorker teaches the Japanese to navigate the big city.


MARKET TIMING
Monday The Commerce Department reports on June business inventories and business sales.
Forecast: inventories up 0.3 percent as unsold goods continue to pile up, but at a slightly slower pace than in May, when they rose 0.4 percent.
Sales rose 0.5 percent in May.
Comcast is expected to report a second-quarter loss of 8 cents a share, and Kmart, a profit of 11 cents a share.
Tuesday The Federal Reserve releases industrial production and capacity utilization for July.
Forecast: production down 0.1 percent, following a 0.1 percent increase in June.
Utilization is expected at 83.2 percent, down from 83.7 percent in June.
Dayton Hudson is expected to report second-quarter earnings of 41 cents a share; Rockefeller Center Properties, 13 cents, and Wal-Mart Stores, 28 cents.
Wednesday ALC Communications, which owns the long-distance telephone company Allnet Communications Services, holds a special shareholder meeting to vote on its $1.8 billion merger with the Frontier Corporation.
The merger would create the nation's fifth-largest long-distance phone company.
The U.S.
Department of Energy issues its weekly report on petroleum stocks, production, imports and refinery utilization.
The Commerce Department reports July housing starts.
Forecast: up 3.2 percent, after falling 0.1 percent in June.
Mexico's Finance Ministry reports gross domestic product for the second quarter.
The country's finance minister recently predicted that the economy contracted 5 percent to 6 percent during the quarter.
Thursday The Commerce Department reports the June trade balance.
Forecast: down $10.4 billion, after falling $11.43 billion in May.
Friday Baker Hughes releases it survey of the number of active oil and gas drilling rigs.


Making Music Through Sleight Of Hand And Eye
FOR THOMAS BEECHAM there were no secrets: you hired good musicians, and you let them play.
Charles Munch considered conducting a form of priesthood and the podium an altar.
Leonard Bernstein believed that the mechanics of beating time could be learned in minutes.
Max Rudolf wrote a book about it.
Pierre Boulez creates great performances through the absolute trustworthiness of his gestures.
Otto Klemperer in old age created great performances with players who were never sure what his gestures meant or what was coming next.


A Look Into Jerry Garcia's Future
FITZGERALD was wrong.
There are second acts in America.
It's just that most of them take place after last rites.
That's what happened to Elvis, Marilyn and James Dean.
Now will it happen to Jerry Garcia?
The death last week of Mr.
Garcia, the 53-year-old leader of the Grateful Dead, brought front-page obituaries and critical assessments on "Nightline" and "Crossfire." President Clinton called him "a genius." Hackers shed virtual tears on the Internet, while fans gathered in parks, bars and homes to remember the man whose life and music symbolized the exuberance and excesses of the 1960's.


The Raider Faithful Have Reason to Roar
Welcome to the "Lost Bowl" with the teams from "Lost Angeles."
What a laugh.
And since the joke is on L.A., that simply makes it that much sweeter for the football fans here in Oakland.
It is their game now, their team.
They have been waiting 13 National Football League seasons for this.
And finally, the wait is over.
The Raiders are, indeed, back home.


MY GUY'S COMING HOME
To the Editor:
As one of the 1 in 4 New Yorkers (your figure) who recalls that wonderful night the Times Tower signaled the end of the war in the Pacific, I reveled in your article.
It really caught the mood and emotion of that fabulous best of times.
I'm remembering now with so much joy everything I felt then: the seemingly endless war was finally over and my guy was coming home.
In the middle of that August afternoon, a friend called me at Doubleday, where I was an editorial assistant.
"Something's going on," he said.
"Let's go over to Times Square." He picked me up, we latched onto some wine and off we went.


Finally, a Suburban Cab That Delivers Dinner
David Glauberman delivers comfort to weary mothers, lazy bachelors and anyone else who would rather starve than turn on the stove.
For some, it takes the form of onion rings and a triple cheeseburger.
Others choose something more refined -- veal scaloppine, perhaps, or crawfish etouffee.
Since 1992, Mr.
Glauberman has tried to satisfy countless cravings with a delivery service called Carry-Out Cab, shuttling food from 20 restaurants to homes and offices around Middlesex County.


Terrorism, Parking and Angry Merchants
This time the Empire struck first.
The Empire State Building's managers recently sought stricter parking rules, voicing concerns about the risk of a terrorist truck bombing that were prompted by the attack on the Federal Building in Oklahoma City.
This month -- to the surprise and chagrin of neighboring merchants -- the city responded by lining 33d Street between Broadway and Fifth Avenue with the requested "No Standing" signs.


Lisa S. Hersbeg, James G. Striar
Lisa Sue Hershberg, a daughter of Karen and Elliot Hershberg of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to James Gordon Striar, a son of Joyce and Alan Striar of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Rabbi Helene Ferris officiated at the St.
Regis Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Striar, 25, is a certified school psychologist at Mt.
Sinai Hospital and is a candidate for a doctorate in child psychology at Yeshiva University, both in New York.
She graduated from the University of Maryland.
Her father is a managing director of Bear Stearns &amp; Company, the investment bank in New York.


First, You Get the Baby Pictures
WHEN executives at the Arts and Entertainment Network started the documentary series Biography, they assumed that celebrities would pull the greatest number of viewers.
They were wrong.
"The big draws are historical figures like the Vanderbilts, Bonnie and Clyde, Genghis Khan or Julius Caesar," said Michael Cascio, A&amp;E's vice president for documentary programming.
"George Washington had a decent rating."


Ousted Serbs Said to Oust Others in Turn
Croats and Muslims in this Serbian-held city in northern Bosnia are being forcibly evicted from their homes in acts of revenge by some of the approximately 200,000 Serbian refugees who fled their territory in Croatia last weekend in a rout by Croatian forces, relief officials said today.
A Roman Catholic Bishop said in an interview here today that gangs of armed Serbian refugees had hunted down Croats in Muslim neighborhoods in the city, threatening to kill them if they did not leave immediately.


Children's Books
SAD UNDERWEAR AND OTHER COMPLICATIONS  More Poems for Children and Their Parents.
By Judith Viorst.
Illustrated by Richard Hull. 78 pp.
New York: Atheneum Books for Young Readers. $15. (Ages 7 and up)  SWEET CORN  Poems.
Written and illustrated by James Stevenson. 63 pp.
New York: Greenwillow Books. $15. (Ages 8 and up)


Dole Defending Middle Ground In G.O.P. Race
These days, almost as many roads lead to Bob Dole's office in the Capitol as to that Oval Office down the street.
Bosnia, Medicare, welfare overhaul, the budget, the ethical troubles of his colleague, Bob Packwood -- all of those subjects and many more traced paths through his shorthand conversations with aides on Thursday as he pressed the Senate toward its summer adjournment on Friday.
And without missing a beat, he simultaneously told a visitor about his other current preoccupation, the 1996 Presidential campaign.


Fast Food and High Rent Do In Diner
Twenty-eight years ago, Larry Pilatos converted two garages on 25th Street between Eighth and Ninth Avenues into G &amp; P luncheonette, and ever since he has served lunch to business people.
But times have changed.
Instead of spending a leisurely lunch in an old-fashioned diner, people tend to eat on the run -- grabbing something quick at a deli or having food delivered to their offices.


A Man and His Birds
It is only a slight exaggeration to say that Roger Tory Peterson taught Americans how to look at birds.
His book "A Field Guide to the Birds," first published in 1934, was "the single most revolutionary development in American birding," William Zinsser asserts in ROGER TORY PETERSON: The Art and Photography of the World's Foremost Birder (Rizzoli, $50).
At the time, bird guides were bulky and burdened with confusing detail.
Mr.
Peterson's pocket-sized work focused on the essential features by which a species could be swiftly and unerringly identified, even by neophytes.
His bold, precise drawings and paintings stressed coloration, the shapes of beaks, wing feathers and tails.
His prose was equally clear and succinct: he summed up the male goldfinch as "the only small yellow bird with black wings." Mr.
Peterson is quoted in this handsomely designed retrospective of his work -- which he edited himself along with Rudy Hoglund, the art director of Money magazine, with text by Mr.
Zinsser, a neighbor of Mr.
Peterson's and the author of "On Writing Well" -- as saying that his main purpose has been to instruct.
In a career that has stretched over 60 years and generated 19 books on birds and thousands of paintings and photographs, he has inspired and informed several generations of birders.
But as the scores of artworks gathered here demonstrate, Mr.
Peterson is above all a highly original and accomplished artist.
Indeed, some of his paintings, like the portraits of snowy owls and of a pair of peregrine falcons, rival Audubon's in their perfection of detail and use of color.
RICHARD E. NICHOLLS


Not All Sun and Surf


Tracy Korde, John M. Katz
Tracy Korde, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald L. Korde of Livingston, N.J., was married last evening to John Michael Katz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur T. Katz of Rockville Centre, L.I.
Cantor Norman Summers officiated at Headquarters Plaza, a hotel in Morristown, N.J.
Mrs.
Katz, 28, is the advertising coordinator at Bergdorf Goodman in New York.
She graduated from the University of Hartford.


All She Has, $150,000, Is Going to a University
Oseola McCarty spent a lifetime making other people look nice.
Day after day, for most of her 87 years, she took in bundles of dirty clothes and made them clean and neat for parties she never attended, weddings to which she was never invited, graduations she never saw.
She had quit school in the sixth grade to go to work, never married, never had children and never learned to drive because there was never any place in particular she wanted to go.
All she ever had was the work, which she saw as a blessing.
Too many other black people in rural Mississippi did not have even that.


For Some Teen-Agers, Cramming for the Future Starts Now
Summer has always offered teen-agers a chance to loaf around the house, frequent the beach and, if pressed, work for the minimum wage.
But these days, many choose to get a head start on a career.
With college admissions, internships and jobs becoming more selective each year, a growing number of teen-agers do not allow themselves a vacation.
Instead, they spend July and August studying or working -- not in brainless summer jobs, but in serious professions.
Rigorous academic programs and internships have become so popular that many have long waiting lists.


With Figs in Season, Resistance Is Low
THE other night I was looking at the dessert menu in an Italian restaurant when the waiter told me they had fresh figs.
I looked no further.
Of all the fruits that come into season in summer and fall, I can never resist figs.
The figs at the restaurant (I Trulli at 22 East 27th Street in Manhattan) were served very simply, cut open and arranged on a plate around a dollop of mascarpone with a little honey dribbled over them.
They were perfect.
Figs are also wonderful served with a sauce made from pureed raspberries, or halved on a tart shell, accompanied by homemade honey-vanilla ice cream.
I also loved them as a first course with prosciutto.


Neighbors Give 2 Cheers for Cut In Armory Plan
When the city announced plans two months ago to turn the empty armory on 14th Street into a job placement center for thousands of welfare recipients, neighborhood leaders were alarmed.
They quickly organized the Armory Action Association, an umbrella association of 44 local block and civic associations, to fight the move.
Last week the city responded, promising to operate the job program in the armory for just one year, starting in October.
While local leaders say they are somewhat relieved, they are still demanding a legally binding guarantee from Mayor Giuliani that the Human Resources Administration's workfare program would leave the armory by October 1996.


Harry Lipsig, Who Talked Juries Out of Millions, Is Dead at 93
Harry Lipsig, the New York lawyer who won millions of dollars in damage awards for clients who had been widowed, orphaned, crippled, maimed or merely inconvenienced through someone else's negligence, died Friday night at his home in Manhattan.
He was 93.
In a career that spanned six decades, Mr.
Lipsig became famous for his heart-wrenching courtroom depictions of the plight of accident victims and the huge jury awards his eloquence often elicited.


F.Y.I.
A Lightboat's New Life
Q.
For the last few years, I have seen a lovely old ship called the Frying Pan anchored in the middle of the Hudson River.
It comes and goes, but recently it looks as though it might be being renovated.
Can you tell me anything about the ship and why it's out in the channel?


The Big Plunge: A Swim Around The City
The 14th annual Manhattan Island Marathon Swim starts at 9 this morning at Battery Park City Gangway 5, with 18 individuals and 4 six-person relays.
Here is a former competitor's account of her route to the finish.
It's a secret that I carry around, pretty much without thinking.


BABY PIGEON SIGHTED!
John Tierney's chronicle of nesting pigeons is a fine example of Mother Nature saying "Gotcha!" ("Baby Pigeon Sighted! Urban Mystery Solved!" July 23).
It is easy to see, for this reader at least, that he is on his way to becoming an explorer of all the biotic world.


Conscience for All
To the Editor:
You quote Senator Robert C. Smith of New Hampshire (front page, Aug. 6) as supporting the "freedom of conscience" of the millions of Americans opposed to abortion who should not be forced to subsidize a procedure that is anathema to their moral code.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
UPPER EAST SIDE  In the Tom Waits Tradition, Holly Cole Stops In
Holly Cole comes from a family of musicians.
Her mother and father are classical musicians, her brother is a composer.
Ms.
Cole herself says she tried to keep away from the musical path.
It didn't work.


That pink hotel
When the Sultan of Brunei bought the legendary Beverly Hills Hotel in the late 1980's, it marked the first time the fabled pink hotel, an institution since its opening in 1912, had come under foreign ownership.
The hotel was closed in December 1992 for long-overdue renovations.
This June, after two and a half years and a $100 million renovation, the hotel reopened amid much fanfare over the return of the pink and green Polo Lounge, poolside cabanas once the province of starlets and dealmakers, even the banana-leaf wall paper.
While the decor has been lushly renovated with newly undulating walls and salmon-pink velvet divans dotting the lobby, the return of the hotel's celebrity quotient remains a question mark.


DEATH ON THE CNN CURVE
It was with tremendous sadness that I read about the fate of Robert O'Donnell, in Lisa Belkin's "Death on the CNN Curve" (July 23).
As a firefighter and emergency medical technician, I have the privilege to serve alongside men and women who perform acts of heroism and bravery every day.
Saving a human life is the greatest reward, and we must never lose sight of the fact that it is its own reward.


Caution in Russia
To the Editor:
Having returned recently to St.
Petersburg, I found Steven Erlanger to be right on the mark.
I would add a few pointers.


Jennifer Stonecliffe, Stephen Gorham
Jennifer Elaine Stonecliffe, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George A. Stonecliffe of Portland, Ore., was married yesterday to Stephen David Gorham, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David L. Gorham of Upper Saddle River, N.J.
The Rev.
Woodley White performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Portland.
Mrs.
Gorham, 23, is known as Jenna.
She is a sample control technician at Analytical Technologies, an environmental testing company in Durham, Ore.
She and her husband graduated from Principia College in Elsah, Ill.
Her father is the vice president of operations at General Tool and Supply Company, a family business in Portland of which her maternal grandfather, John Derville, is the chairman and at which her mother, Susan D. Stonecliffe, manages the computer catalog.


Latino Cultural Center Endangered Even Before Opening
"What the kids in this neighborhood need is to learn some respect and understanding of our culture," said Angel Correa, 37, who was standing across from a self-service laundry on East 105th Street where his clothes were being washed.
"I would like the new center to have counselors who can really sit down and help them understand."
Mr.
Correa was talking about the Julia de Burgos Latino Cultural Center, planned for 1680 Lexington Avenue, at 106th Street.
East Harlem residents envision a center where children work with professional artists, take part in plays and learn that Latino culture goes beyond the Puerto Rican flags spray-painted on abandoned buildings nearby.


Breaking Bread With Stars
THIS is the first time I've come to Los Angeles for the sole purpose of staking out the stars, and it changes everything.
Upon arrival at the airport, I'm easily talked out of my sensible, hard-top sedan and into something a bit more, well, Hollywood.
"Waste a beautiful day like this?" The rental agent asks the rhetorical question.
"Put the top down." (Did he really add, "Babe"?) I'm a bit surprised to find myself driving away in an iridescent eye-shadow blue convertible, but by the time I've passed Howard Hughes Parkway and entered George Burns Boulevard, it's beginning to feel just right.
Is that Sly Stallone or a lookalike who has drawn up next to me at a red light on Sunset Boulevard?
While I stare he adjusts hair and sunglasses in the rear-view mirror of his low slung, white Testarossa.
This is what I've come for.


A Quieter St. Mark's Basilica
Priests at St.
Mark's Basilica, Venice's most popular tourist attraction, recently devised a new set of regulations that will greatly reduce the number of people admitted at one time.
The rules were issued last month by church officials in response to the often disruptive presence of tour groups, who are thought by church authorities to be undermining the role of the basilica as a place of worship.
Only 20 visitors are now allowed into the church every minute while tour groups will be limited to 20 people and will be let in every five minutes.
Taking photographs will no longer be permitted, and tourists will be admitted to the church only if they are properly attired (no swim suits, shorts, bare feet or bare shoulders).
Silence will also be enforced; only tour guides will be allowed to speak out loud.
Finally, the tour to the basilica will follow a prescribed course, with the altar of the Madonna of Nicopeia off limits to visitors unless they intend to stop to pray.


Soul Matters
To the Editor:
Though Robert Wright does an impressive job of exposing the flaws in Paul M. Churchland's materialism, Emily Dickinson accomplished the same, but far more succinctly and with much more bite:


Idyllic Nature, Done With Ebullience, on Exhibit at Wave Hill
IN the Eden that is Wave Hill, here, flowers are usually confined to the beds and greenhouses at the far end of the estate.
At the moment, however, they are all over the Glyndor Gallery, too.
As rendered in oil and watercolor by Sandra Kaplan, lilac and hibiscus, canna and cleome, palm trees, cactuses -- cabbages, even, cascade through three rooms filling them with color.
Gardeners should be delighted and even the visitor who cannot tell a begonia from a hyacinth (if Wave Hill counts such an oddity among its constituents) may have a hard time resisting the sheer ebullience of the work.
Ms.
Kaplan came from Cincinnati to study at the Pratt Institute and the City University of New York then, in 1971, returned west, settling in Denver.
At about the same time, she switched from abstraction to representation, specializing, it seems, in cultivated plant life and sparsely inhabited landscape.
Not only do these subjects insure her success in the galleries of the West and Southwest, they also qualify her for attention at Wave Hill, where the emphasis is usually on nature tamed by man.


Anniversary Postmark Returned to Sender
THE way Goldie Solomon sees it, you cannot change history.
Still, in a small way, she almost did.
Mrs.
Solomon, the president of the Port Chester Historical Society, was only days away from rubber-stamping her view of the defining moment that marked the end of World War II -- a depiction of the atomic bomb blast -- on outgoing mail at the post office here.
The image was to have been used last Wednesday, on the 50th anniversary of the bombing of Nagasaki, Japan.
Instead, the United States Postal Service intervened, and letters were canceled with a different image.
In general, mail is canceled by a machine at the post office, which marks the envelope with the date and the place from which it was mailed.
But localities can request permission to cancel some mail by hand, using pictorial rubber stamps that are designed to honor particular events or occasions.
The historical society has created a series of hand cancellations that have been used to observe other historic events like the bicentennial of the United States Constitution, the 500th anniversary of the arrival of Columbus in America (another controversial milestone) and Port Chester's 125th birthday.


Disappointments Run Together for the U.S.
The men's 400-meter relay team from the United States has achieved only two results at the Olympics and world championships: a gold medal or disqualification.
The Americans have never been beaten by others, but several times they have beaten themselves.
On a day when Allen Johnson of Chapel Hill, N.C., won the 110-meter hurdles title with a personal-best of 13.0 seconds, the American 400-meter relay team was disqualified in the first round after a failed baton exchange, continuing a string of disappointing performances in the short sprints at the world track and field championships.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: THE RICHEST -- The Richest and Poorest Blocks in Queens; Where the City Looks More Like The Suburbs
Summer mornings are quiet in Douglas Manor, a hamlet of country living within New York City lines.
Crickets chorus, a lawn mower whines and, on this particular morning, a water truck rumbles along the winding narrow streets and stops outside 315 Arleigh Road.
The doorbell rouses the McEleavy family just after 9 A.M.


Q and A
French in the Islands
Q.
Do you know of any French-language schools in the Caribbean islands? -- L. M. B., Somerville, N.J.


S. L. Seligman, Marc A. Reimer
Suzanne Lynn Seligman, a daughter of Bonnie Konigsberg and a stepdaughter of Robert Konigsberg of Harrison, N.Y., was married last evening to Marc Andrew Reimer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Reimer of Marlboro, N.J.
Rabbi Henry M. Weiner officiated at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.
Mrs.
Reimer, 30, is the marketing communications manager for Cellular One of New York and New Jersey, a telephone service provider in Paramus, N.J.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y.
Her stepfather is a partner in Konigsberg, Wolf &amp; Company, an accounting firm in New York.
The bride is also a daughter of Stephen Seligman of Hallandale Beach, Fla.


Housing Sales Up, but Buyers Are Wary
PLAIN vanilla, meaning unremarkable, is how P. Gilbert Mercurio describes the second-quarter activity in the residential real-estate market in the county.
Mr.
Mercurio, executive vice president of the Westchester County Board of Realtors in White Plains, which recently released figures for housing sales April, May and June, noted though that although sales were down by 20 percent from the record-breaking year of 1994, they were comfortably ahead of 1993, another very good year.


Jennifer Merlis, William Houston
Jennifer Elisabeth Merlis, a daughter of Carole F. and Edward A. Merlis of McLean, Va., was married yesterday to William Erling Tenney Houston, a son of Marguerite L. and Dr.
William R. M. Houston of Mansfield, Ohio.
The Rev.
Richard Norman Jr. officiated at All Saints' Episcopal Church in Chevy Chase, Md.
The bride, 25, and the bridegroom, 26, graduated from Kenyon College.
In September, Mrs.
Houston is to begin teaching the third grade at St.
Francis Episcopal Day School in Potomac, Md., and Mr.
Houston is to begin teaching history at St.
Andrew's Episcopal Day School in Bethesda, Md.


A Memory Restored Fleetingly
LEAVE it to Lucille Lortel to give nostalgia a kick and restore a memory to real life.
It was 43 years ago to the day on Wednesday that the one-act opera, "The Stronger," composed by Hugo Weisgall and based on Strindberg's play, had its American premiere at the White Barn Theater, which Ms.
Lortel opened in Westport in 1947.
"The Stronger" was repeated the following night.


Ms. O'Malley And Mr. Wilhelm
Courtney Anne O'Malley, the daughter of Barbara B. and Robert E. O'Malley of Washington, was married there yesterday to Daniel Francis Wilhelm, the son of Dr.
Diane Zior Wilhelm of Pine Beach, N.J.
The Rev.
Jeffrey von Arx, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Victory Church.
Ms.
O'Malley, 30, is keeping her name.
She is the director of development and strategic planning at the Family Resource Coalition in Chicago, a nonprofit organization that assists day-care and other family-support programs nationwide.
She graduated cum laude from Wellesley College and received a master's degree in public administration from New York University.


MY GUY'S COMING HOME
To the Editor:
As one of the 1 in 4 New Yorkers (your figure) who recalls that wonderful night the Times Tower signaled the end of the war in the Pacific, I reveled in your article.
It really caught the mood and emotion of that fabulous best of times.
I'm remembering now with so much joy everything I felt then: the seemingly endless war was finally over and my guy was coming home.
In the middle of that August afternoon, a friend called me at Doubleday, where I was an editorial assistant.
"Something's going on," he said.
"Let's go over to Times Square." He picked me up, we latched onto some wine and off we went.


Soul Matters
To the Editor:
I dearly love the moments when science appears to catch up with poetry.
There was evidence of such a moment in Robert Wright's review of Paul M. Churchland's book "The Engine of Reason, the Seat of the Soul" (July 9).
Mr.
Churchland, in a selection chosen to represent the book, writes, "The human brain, with a volume of roughly a quart, encompasses a space of conceptual and cognitive possibilities that is larger, by one measure at least, than the entire astronomical universe." In 1862, Emily Dickinson made a similar observation and took on the difficult business of consciousness:


WNYC Fans Fear Programming Loss
Mariko Niesi regularly switches on WNYC-TV, Channel 31, for "World Network Supertime" -- two hours of news and features in Japanese with English subtitles -- because the show is a bridge to her native Japan.
Mrs.
Niesi, a Japanese-American homemaker from Tuckahoe in Westchester County, is worried, however, that the show and other Japanese programs may go off the air because of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's recent announcement that the city-owned station will be sold, to be recast into a 24-hour financial news and sports channel by its prospective buyers, the ITT Corporation and Dow Jones &amp; Company.
While the city says it will help the foreign-language programs find time on Crosswalks, its cable network, viewers like Mrs.
Niesi fear the pledge will be forgotten once the station is sold.


E-Mail Puts Officials In Reach
WHEN one Eastchester resident's vacation was ruined this summer by noisy buses idling outside her door, she E-mailed local government officials and gave them a piece of her mind.
Another resident questioned the legality of permit parking on a public road in the town, and he too took to his computer to complain.
One man only wanted an electronic copy of the proposed master plan of development, but he too addressed his concerns to: cavanauj@nyslgti.gen.ny.us like the others did.
All three notes landed on the desk of Town Supervisor James E. Cavanaugh, one of 73 municipal officials in New York State who now have E-mail addresses as part of a state-financed $2 million grant "to bring local governments into the modern age," said Anthony M. Pascarella, director of the Telecommunications Initiative Project.


Mantle Status Is Still Serious
Mickey Mantle remained in serious condition in Baylor University Medical Center today, those attending him said.
He was capable of getting out of bed and walking but only with support.
Doctors have suspended his chemotherapy for the cancer that has spread to his right lung, the area of his pancreas and his bowels.
They are giving him pain killers and intend to resume chemotherapy when he can handle it.


Aug. 6-12; Warning: Clinton May Stunt Tobacco's Growth
It was a move that the tobacco planters who helped found the Republic doubtless never imagined, but then again, those 18th century farmers probably could not forsee the day when cigarettes would be mass marketed with images of a cowboy and a camel either.
President Clinton's decision last week to accept the findings of the Food and Drug Administration that the nicotine in cigarettes is an addictive drug, subject to regulation, sparked a furor among the industry and its supporters in Congress, as did his proposal to bar vending machine sales and sharply limit tobacco advertising aimed at young people.


With Nod to the Dead, Woodstock Lives
High above the tents and campfires and drum circles, where several thousand music lovers were celebrating the 26th anniversary of the original Woodstock festival, a gray banner bearing the grinning-skull logo of the Grateful Dead glowed against the night sky, illuminated by a flashlight.
Its owner, Ronald De Graw, said he was letting the flashlight's battery run down, allowing the symbol of his favorite band to fade into the darkness.
It was something of a tribute to Jerry Garcia, the Grateful Dead's spiritual center and lead guitarist, who died last week.
But now, Mr.
De Graw said, "The mourning is over. It's time to party."


Ms. Thornton And Dr. Grieco
Christine Mary Thornton and Dr.
Michael Bajan Grieco were married yesterday in Manhasset, L.I.
Msgr.
George Deas performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Grieco, 44, was until recently a research assistant at the Hofstra University Law School in Hempstead, L.I.
She graduated from Marymount College and in May received a law degree from Hofstra.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Thornton of Manhasset.


4 Hurt at Empire State Building
Four people were injured yesterday when an elevator missed a stop between floors in the Empire State Building, fire officials said.
The occupants were trapped for nearly an hour inside the elevator after it struck an overhang above the 80th floor about 12:20 P.M., said Firefighter Michael Candelaria, a Fire Department spokesman.
Four people were taken to Bellevue Hospital Center, he said.


Whitney Shindler, Michael Roban
Whitney Alison Shindler, the daughter of Barbara and Lowell Shindler of North Hills, L.I., was married last evening to Michael David Roban, a son of Fran and Stanley Roban of Oceanside, L.I.
Rabbi Joseph Potasnik performed the ceremony at Oheka, the former Otto Kahn house in Cold Spring Hills, L.I.
Mrs.
Roban, 26, graduated from Tulane University and received a master's degree in psychology from New York University.
She is a candidate for a Ph.D. in clinical and school psychology at Hofstra University.


No Headline
"I wanted to share my wealth with the children. I never minded work, but I was always so busy, busy. Maybe I can make it so the children don't have to work like I did." -- OSCEOLA MCCARTY.  [ 1:2. ]


Boston Floats to Top On Wakefield's Arm
When the Yankees drag what is left of their division-title hopes into Fenway Park tomorrow, they will brace for the usual nooks and crannies the old ball park can present.
However, the Yankees will not have to brace for the newest wrinkle, and among the most puzzling, presented by the Red Sox this season.
They will miss Tim Wakefield, the born-again master of the knuckleball, by one day, a bit of good fortune needed by a team that has had too little of that commodity lately.


Politicians Cozy Up to Perot In Quest for Independent Vote
The weekend convention here of 3,000 members of Ross Perot's United We Stand America organization was supposed to be a fiery gathering of the politically disenchanted.
But by this evening just about every Congressional leader and Presidential candidate invited to speak, of whatever ideology, had managed to find a rhetorical way to cozy up and promise all to the conventioneers and their leader, Ross Perot.


POLITICS UNUSUAL: The Alien's Endorsement
The 1996 Presidential primaries are approaching, and while the candidates worry about CNN and influential newspapers, a lot of "real" Americans are getting their news in the checkout line, where the "Space Alien" wields the real influence.
In 1991, Weekly World News, a Florida-based supermarket tabloid, stuck the image of an alien into an existing photograph of President Bush.
Since then, the alien, in one composite photograph after another, has been seen with many American statesmen.
Selected headlines include: "Space Alien Meets With President Bush!" (1991), "Space Alien Meets With Ross Perot!" (1992), "Alien Backs Clinton!" (1992), "Alien Dumps Clinton and Goes Back to Perot!" (1993) and "Space Alien Meets With Newt Gingrich!" (1995).


Sanya Popovic, George Bogdanich
Sanya Popovic, a daughter of Dr.
Tatyana Popovic and Prof.
Nenad Popovic of New York, was married yesterday to George Vladimir Bogdanich, a son of Helen Bogdanich of Naples, Fla., and the late Walter Bogdanich.
The Rev.
Rudy Aguilla, a nondenominational minister, officiated at the Graceland Wedding Chapel in Las Vegas, Nev.
Ms.
Popovic, 32, is keeping her name.
She is a professor of political science at Barnard College in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Syracuse University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She also received a master's degree in political science from Columbia University, where she is a candidate for a Ph.D. in that subject.
Her father is professor emeritus of international political economy at Syracuse.
He was the minister plenipotentiary in the Yugoslav Ministry of Foreign Affairs from 1956 to 1961.
Her mother is the author of "Prince Marko: Hero of the South Slavs."


A QUESTION FOR: Trevor Weekes
Q: If pigs could fly, how would they do it?
A: This slow-cruising, low-flying, flapping machine with its perfect wing-to-weight ratio will accommodate the average pig.
After a quick catapulting from a cliff, the pig flies by moving its limbs in a forward-backward motion.
Leather straps carry wire cables to flappable wings.
Another unique feature is the fan tail attached to the pig's natural tail.
The control system allows the pig to turn quickly in high-wind gusts.
Cambered pig's-ear-shaped wings can increase speed when tipped at the correct angle.
And the optional leather face mask and goggles also increase cruising speed.


A Battle Hard Won
To the Editor:
Herbert Muschamp's eloquent ode to Broadway's senior theaters was deeply appreciated  [ "Broadway's Real Hits Are Its Antique Theaters," July 30 ] .
In fairness, however, it seems necessary to add that many of the stages would not remain, given the heated development fever of the 1980's, if not for the struggles, first, to preserve the Helen Hayes, Morosco and Bijou theaters, which were lost to the Marriot Marquis Hotel, and then, to landmark the remaining theaters, a battle waged by a large number of dedicated theater people and preservationists.


Rhonda Kinsler And Marc Tescher
Rhonda Starr Kinsler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Kinsler of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Marc Bradley Tescher, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward Tescher of Hollywood, Fla.
Rabbi Shimon Dudai performed the ceremony at Temple Beth Shmuel in Miami Beach.
Mrs.
Tescher, 28, graduated from the University of Arizona and received a master's degree in social work from Barry University.
Until recently she was a clinical social worker at St.
Francis Elementary School in Miami.
Her father is the executive vice president and the publisher of Playboy magazine.
Her mother, Nancy A. Kinsler, is a clinical social worker at the Bergen County Department of Human Services in Hackensack, N.J.


No Headline
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review@nytimes.com


Offensive Line: Mix, Match and Hope
The Giants will no doubt get through these tough times, but for the next several weeks the team will have some sleepness nights about their suddenly devastated offensive line.
And the offensive coaching staff will definitely be earning its money as it tries to deal with injuries.
The Giants lost two starting offensive linemen in their 14-13 preseason victory over New Orleans here Friday night.
Center Brian Williams severely sprained his right ankle.
The good news concerning him is that the team physician, Dr.
Russell Warren, believes Williams could be back in time for the Sept. 4 regular-season opener against Dallas.


An Airy and Sexy 'Two Gentlemen of Verona'
WITH its free-floating signature style, the Hudson Valley Shakespeare Festival takes to "The Two Gentlemen of Verona" as though it were the airiest and sexiest of comedies.
If only by default, a vague moral message emerges from a 1980's time frame that makes of Proteus a symbol for a decade of betrayal, promiscuity, egomania, greed and other excesses.
But Stephen Rockwell's direction is all about love's hold, love as enslaver, the numbing power of love, its sheer capriciousness.
All that is reinforced by lusty between-the-scenes encounters among servants and attendants (or postal carriers, maids and workmen, as here).
Besides a truly running-through line of amorous pursuits, the notion of love is the subject of hot discourse.
"Love is blind"/"Love hath 20 pairs of eyes." And so forth.
It all flimsily disguises a dark play that is really more about hurt than heart.


Power And the Folly, Frozen in Time
THEY HAD FACES THEN.
Calvin Coolidge's pickle lips.
Alfred E. Smith's guffaw.
Fiorello H. LaGuardia's smiling scowl.
Harry S. Truman's high-beam grin.
They are the public countenances of the mid-20th century, the time when advances in photographic reproduction and a journalistic access to politicians unthinkably intimate by modern standards combined to produce a priceless casual iconography.


Dole Reversal; A Welfare Revolution Hits Home, But Quietly
AS senators dicker over welfare policy, debating how much power to give the states, President Clinton has fostered what amounts to a quiet revolution.
His Administration has approved almost all the innovative welfare changes that states have devised.
Some impose work requirements and time limits, some require teen-age mothers to live at home and still others deny additional benefits to women who have more children while on welfare.
All seek to reduce the rolls and to nudge the poor from welfare to work.


Corrections
The Good Eating column last Sunday misstated the rating for the Chelsea Bistro and Bar, on West 23d Street.
It received two stars, not one, when it was reviewed on June 9, 1995.


Rachael Milder, Michael Kosch
Rachael Ida Milder, a daughter of Sheila Milder and Jay Milder, both of New York, was married yesterday in New Rochelle, N.Y., to Michael Fredrick Anthony Kosch, a son of Caroline Sanowski and Francis X. Kosch of Wyckoff, N.J.
Mayor Timothy C. Idoni of New Rochelle officiated at the home of Joshua Milder, the bride's brother.
Mrs.
Kosch, 35, is a choreographer who has a New York-based dance company, Wilder Milder Dances.
She also teaches creative dance at the Park East Day School in New York.
She graduated from Columbia College in Chicago and studied dance at the Martha Graham School of Contemporary Dance and the Joffrey Ballet School, both in New York.


Lost in the City But Found By a Camera
ARMED WITH A PANASONIC VIDEO CAMERA YOU might use to shoot your child's first pony ride, Michel Negroponte sets out to capture the New York we know, and the New York he would like us to meet.
Like a tourist exploring the city's soul, Mr.
Negroponte, a 41-year-old documentary maker, focuses his camcorder on New York subjects.
"Jupiter's Wife," his documentary about a homeless woman in Central Park that opens at the Quad Cinema in Manhattan on Friday, is just the beginning.
He is so fired up about the lightweight, cheaper-than-you-dare camera (a Panasonic AG-450, which cost about $1,500) that he talks about revolutionizing film making with it.


And the Ponies Go Up and Down


At This Church, the Choir's Got a Grammy
Some spoke in tongues.
Others jumped from their seats for spontaneous, frenzied dancing.
Then the pastor, the Rev.
Hezekiah Walker, took the podium, and the gospel choir behind him sang "I'm Glad to Be Alive." There were 250 people at the prayer meeting last week, and most of them were under the age of 30.
Many churches form choirs.
But in the case of the Love Fellowship Ministry, a Pentecostal church in a former tie factory, the choir formed the church.
It grew out of the Love Fellowship Crusade Choir, which Mr.
Walker, 33, started a decade ago with 12 singers.
As the choir grew in size and stature, its fans multiplied.
This year it won a Grammy Award, and last week it had two albums on Billboard's gospel chart.


Victoria Kohn, Antony Michels
Victoria Ann Kohn, a poet and freelance photography editor in New York, and Antony Michels, a reporter at Fortune magazine in New York, were married yesterday at St.
Maggie's Cafe in New York.
Judge Jody Adams of the New York State Family Court in Manhattan officiated.
The bride, 37, graduated from Hamilton College.
She is a daughter of Kathleen O'Keefe Kohn of New York and Gerald Kohn of Corralitos, Calif.
Her mother is the director of guidance at Grace Church School in New York.
The bride's father, who is retired, was a computer programmer at First Nationwide Bank in San Bruno, Calif.


A Chilling Analogy
To the Sports Editor:
As wrong as Robert Lipsyte was about suggesting that Cal Ripken voluntarily refuse to break Lou Gehrig's consecutive-game record, he is right in urging that we should refuse to support -- and, of course, support in this country always involves monetary calculations -- Mike Tyson's return to the ring ("Clench Fist, Say No to Watching Tyson," The Times, Aug. 6).


Prime Time At L.I. Camp For the Gifted
FOR many children, summer camp is a place to escape the relentless attempts of adults to mold and improve them.
At Hamptons Summer Music the idea is the reverse.
The idea is Toby Perlman's two-week program for gifted students of the violin, viola, cello and piano that began its first season yesterday in East Hampton.


The Lure of the Coffee Bar, the Smell of the Grounds
SARAH MEYER works in a coffee bar in Hartford.
Her boyfriend works in a coffee bar.
She says she has actually been to parties where every person there -- you guessed it -- works in a coffee bar.
Think that's unusual?
Consider the story of Johnboy.
A 24-year-old aspiring shoe designer with a shaved head and gun-metal grey granny glasses, he moved to New York from Chicago last year and took his first crowded, shared apartment in the East Village.


RESULTS PLUS
PRO BASKETBALL Wilkins Leaves Celtics for Greek Team
Dominique Wilkins has left the Boston Celtics to sign with a professional team in Greece.
Panathinaikos Athens said yesterday that it had signed the 6-foot-8-inch forward.


The Case That Brought Back Radical Chic
THE hard fact that criminal justice is grossly relative is never clearer than when a felon gifted with articulateness approaches the gallows, rallying celebrities to his side.
Tongue-tied peers -- 3,009 and growing at last count of America's burgeoning death rows -- can only wonder in silence, perchance grunting of their own innocence, but well ignored.
So it goes with the condemned among us lately as a throng from the arts, academic and entertainment worlds singles out the cause of Mumia Abu-Jamal, a finely expressive, dramatically dreadlocked, suddenly celebrated 41-year-old man on Pennsylvania's death row whose execution, scheduled for this week, has just been postponed amid an outcry for a new trial.


A Third Party
To the Editor:
In her article "Martha Clarke's Midlife Dream"  [ July 23 ]  Dinitia Smith wrote that Ms.
Clarke had collaborated with Linda Hunt on "A Metamorphosis in Miniature." Ms.
Smith neglected to mention that the play was an adaptation by me of Kafka's "Metamorphosis." JEFF WANSHEL  Larchmont, N.Y.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
UPPER EAST SIDE  In the Tom Waits Tradition, Holly Cole Stops In
Holly Cole comes from a family of musicians.
Her mother and father are classical musicians, her brother is a composer.
Ms.
Cole herself says she tried to keep away from the musical path.
It didn't work.


A Challenge To Credibility
Earlier this year, Louis J. Freeh, the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation went out on a limb and confidently asserted there had been no cover-up by bureau officials about what happened in a deadly standoff two years ago with a white separatist in Idaho.
Mr.
Freeh was so confident that he promoted Larry A. Potts, a longtime friend to be the bureau's second-ranking official, even though Mr.
Potts was the subject of cover-up charges by agents in the field.


Russia Is Shocked
To the Editor:
John Lloyd's celebration of "How Russia Became a Market Economy," by the Swedish economist Anders Aslund (July 23), brings us full circle on the "shock therapy" policy he helped design with Harvard's Jeffrey Sachs.


Kiersta Fricke, Mark Gostnell
ON ALMOST all long weekends and holidays, Jacqueline and Jeff Jones tell their friends and co-workers, "If you don't have anything to do, come on over to our place."
Their place is a blue and white cottage on a country lane in New City, N.Y., a half-hour's drive from Manhattan, in Rockland County.
Last November, about nine people showed up for Thanksgiving dinner, including Kiersta Fricke, 36, and Mark Gostnell, 45.


Cheryl Bildner And Fred Nemeth
Cheryl Bildner, a daughter of Deborah and William Bildner of Jericho, L.I., is to be married today to Fred Howard Nemeth, a son of Dorene and Alan Nemeth of Sudbury, Mass.
Rabbi Brooks R. Susman is to perform the ceremony at the Temple Israel of Lawrence, L.I.


Iraqi Defector Says He Will Work to Topple Hussein
A son-in-law and top aide of President Saddam Hussein of Iraq who defected to Jordan this week vowed today to work to topple the Government in which he played a major role for more than a decade.
The man, Lieut.
Gen.
Hussein Kamel, was a chief arms procurer and senior decision-maker for the Iraqi Government for more than a decade, during which time Iraq entered wars against Iran and Kuwait.
He defected to Jordan this week, along with his brother, who is another son-in-law, and their wives and families.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
A LOVER'S VISION
As one of Isadora Duncan's numerous lovers, Abraham Walkowitz may well have had a special interest in painting her.
The result, a large semi-representational figure with chalk-white skin, dressed in a fire-engine-red gown and set against a blue background, is "like nothing else he ever did," said Conchita Nardin, owner of Nardin Galleries in Somers, where 25 of Walkowitz's paintings can be seen through Sept. 6.
"He did figures, abstracts, landscapes, cityscapes -- they are all here, but the Isadora is an icon," she said.
"Some of the paintings are very beautiful impressionistic still lifes. There is a very long landscape with figures, from 1903 -- 24 inches by 72 inches -- and there are some pastels and watercolors."


Outdated Strategic Stockpiling
The Pentagon maintains a $6.5 billion stockpile of strategic materials used in military hardware.
With the end of the cold war and the greater availability of raw materials worldwide, it says it could make do with $24 million worth of just three items -- iridium, tantalum and quartz crystal.
Congress should seize this opportunity to raise more than $6 billion from the sale of surpluses.
But this year's defense authorization bill is likely to allow only limited sales, or none.


DEATH ON THE CNN CURVE
Belkin's sad story draws the wrong conclusion about the cause of O'Donnell's suicide.
Claiming that his fall from fame was the reason he did it is the equivalent of blaming divorce, job loss or any of life's myriad stresses for the thousands of suicide attempts each year.
Everyone's life is full of highs and lows, successes and failures, yet suicide is a rare response.
The media's attention, though it disrupts the lives of some heroes and victims, cannot be blamed for O'Donnell's death.
BARRY P. MARKOVITZ, M.D.
St.
Louis


Correction
An article on Aug. 6 about the movie "The Brothers McMullen" misstated the film's original format.
It was shot on 16-millimeter film, not videotape.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Doors Are Open At City College -- Till Midnight
"Open the doors to all," Townsend Harris, a founder of the City College of New York, said nearly 150 years ago.
But that tradition has been threatened of late by curbs on the school's open admissions policy, and by tuition increases that will bring the annual cost to $3,200 this year.
Many of City College's neighbors have criticized these changes.
Now some are protesting what they see as another move by the school to shut out their community -- new gates that are locked at midnight to restrict entry to some parts of campus.


Comeback Completed
She muscled her way through two runners to win a preliminary 800-meter race at the world track and field championships, and if that were not evidence enough of her determination, Ana Fidelia Quirot of Cuba removed her sunglasses in the interview tent.
"Look at me," she said, meaning that the fire that had crept up her chest and face and down her arms had not incinerated her spirit.
"My smile and my laughing eyes are the same as before," she said in Spanish through a translator, her hair in familiar braids, her piercing gaze leveled at a group of reporters.
"I am the same woman as before."


Heading for the Mall? Why Not Try Third Ave.?
FOR 15 years, Kraus Hardware at 66th Street and Third Avenue was a neighborhood fixture.
Then, last year, its lease ran out.
It had a choice: pay triple its annual rent of $30 a square foot, or get out.
It got out.
In its place came Bebe, a national clothing chain that last Thanksgiving opened its first non-mall store in the 3,000-square-foot space.


I AM THE GIRL IN THE PICTURE
To the Editor:
I have just received a copy of your article about the end of World War II ("New York 1945," July 30).
Above it is a photograph of a group of ecstatic people marching onto Times Square on that most eventful day in August that heralded the end of the war.


With Figs in Season, Resistance Is Low
THE other night I was looking at the dessert menu in an Italian restaurant when the waiter told me they had fresh figs.
I looked no further.
Of all the fruits that come into season in summer and fall, I can never resist figs.
The figs at the restaurant (I Trulli at 22 East 27th Street in Manhattan) were served very simply, cut open and arranged on a plate around a dollop of mascarpone with a little honey dribbled over them.
They were perfect.
Figs are also wonderful served with a sauce made from pureed raspberries, or halved on a tart shell, accompanied by homemade honey-vanilla ice cream.
I also loved them as a first course with prosciutto.


Neighbors Give 2 Cheers for Cut In Armory Plan
When the city announced plans two months ago to turn the empty armory on 14th Street into a job placement center for thousands of welfare recipients, neighborhood leaders were alarmed.
They quickly organized the Armory Action Association, an umbrella association of 44 local block and civic associations, to fight the move.
Last week the city responded, promising to operate the job program in the armory for just one year, starting in October.
While local leaders say they are somewhat relieved, they are still demanding a legally binding guarantee from Mayor Giuliani that the Human Resources Administration's workfare program would leave the armory by October 1996.


A-Bomb's Radiation Took Its Heaviest Toll Among Children
To the Editor:
"The Bomb: An Act That Haunts Japan and America" (front page, Aug. 6) misses an important point about the tragic medical effects of radiation.
Although the population of survivors may have been 4.9 times more likely to contract leukemia (an appallingly high multiple), children were more vulnerable than adults.


Fund Drive For Arts Center
THE Northern Westchester Center for the Arts has begun a fund-raising drive to offset a shortfall of $250,000.
The chairman of the organization's development committee, George Bianco, said the drive would include a phone-athon on Tuesday and Wednesday.
Mr.
Biano said it would be "a tragedy" for the community to lose the center, which offers programs in dance, music, theater and the visual arts.
He added that the organization had met all its enrollment and programming goals since moving into spacious new headquarters on Route 117 here last September, but that "unanticipated expenses" -- such as plumbing and heating costs -- had arisen in relation to the move.
The organization is still awaiting $95,000 from New York State.


U.S. Scrutinizes Air-Ticket Ads
THE Government has fly-specked the small type in travel advertisements and found that the consumer who flies is often getting incomplete information on prices.
In mid-July, the Department of Transportation sent a four-page letter to top executives of 100 domestic and foreign airlines and to heads of 46 major travel agencies, counseling them to tell readers clearly and consistently all the possible costs of buying an "air tour package," including such unanticipated items as hotel "energy" or "linen" charges, airport "passenger facility charges" and port charges on a cruise.


WHERE THE THRILLS OF OLD KEEP COMING ROUND
What a delight to have my summer again punctuated by dreams of Kennywood Park ("Where the Thrills of Old Keep Coming Round," by Peter Passell, July 23).
The passages of my life have all been engraved with Kennywood benchmarks: old enough to venture out of Kiddyland, old enough to ride the Racer, old enough to celebrate "Kennywood Day" without my parents in tow, old enough to discover that changing clothes for the dance was actually the most exciting event of the day, old enough to revisit Kennywood with a child of my own and, most recently, old enough to get a headache on the Thunderbolt.


Tainted-Propert Bottom Feeders
To the Editor:
Although I agree that deals are still broken as a result of environmental issues  [ "Fears of Future Liability Scuttle Many a Deal," July 2 ] , the days are gone in which bottom feeders could acquire environmentally tainted real estate at huge discounts because of the perceived risk of environmental liability.


Fast Food and High Rent Do In Diner
Twenty-eight years ago, Larry Pilatos converted two garages on 25th Street between Eighth and Ninth Avenues into G &amp; P luncheonette, and ever since he has served lunch to business people.
But times have changed.
Instead of spending a leisurely lunch in an old-fashioned diner, people tend to eat on the run -- grabbing something quick at a deli or having food delivered to their offices.


In Need of Running Backs, Patriots Pencil a Rookie Into the Starting Lineup
The Patriots let the veteran running backs Marion Butts and Leroy Thompson take a free-agent stroll.
They allowed Philadelphia to snap up fullback Kevin Turner, a restricted free agent.
The Eagles had to give New England a third-round pick in compensation for signing Turner.
With that pick, the Patriots selected running back Curtis Martin from Pittsburgh.
Now, Martin finds himself penciled in as the starting running back for the Patriots -- at least for the preseason.


Opening a New Vein in Soviet Vaults
SOON AFTER THE Collapse of the Soviet Union, functionaries of the Government-owned television, radio and record industries discovered an entrepreneurial streak.
They opened their archives to Western producers who had dreamed for decades of the artistic treasures those archives might have held.
The immediate result, as with other early Russian ventures in capitalism, was chaos.
When the state radio opened up its holdings for bids by foreign record labels, musicians whose work was being offered protested that they had been left out of the payment scheme.
And in at least one prominent case (that of the Melodiya label, now distributed in the United States by BMG Classics) "exclusive" rights were parceled off to several companies at once, and Western courts were left to sort through the conflicting contracts.


Andrew J. Thompson, Mei-Mei Tuan
Mei-Mei Tuan, the daughter of Gwynne and Pao-Hwa Tuan of New York, was married yesterday to Andrew Jay Thompson, a son of Susan S. Perkins of Hermosa, S.D., and Dr.
Richard H. Thompson Jr. of Denver.
The Rev.
Dr.
Laird Stuart performed the ceremony at Calvary Presbyterian Church in San Francisco.
Mrs.
Thompson, 28, is an associate in the project finance division of BA Securities in San Francisco.
She graduated cum laude from Wellesley College.
She and Mr.
Thompson received M.B.A.'s from Harvard University.
Her father is an architect in New York.
Her mother is the director of development at the Asian American Federation of New York.


Stagnating Wages As a Political Issue
Both Democrats and Republicans are making an economic issue of earnings that have not kept pace with price increases, holding down the living standards of Americans.


Stock Strategist: Long-Term Losers May Not Be Long Shots
IN the search for good stocks, many investors pick past winners, and it is easy to understand why.
Who wouldn't be impressed with a stock like Cisco Systems, which has doubled and more in the last year?
But to raise substantially your odds of choosing the next year's standouts, bet on long-term losers, said Mark Stumpp, chief investment officer for Prudential Diversified Investment Strategies.
Mr.
Stumpp, whose Short Hills, N.J., firm manages roughly $10 billion, reached that conclusion after studying the stock performance, from 1971 to 1994, of the nation's 2,000 stocks with the largest capitalizations.


Figs in Season, Resistance Is Low
THE other night I was looking at the dessert menu in an Italian restaurant when the waiter told me they had fresh figs.
I looked no further.
Of all the fruits that come into season in summer and fall, I can never resist figs.
The figs at the restaurant (I Trulli at 22 East 27th Street in Manhattan) were served very simply, cut open and arranged on a plate around a dollop of mascarpone with a little honey dribbled over them.
Perfect.


QUICK BITES/Jersey City; A Fragrant and Tangy Egyptian Fish Stew
When you get right down to it, there just aren't a lot of places that do a decent samak bil-salsah these days.
That's why Suez Canal Fish and Things is such a treasure.
Samak bil-salsah is, simply, fish in sauce, but Hassan Ibrahim's whole porgy baked in tomato sauce, Port Said-style, is anything but simple.
The recipe is from Mr.
Ibrahim's father, a fisherman in Egypt's main Mediterranean port, and the taste is a fortuitous midsea collision of cuisines: tomato, onion, garlic, parsley, dill and cumin with phantom notes of cinnamon, anise and eggplant.
The tangy, salty sauce plays delicately off the fish itself, the sweet flesh of which falls from the (plentiful) bones.
Not bad for $6.
Suez Canal Fish and Things, around the corner from the strip of Indian restaurants on Newark Avenue in Journal Square, is worth a visit for the atmosphere alone.
Just about the only sit-down restaurant serving Jersey City's 10,000-plus Egyptian community, it has the cozy feel of a neighborhood hangout.
Men spend the evening talking over glasses of hot sugared tea.
The room gives one the impression of being inside a giant aquarium.
An undersea scene is painted on the window, and the red neon crab and blue wavelets on the opposite wall bathe the place in faint purple.
Mr.
Ibrahim has unofficially dropped the "and Things" from the establishment's name (though the sign outside hasn't changed) because he no longer serves the Things -- kofta kebabs, lamb chops, chicken -- the better to concentrate on fish.
The house mainstay is pollack or porgy dipped in whole wheat flour, grilled over charcoal, dunked in salt water and served with limes.
Suez Canal Fish and Things, 117 Tonnelle Avenue, Jersey City. (201) 333-5305.
Open Monday, Tuesday, Thursday and Sunday from 1 P.M. to 1 A.M.
Open Friday and Saturday from 1 P.M. to 2 A.M.
Closed Wednesday.
ANDY NEWMAN


For Sale: Junk, Jewels and Mystery
Every August, the William Doyle Gallery auctions the contents of safe deposit boxes that have been abandoned owing rent at local banks.
The sale is tinged with enticing mystery, for Doyle offers the fragments of lost lives.
"It's a popular sale," said Peter Cleary, who has been running these auctions since 1985.
"It's kinky and everybody comes. You always find something new."
Take Lot 311 of the Aug. 2 sale.
It contained costume jewelry, a 1957 Island Park School medal (engraved with "N. Lesher,") a passport-size photograph of a young man in glasses and a horse's bridle ornament.
What was the tale behind those objects?
Did it involve a lost love, a dead son, or a shady racetrack deal?


The Tax Obsession
To the Editor:
In discussing the advantages of hedging a stock position ("4,700 and Coping With High Anxiety -- Strategies for Preserving Your Gains, Investing It, July 9), you didn't mention a common mistake of many investors: the assumption that holding a stock solely to avoid the related income tax is preferable to selling the stock and triggering the taxable gain.


Judith Kronenberg, Harvey Mars
Judith Ellen Kronenberg, the daughter of Martin and Arlene Kronenberg of Flushing, Queens, is to be married today to Harvey Steven Mars, the son of Robert and Charlotte Mars of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Judith Cohen Rosenberg is to officiate at the Swan Club in Roslyn, L.I.
The bride, 30, is the librarian at the Columbia University Center for Psychoanalytic Training and Research.
She graduated from Vassar College and received a master's degree in library science from the Pratt Institute.


Rescuing Main Street? No More Pay Phones
THE LANGUAGE of the ordinance banning phones from the streets of Boonton is clear: "Whereas the Boonton Police Department has advised the Mayor and the Board of Aldermen that public telephones are used in connection with the purchase and sale of controlled dangerous substances no person may place or maintain any pay telephone on or above any public street or sidewalk or other public right of way."
Thwarting drug dealers certainly makes sense to Stacy Beston, who lives without a phone in a public housing project.
But she has one question: "Where am I going to find a phone when I have an emergency?"


Voices From V-J Day
For those old enough to recall it, V-J Day is one of life's sweetest memories, a moment of sunshine whose warmth endures into old age.
The surrender of Japan and the end of World War II touched off a celebration in Times Square on Aug. 14, 1945, in which strangers hugged and kissed and danced in the street.
Today, Times Square will be closed to vehicles as New York City marks the 50th anniversary of V-J Day starting at 4 P.M.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani will welcome veterans, entertainers will perform, and 1940's music will be played.
People are invited to live V-J Day, or relive it.
Depending on one's age, it may seem like long ago, or only yesterday.
During the war, Nora Bender, now in her late 70's, was a hand model for Van Cleef &amp; Arpels on Fifth Avenue.
"I saw the parade. I remember Eisenhower turned the corner: He looked happy, thin and fit, and so strong then. People raised their hands and made the victory sign. Everyone talked to everyone else. No introductions were necessary. People said things like, 'Have you heard any more news?' 'What's really happening?' 'Why did we bomb Nagasaki?' "
"I saw Oppenheimer and his wife at a bus stop on Madison Avenue, and I wanted to ask him how he felt about the end of the war, about Nagasaki, but I was too shy. I can't understand Americans' confusion today as to why we dropped the bomb. We had suffered such tremendous losses in Europe and in the Pacific."
Edith Shain, 77, a part-time nurse at Doctor's Hospital, was immortalized in a famous kiss (above).
"When I was kissed, I closed my eyes. I didn't look at him. It was a startling thing. But I thought, this man had fought the war for all of us." After another kiss from a soldier, Ms.
Shain and a friend fled back down the subway.
"I was getting grabbed, she was getting grabbed. In those days we didn't do that sort of thing."
James Landes, 87, captain in the First Army of the Corps of Engineers, was at Halloran Hospital on Staten Island for a spinal injury.
"I heard about the Japanese surrender and the guys in the hospital were overjoyed. People shouted, 'We don't have to go!' " There was no celebration for us, just relief that the war wasn't going to begin again for us."
James Dematties, 69, a gunner in the Navy Special Forces, was awaiting reassignment at the Hudson River Pier 92, near 52d Street.
"We were about 500 guys. They gave us liberty and we went right into town, to Times Square. We really tore up the town. At that time, the Copacabana on 48th Street was free bees and honey. The management opened everything up for us. Drinks on the house. Most of the guys were throwing money around anyway. Money all over the bar, they were so happy it was over.
Angie Perisone, 66, set and tested clocks for bombs at Jaeger Watches on East 45th Street.
"It had been terrible before then; blackouts, air raids, news of people killed in action. We did all the flirting and kissing that could be done. We kissed every serviceman on Broadway. There were block parties that lasted almost a week in the neighborhood, and store owners donated food and soda. For the parade in my neighborhood, my sister was the Statue of Liberty. We had Betsy Ross with the American flag. I was supposed to be a Red Cross girl, but I didn't do it."


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $265,000
114 West 27th Street  1,600-sq.-ft. open-space co-op in a loft building: elevator, 2 baths, remodeled kitchen, steam shower, north exposure; maintenance $1,242, 70% tax-deductible, listed at $295,000, 42 weeks on market (Brokers: Wells &amp; Gay/Stibling; Douglas Elliman)  GREENWICH VILLAGE  $595,000
126 Waverly Place  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. postwar condo: 24-hr. doormen, dining area, fireplace, terrace, c/a, 2 exposures; common charge $962; taxes $6,000, listed at $615,000, 13 weeks on market (Brokers: Herbert H. Kliegerman; Douglas Elliman)  UPPER EAST SIDE  $370,000
103 East 84th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; maid's room, dining room, windowed kitchen; maintenance $1,486, 36% tax-deductible, listed at $399,000, 70 weeks on market (Broker: Halstead Property)  UPPER WEST SIDE  $585,000
329 West 108th Street  (Cloisters)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. co-op in a former seminary; part-time doorman, dining room, fireplace, balcony, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,458, 58% tax-deductible, listed at $600,000, 1 week on market (Broker: Klara Madlin)  BRONX
CASTLE HILL  $149,000
2439 St.
Raymond Avenue  2-family, 54-year-old detached brick house; 2 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; eat-in kitchens, 1 bath in each; semi-finished basement, common driveway, 3-car garage; taxes $1,438, listed at $169,000, 14 weeks on market (Broker: J.A.V.)  RIVERDALE  $360,000
3247 Johnson Avenue  3-family, 70-year-old detached brick house; 3 bedrooms in upper-floor units; 1 bedroom in other; eat-in kitchens in each; 2-car garage; taxes $2,729, listed at $399,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Trebach)  BROOKLYN
BOERUM HILL  $310,000
147 Bond Street  2-family, 3-story brick town house; 2 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room, den in primary duplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in simplex; 1 fireplace in each; taxes $1,200, listed at $319,000, 1 week on market (Broker: Cobble Heights Realty)  PARK SLOPE  $210,000
10 Eighth Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft co-op in a brownstone; spiral staircase to private roof deck, 14-ft. ceilings, Manhattan skyline view; maintenance $928, 62% tax-deductible, listed at $219,000, 3 weeks on market (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  PROSPECT HEIGHTS  $380,000
301 Sterling Place  2-family, 4-story brownstone and limestone house; 5 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room, laundry room, fireplace in primary triplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, den in simplex; 19- by 131-ft. lot; taxes $2,200, listed at $380,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Warren Lewis Realty)
QUEENS
FOREST HILLS GARDENS  $465,000
6 Middlemay Circle  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 78-year-old attached, 3-story Tudor; dining room, eat-in kitchen, solarium, fireplace, front and rear sun decks, 1-car garage; taxes $2,200, listed at $520,000, 15 weeks on market (Broker: Terrace)  STATEN ISLAND
MANOR HEIGHTS  $255,000
371 Gower Street  2-family, 18-year-old detached house; 4 bedrooms, 2 full and 1 half baths, dining room in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; 1-car garage; taxes $2,400, listed at $269,000, 13 weeks on market (Broker: Vitali-Sunshine)  TRAVIS  $120,000
4060 Victory Boulevard  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old detached cape cod; remodeled eat-in kitchen, front and rear porches, hardwood floors, 1-car garage, 43- by 185-ft. lot; taxes $1,300, listed at $129,900, 7 weeks on market (Broker: Linda Nasta Ltd.)  LONG ISLAND
MINEOLA  $165,000
26 Jerome Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 65-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, porch, 1-car detached garage; taxes $2,400, listed at $179,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Atanas)  OLD BROOKVILLE  $558,000
855 Cedar Swamp Road  7-bedroom, 5-bath, 300-year-old Colonial; eat-in kitchen, den, sun porch, 8 fireplaces, pool, 3-car garage; taxes $11,200, listed at $695,000, 24 weeks on market (Brokers: Douglas Elliman-Jane Hayes; Piping Rock Associates)  PORT JEFFERSON STATION  $119,500
57 Morton Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 22-year-old cape cod; eat-in kitchen, family room, patio, 1-car garage; taxes $3,900, listed at $123,500, 20 weeks on market (Broker: ERA Manzoni)  SYOSSET  $215,000
10 Texas Street  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 44-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, fireplace, pool, 1-car garage; taxes $4,000, listed at $239,000, 7 weeks on market (Brokers: ERA Gatewood; Mel J. Patto)  CONNECTICUT
BRANFORD  $675,000
30 Brookhills Road  6-bedroom, 5 1/2-bath, 54-year-old colonial; au pair wing, 3 fireplaces, heated pool, tennis courts, 3-car garage, 10.45 acres; taxes $7,077, listed at $795,000. (Broker: Beazley; Century 21)  DARIEN  $2.4 million
104 Delafield Island  5-bedroom, 5 1/2-bath, 31-year-old brick-and-shingle house; flagstone front steps, parquet floors, 2-car garage, 2.95 acres, 445-ft.
L.I.
Sound waterfront; taxes $21,064, listed at $2.7 million, 2 years, 3 months on market (Brokers: Prudential Connecticut; Coldwell Banker/Schlott)  GREENWICH  $520,000
89 Mallard Drive  4-bedroom, 4-bath, 36-year-old split-level; family room, c/a, playroom, 2-car garage; taxes $5,287, listed at $549,900, 21 weeks on market (Brokers: Coldwell Banker/Schlott; Smith Hekker)  WESTPORT  $2.575 million
56 Coleytown Road  5 bedroom, 5 full- and 2-half-bath, 100-year-old antique colonial attached to a 5-year-old house; 4 fireplaces, pool, barn with 4 stalls, 3-car garage, 4 acres; taxes $25,852, listed at $2.95 million, 20 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties; Riverside)  NEW JERSEY
CAPE MAY  $71,000
213 Judith Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 16-year-old ranch; eat-in-kitchen, deck, family room, Florida room; taxes $1,669, listed at $79,900, 26 weeks on market (Broker: DeMusz)  EMERSON  $280,000
35 Scott Court  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 25-year-old bi-level; 2-car garage, c/a, fireplace, deck; taxes $6,230, listed at $289,000, 6 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential Higgins)  MAHWAH  $150,000
69 West Airmount Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old colonial; fireplace, enclosed sun porch, walk-up attic; taxes $2,421, listed at $159,000, 17 weeks on market (Broker: Weichert)  OLD BRIDGE  $158,000
242 Community Circle  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 9-year-old ranch; underground sprinklers, eat-in-kitchen, dining room, 2-car garage; taxes $4,591, listed at $165,000, 15 weeks on market (Broker: The Prudential New Jersey)  WESTCHESTER
HARTSDALE  $160,000
82 South Washington Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 49-year-old cape cod; front porch, modern eat-in kitchen, powder room, flagstone patio; taxes $4,500, listed at $179,000, 26 weeks on market (Brokers: Century 21 Wolff)  MAMARONECK  $550,000
5 Briar Del Circle  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 37-year-old ranch; paneled den, 2 fireplaces,; taxes $16,514, listed at $649,000, 22 weeks on market (Brokers: Dudley D. Doernberg; Merritt Associates)  PELHAM MANOR  $445,000
901 Plymouth Street  7-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 83-year-old colonial; , 3 fireplaces, modern eat-in kitchen; taxes $12,754, listed at $475,000, 2 years, 31 weeks on market (Broker: C.S. McClellan &amp; Co.)
YONKERS  $418,400
24 Dellwood Circle  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 66-year-old Tudor; oak woodwork, leaded windows, stone fireplace, family room; taxes $7,462, listed at $445,000, 8 weeks on market (Brokers: Bronxville/Ley; Houlihan/Lawrence)


THE REAL STARLIGHT PARK
To the Editor:
I am writing to correct your impression, expressed in a chart accompanying the "New York 1945" article, that Starlight Park in the Bronx was a soccer field.


Not Quite on a Spree, but Getting Acquisitive Again
MUSEUMS HAVE BEEN Surprisingly active this year in expanding their holdings of decorative arts and design objects through gifts and purchases.
While no one is claiming a sharp upsurge in acquisitions, which have been depressed for nearly a decade, a slight but noticeable increase has been reported.
"Such gifts are going up again," said Ashton Hawkins, executive vice president and counsel to the trustees at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
"And the renewed tax deductibility did help." He was referring to a recent easing of tax rules for art donors.


A FAVORITE MAYOR
To the Editor:
The story enlightened me on the exploits of my other favorite mayor, Fiorello H. La Guardia, and I now know how the "capital of the world" became the "capital of the world." ANDY M. MASTRO  Manhattan The writer is chief of staff to Mayor Giuliani.


Retailing's New Strategy: I Can Get It for You Personal
THEY will open the store early for you.
They will come to your home or office bearing the new fall wardrobe you've purchased.
Some will inspect your closets at home, telling you what clothes to give away or to alter for the new season.
Or they might take your teen-age daughter in hand and, without a three-hour screaming session, get her into clothes you can look at and not blanch.
They would, if asked, even call your relatives and find out what they want for Christmas, wrap the gifts and mail them.
And you don't have to be a big spender or shop on a regular basis to get these services -- free.


Slowly, Survivors Sue Japan for War
It took Song Byung Wook five decades to muster the necessary mix of anger, determination and hope, but this summer he finally decided to sue the Japanese Government for the kidnapping and forced labor that tore him from his family in Korea and left him an alien in a hostile land.
Mr.
Song is not alone.
A growing number of Koreans, Chinese and even Americans are taking the Japanese Government to court for mistreatment during World War II.
In the past few weeks alone, dozens of people from six countries representing thousands of victims -- former sex slaves, forced laborers and even American and British prisoners of war -- have come to Tokyo to file suits in Japanese courts.


ALSO INSIDE
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 2
A New Yorker teaches the Japanese to navigate the big city.


Building Homes in the Bronx With No Subsidies
IN the Baychester section of the northern Bronx, not far from Cardinal Spellman High School, Leslie A. Lerner is starting to build two-family houses where another builder's project went aground in the early 90's.
He already has found a handful of buyers, most of them blacks of Jamaican or West Indian heritage.
He is building without the public funds that are usually used to make new houses affordable to buyers in the city.
Typically these buyers are ineligible if their household income exceeds $53,000 a year.
But Mr.
Lerner expects his buyers to have higher incomes than that, or at least to have savings sufficient to make a down payment large enough to reduce their mortgage requirement to an affordable level.


Robin Bowers and Wayne R. Manos
Robin Bowers, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack L. Bowers of Pauma Valley, Calif., was married there last evening to Wayne Robert Manos, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William G. Manos of Riverdale, the Bronx.
Dr.
Gerald Larue, a leader of the Ethical Culture Society, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
The bride is a production administrator for "Saturday Night Live" in New York.
She graduated from Colorado State University and received a master's degree in fine arts from Boston University.
Her father retired as the chief executive of Sanders Associates, a military contractor in Nashua, N.H.
From 1973 to 1976 he was an Assistant Secretary of the Navy.


Toni A. Richards, Peter M. Rowley
Toni Alexis Richards, the daughter of Dr.
Patricia A. Richards of Tarrytown, N.Y., and Dr.
Neil M. Richards of Elmont, N.Y., was married yesterday to Peter Matthew Rowley, a son of the Rev. and Mrs.
Louis E. Rowley of Mount Vernon, N.Y.
The bridegroom's father, who is the pastor of the First United Methodist Church in Mount Vernon, performed the ceremony in his church.
The bride, 23, is a medical student at the University of Pennsylvania.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father is an associate director of trauma surgeryat Mary Immaculate Hospital in Jamaica, Queens.
Her mother is a pediatric physiatrist at Blythedale Children's Hospital in Valhalla, N.Y.


How to Cut Truck Traffic: Improve the Rail System
To the Editor:
The July 23 article "Truckers Carve a New Route, Crowding a Two-Lane Road" provides a very clear example of how adding roads does not solve traffic problems.
Instead, it just moves the congestion around -- or worse, it encourages more highway use.
The real question, though, is why nothing has been done to improve rail access to New England -- the destination of much of the truck traffic.
Improved rail access would encourage the shipment of freight by rail instead of by truck.


Is Lawn Care Too Loud?
Should towns try to regulate the amount of noise from lawn mowers, leaf and snow blowers, edgers and other yard-care devices?
Silence of the Mower
It's not really necessary.
The newer mowers are indeed substantially quieter than those currently being used up.
I'm planning to buy a new one for the very reason that it appeared to be the quietest.
STEVE MARTINI Wanaque Lawn-Chore Laziness
This ploy was originally dreamed up in Morris Plains several decades ago by creatively lazy youth to avoid doing lawn chores.
It did not work then, but a revisit in this politically correct, litigious era is sublime and ironic.
GEORGE VORSHEIM JR.
Albany Car Stereos Are Worse
Way waste tax dollars worrying about lawn mowers?
Let us be more concerned with the cars and trucks that are heard from a half- mile away.
The drivers of these vehicles are a danger to other drivers and are taking our right to a quiet neighborhood as they BOOM BOOM BOOM their way past.
Their car stereo systems prevent the driver from hearing anything but their music.
LARRY LAMOURINE Gloucester Township Noise Pollution
Yes, town adminstrators have a clear duty to regulate the noise that assaults their citizens.
Loud noise is a health hazard and is probably the most widespread environmental pollutant in American life.
TRUDY DRUCKER River Vale Who Will Pay?
And just who is going to pay for all of this?
Another hundred dollars a mower for the noise-suppression equipment?I personally have never mowed after 11 P.M.
JIM WYNKOOP Sicklerville Self-Regulation
I have lived in many areas of the state, and for the most part my neighbors have always been considerate of others when it comes to lawns and noise in general.
I feel that in this matter most neighborhoods are self-regulating.
MICHAEL BERNER Howell Township Using Common Sense
Be happy people are maintaining their lawns.
We only mow after 10 A.M. and never in the evening.
Most people have common sense about when to make unnecessary noise doing outdoor work.
KAREN MARINO Cedar Grove It's Not So Bad
In a time when people are living with the noise from deadly gunshots, I think we can live with a bit of grass-grooming noise!
SHERALYN ROBERTSON Elizabeth


Melissa K. Rose, M. T. McClammy
Melissa Kaye Rose, a daughter of Gail and Elihu Rose of Port Washington, L.I., was married last evening at the Crest Hollow Country Club in Woodbury, L.I., to Michael Thomas McClammy, a son of Elaine and William McClammy of Burlington, N.J.
Rabbi Eugene Lipsey officiated, and the Rev.
William James, a United Methodist minister, participated in the ceremony.


Rich Tract, Poor Tract


Stray Bullet Hits a Girl, 3, Walking Home in the Bronx
A 3-year-old girl who was walking home with her mother early yesterday in the Bronx was shot in the back and seriously injured by a teen-ager who was aiming at a man he had argued with earlier in the evening, the police said.
The girl, Aungahne Williamson, who was listed in critical but stable condition last night at Lincoln Hospital, had been taken by her mother, Nicole Woods, to sleep over with Ms.
Woods's sister-in-law in the Mott Haven section.


In Flux, Berlin Remaps, Reminds
PIERRE BOULEZ IS ON THE Radio, elucidating the original piano version of his "Notations." A concert of Japanese compositions commemorating Hiroshima takes place behind a door plastered with flyers for antifascist hard-core rock bands and improvisations involving sheet metal.
An eclectic cafe offers Soviet chamber music one night, Swiss jazz the next.
From a hundred windows comes the neutral throb of techno, whose ambient strings and blistering bass are a kind of incidental music to the city as a whole.
The city is, of course, Berlin; it could hardly be any other.
Against a majestically ugly backdrop of urban disintegration and reconstruction, musical Berlin reels through new sounds and untried combinations.
It resembles New York more than any other city in the West.
But while even the most self-consciously daring of New York's downtown musical centers are institutions of long standing, Berlin, a city in total flux, remaps itself from hour to hour.
There is a feeling, vague but strong, that something extraordinary is about to happen.


Fore!
Urban golfers take to the streets in clothes designed to put an end to golf's longstanding (and long-deserved) distinction as the world's worst-dressed sport.


Aug. 6-12: A Mystery Leg; Indictment in Oklahoma: A Not-So-Wide Conspiracy
After all the months of manhunt, the hundreds of F.B.I. agents, the unearthing of an American netherworld of rifle-toting militiamen, a grand jury of 22 workaday Oklahomans brought in their indictment last week.
The bombing of the Federal building in Oklahoma City on April 19 was tied not to a wide conspiracy, as first suspected, but pinned primarily on just the two ex-soldiers arrested in the first few days: Timothy J. McVeigh and Terry L. Nichols.


The Bulb, Seed and Weed Patrol
Onions are ripe when their leaves wilt and flop to the ground.
Energy from the leaves has been stored in the bulbs, which almost push out of the ground when ready to be pulled.
Let them dry in the sun for a week, then brush off the soil, braid the stems and hang in a cool, dry place that won't freeze in winter.
Keep an eye on favorite plants along roads, in fields and friends' gardens, and collect seeds when ripe.
Hollyhocks, poppies, butterfly weed, lupine, columbine and others are full of free seeds.


The Voice to Stan Mack: 'It's Been Real, but . . .'
For two decades, Stan Mack has eavesdropped on New York, gleaning bits of conversation to fill his weekly cartoon in The Village Voice.
"Stan Mack's Real Life Funnies" exposed the ironic and comic life of the city, revealed through the words of its residents: politicians, prostitutes, advertising executives, anarchists, anyone in between.
But last month, The Voice's new editor in chief, Karen Durbin, killed Mr.
Mack's strip.
Ms.
Durbin was not commenting on the matter, but The Voice's managing editor, Doug Simmons, said her decision was "a matter of personal taste."


Sheila Tuller, Mitchell Keiter
Sheila Anne Tuller, the daughter of Lana and Ronald Tuller of North Hollywood, Calif., is to be married today to Mitchell Keiter, the son of Lenore Schultz of New York and Albert Keiter of Boca Raton, Fla.
Rabbi Daniel Bouskila is to perform the ceremony at the Sportsmen's Lodge in Studio City, Calif.


Something New for America's Attic: An Old Machine With a Neat Pedigree
As soon as Lewis Neuman saw it, he fell in love.
It was solid and beautifully proportioned, not too tall, not too wide: an air compressor built more than 75 years ago to power industrial equipment.
To Mr.
Neuman, a mechanical engineer, it was a work of art.
Through serendipity, the object belonged to him.
Two and a half years ago, Mr.
Neuman bought several empty buildings in Garfield and moved his zipper-manufacturing business there after the rent tripled at his Manhattan offices.


Jewish Heritage Tour In Eastern Europe
Isram World of Travel, (800) 223-7460, has added a new Jewish Heritage tour to its catalog of trips exploring Jewish history and culture in Europe.
The new tour of Russia and the Baltics includes visits to Moscow and St.
Petersburg in Russia, and the capitals of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.
The remnants of once-thriving Jewish communities left after the Holocaust can be found in old neighborhoods, synagogues and cemeteries.
Visits to Holocaust memorials and meetings with local Jewish communities in each city are included in the trip.
The tour also offers explorations of the art collections of St.
Petersburg's Hermitage, the Kremlin in Moscow and the newly independent Baltic republics.


MOVIES THIS WEEK
AN edge of suspense marks some choice films on television this week.
Even with its limp title, AFTER THE THIN MAN (1936) rang the whodunit bell again for all concerned -- William Powell and Myrna Loy (and Asta), the screenwriters Frances Goodrich and Albert Hackett, and the director W. S. Van Dyke.
Murder (and martinis) in San Francisco involve James Stewart, Elissa Landi, Joseph Calleia and Jessie Ralph.
You'll never guess the culprit -- Saturday at 9 P.M. on Channel 13.
At the center of George Seaton's COUNTERFEIT TRAITOR (1962) is a memorable performance by Lilli Palmer, as a dedicated Danish patriot and anti-Nazi spy who falls in love with her British collaborator (William Holden).
It is a provocative espionage drama for thinking adults, with a European backdrop and a large, solid cast -- Sunday at noon on Cinemax.


Aug. 6-12: Ground Zero; Clinton Endorses A Ban on A-Bomb Tests -- And That Means None
President Clinton took a big step last week to end a deadlock in talks to create a treaty to prohibit nuclear tests worldwide.
Fifty years after the United States dropped the first nuclear bomb, he became the first President to call for a ban on all atomic tests, including the small-scale tests that his and previous Administrations had favored even as they called for a comprehensive test ban.
Mr.
Clinton rejected the Pentagon's call for a treaty that would allow tests equivalent to 500 tons of TNT to assure the reliability of the nation's nuclear arsenal.
To reassure the generals, however, Mr.
Clinton said he would be willing to seek a clause allowing the President to invoke America's national interests and carry out tests if he were convinced that the arsenal had become unreliable.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


3-Masted Visitor From Argentina
THE Libertad, a three-masted tall ship docked on the Hudson River at West 46th Street, looks as if it was built in some distant age.
In fact, it was christened in 1963, as a training frigate for the Argentine Navy.
Until Tuesday, it will be docked next to the Intrepid Sea Air Space Museum and open for tours.


A Woman Reports for Duty As a Cadet at The Citadel
Shannon Faulkner passed through the stone gates of The Citadel and into history yesterday as she prepared to become the first woman sworn in to the corps of cadets at the 152-year-old South Carolina military college, one of the South's most tradition-bound institutions.
Escorted by Federal marshals, although not as obtrusively as the black students who first integrated state universities in the South more than 30 years ago, Ms.
Faulkner arrived in Charleston for the orientation that precedes Monday's official matriculation of this year's cadet class.


Camp Necessities: Air-Conditioning and Bed Check
The Florham Park-Madison campus of Fairleigh Dickinson University is a hidden jewel, with lush gardens and grounds laid out in the 1890's by the Central Park designer Frederick Law Olmsted and his son for the estate being built by Florence Vanderbilt and her husband, Hamilton Twombly.
They called their home Florham, a combination of the first syllables of their first names.
In 1958, Fairleigh Dickinson, under its president Peter Sammartino, paid $1.5 million for the 178-acre property.


Cynthia Kontulis, Daniel Gacetta Jr.
Cynthia Helen Kontulis, a daughter of Marilyn and Phedon Kontulis of Locust Valley, L.I., was married yesterday to Daniel John Gacetta Jr., the son of Mr.
Gacetta Sr. of Cape Elizabeth, Me., and the late Priscilla Gacetta.
The Rev.
Leslie Hughes officiated at Christ Episcopal Church in Manhasset, L.I.
Mrs.
Gacetta, 28, graduated from Colby College and received a master's degree in learning disabilities from Columbia University.
In September she is to become a learning specialist at the Packer Collegiate Institute, the private school in Brooklyn Heights.
Her father is the manager of the syndicate department of Baird, Patrick &amp; Company, an investment firm in New York.


More Couples Are Taking No Chance on Love
BRENDA SEXTON, an executive at a large Chicago company, and her fiance, a prominent businessman there, recently postponed their wedding, perhaps indefinitely.
There were lots of reasons -- but, Ms.
Sexton insists, his insistence on a prenuptial agreement that would protect his business as well as his other assets, was not one of them.
"In upper business circles, such prenuptial agreements are pretty standard now," she said.


THE SHELL GAME
There is something so "Gone With the Wind" about shelling beans, an activity best done in a rocking chair, on a shaded veranda, listening to gossip.
It is also an occupation that reminds me a little of birthin' babies.
Split open a fresh pod, and you're confronted with a row of perfectly formed incipient lives.
At first, the cook is overwhelmed by the responsibility, then awed by the possibilities.
Because lima beans freeze so well, more than 100 million pounds of them are frozen each year.
This is all very nice for the frozen food business, but it has deprived most Americans of the sweet buttery taste of the real thing.


Finding Every Noise in the Bronx but the Sound of Silence
Some Bronx streets are canyons of noise: salsa booms, car horns honk, ice cream trucks tinkle, boom boxes blast, all of it accented by sirens, shouts, yells and barks.
Within, the sounds from outside are refracted by millions of feet, scraping furniture legs and slamming doors.
Into these canyons walks a soft-spoken man with a sense of mission, a ready fund of adjectives and a fledgling organization whose name evokes windmill-tilting: the Bronx Campaign for Peace and Quiet.


Astros Snap Mets' Winning Streak
The bats that roared during the Mets' six-game winning streak must have decided to take the night off tonight.
Instead of clutch hits and decisive runs, the Mets spent this night walking from batter's box to dugout, baffled by the Astros left-hander Mike Hampton, who gave Houston a victory it sorely needed to stay in post-season contention.
Hampton allowed the Mets just one run and four hits in seven innings of work before letting his bullpen do the rest as the Astros snapped a six-game losing streak with a 3-1 victory at the Astrodome.
It was the Mets' first loss in seven games, an almost ho-hum affair that lacked any real drama.


A Plan to Buy Cheaper Electricity
Much has already been written about the advantages of a public buyout of Lilco  [ "Counties Lobbied in Takeover of Lilco," July 23 ] .
After all, says the current dogma, a public buyout of Lilco would yield significant savings in monies spent on dividends and interest payments.
This, however, would be a huge mistake for Long Island.
This would allow management and the stock and bondholders to escape the responsibility for the gross mismanagement of the Shoreham fiasco.
Also it would still result long-term in high electricity rates for Long Island.
I would suggest a smarter course of action.
Let a new Long Island power authority buy at current market value just the Lilco network of transmission lines.
Lilco would remain a gas-delivery and power-generation company.
The new authority could then buy power from the "grid" at the current free-market prices.
If Lilco can produce energy at low cost, the power authority will gladly buy from them.
The monies recovered by Lilco for selling their power lines would be used to pay off the bondholders.


Sometimes It Pays to Take a Breath
WHO could be happier right now than the owner of a technology fund?
These funds have gained nearly 40 percent on average so far this year.
Though technology and other sector funds often sound promising, investors rarely seem to jump into the right ones at the right time, new research shows.
Sector funds buy a variety of stocks in a narrow market area, like computers, health care or precious metals.
Their supporters note that while the broad market always fluctuates, certain industries will outperform the market at any given time.


Whose Apology?
To the Sports Editor:
Why should Mike Tyson apologize?
Hasn't he been shamed and punished enough -- first by a scheming girl and second by an incompetent attorney whose wimpy defense landed Tyson in jail?
He has served his time like a man and matured in the process.


Conversations/Ellen T.M. Laan; Science Is Finding Out What Women Really Want
WE'VE had J's sensuous woman, Nancy Friday's secret garden, Mars and Venus in the bedroom, Kinsey and every issue of Cosmo, yet the old Freudian query persists: What do women really want?
Or, more bluntly, what turns them on?
Ellen T.M.
Laan, a psychologist at the University of Amsterdam, is doing the sort of work that few American scientists, in these starchy times, are given the financial support to pursue.
She is studying the fundamental elements of female sexuality, taking both a psychological and physiological approach.
In one recent study, she found that there is a sharp divergence between a woman's physiological and subjective assessment of sexual arousal -- that is, between whether a woman says she is sexually stimulated, and how her body is actually responding.


Irish Society's Hidden Treasure: Books
Thousands of books are stored in the American Irish Historical Society's town house at 991 Fifth Avenue, at 80th Street.
Some are current and popular, like histories of the Kennedy political clan.
Others are old and obscure, like reprinted texts dating to 1171 that mention payments made in wool and hides.
But precisely how many books are on the shelves -- and how many should be there and may be missing -- no one really knows.
Rosa Meehan, who became the society's director this year, estimates that 10,000 volumes are there, about half of which are catalogued.
Past estimates have ranged upward to more than 50,000.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Els Gives The P.G.A. His Special Treatment
Ernie Els has this routine he goes through when he really wants to launch his tee ball.
He widens his stance and slows his swing and gives the ball what he likes to call "the treatment."
The treatment.
That's what Els is giving the P.G.A.
Championship.
That's what he's giving the field, which was the strongest in the history of golf when the week began.
That's what he's giving Riviera Country Club, and it's a treat just to be able to watch.


The Fare to Texas And Other Mysteries
STEP right up, folks, and test yourself against the Air Fare Dart Board.
It's a game of skill, a game of chance, and best of all, you're never sure if you've won or lost.
Thanks to another fare skirmish last week, we've got an invigorating mix of prices and routes on the board.


Pompeii, Perilously Popular
AT the outset of the 30 pages in compact print that my 1930 "Baedeker's Southern Italy and Sicily" devotes to Pompeii, the guidebook sniffs, "Crowds of tourists, usually arriving towards noon, allow themselves to be hurried through by a guide in 2 hours, but a less superficial inspection requires at least 5-6 hours, and, if possible, the traveler should contrive to visit Pompeii more than once."
The "crowds" of 1930 have become mobs, and the crush of sightseers now starts before the 9 A.M. opening of the gates of the walled excavation complex, 15 miles southeast of Naples and 6 miles from the crater of Vesuvius.
Most of today's visitors, especially those arriving in tour groups, seem to be doing Pompeii in 45 minutes.
The day's itinerary may also include Capri or the scenic and tortuous Amalfi Drive.


Somewhere Between Disney World and a Club Med
HOW do you remove a deer from a hotel lobby?
Very carefully, decided Joan Wyatt-Filer of the Fire Island Hotel and Resort in Ocean Bay Park.
"We said, 'Shoo!' " she recalled, "and we got him out, but not before he wet the rug."
Since Ms.
Wyatt-Filer and her husband, Ric Filer, took over the managerial duties of the hotel a year and a half ago, they have made contact with a variety of wildlife, both the four- and two-legged versions.


HARDWARE: No Pain, No CD-ROM
Computer folks seem finally to have recognized how tough it is to install new equipment.
Pinnacle Micro, an Irvine, Calif., manufacturer of optical disk drives, has included a CD-ROM of 100 inspirational videos with its new RCD-1000 recordable CD drive.
The drive, meant for businesses or independent producers, lets you record your own CD-ROM disks.
The videos, presumably, are to boost spirits.
One, of a snowboarder, ends with the words of Ralph Waldo Emerson: "No one can cheat you out of ultimate success but yourselves." Another, of a one-legged skier, has this message: "A man is not finished when he's defeated; he's finished when he quits." Of course, that comes from Richard Nixon, who did quit.


Worker's Complaint Forced Plant Closings
A Federal investigation that led to the temporary closing in late July of two factories in western New York was prompted in part by an outside inspector who complained that MRC Bearings was making aircraft parts for both civil and military engines with a failure rate of more than 25 percent.
The circumstances that led to the shutdown of the two factories in Jamestown and Falconer, south of Buffalo, which have since returned to full production, are contained in an internal Federal Aviation Administration document obtained by The New York Times.
It represents a new and partial explanation of why Federal agents seized thousands of documents, which they are still studying.


In Japan, The Future As Prologue
"The Goddess of Love is smiling on you. If a particular man catches your fancy, tell your friends. You'll soon receive an invitation to go out to sea with him. If you already have a boyfriend, beware of acting like a princess, but if he is older than you, don't worry. Lucky techniques for the week: Stroll barefoot along a beach casually carrying your sandals in your hand. Or stop to admire the sunflowers around noon."
If you are a young Japanese woman reading Non-No, one of the most widely read women's magazines in Japan, and if you come under the sign of Leo, that is your horoscope for the coming week.
Many young Japanese women routinely turn to the horoscopes that women's magazines print regularly.
And that represents just a sliver of the fortunetelling, astrology and other forms of divination routinely embraced by Japanese of all ages.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Simple Rules for a Simple Island
To the Editor:
So salubrious is Robinson Crusoe's island that Crusoe can live entirely off the abundant coconuts.
But the generous yield requires annual difficult labor, so the arrival of Friday is welcome: he is enslaved and put to work, and Crusoe lolls and gets all the coconuts except those few required for Friday's subsistence and a bit of motivation.


Munis Instead of Treasuries? It Depends
BRUISED and battered by Orange County, the possibility of a flat tax and other setbacks, investors in municipal bonds deserve some good news.
And here it is: over the last 25 years, those with high incomes have done far better than they might have supposed if they invested in municipal bonds instead of Treasury bonds.
But the bad news about the good news is what one might expect.
The municipals' advantage applies only to high earners, and not even to all of them.
The lesson: because many sources of investment information -- mutual-fund ads, for example -- use pretax returns, only by crunching their own after-tax numbers can people gauge investments' relative attractiveness.


Figs in Season, Resistance Is Low
THE other night I was looking at the dessert menu in an Italian restaurant when the waiter told me they had fresh figs.
I looked no further.
Of all the fruits that come into season in summer and fall, I can never resist figs.
The figs at the restaurant (I Trulli at 22 East 27th Street in Manhattan) were served very simply, cut open and arranged on a plate around a dollop of mascarpone with a little honey dribbled over them.
They were perfect.


How to Lose Friends and Alienate People
A LIFETIME OF RICHES  The Biography of Napoleon Hill.
By Michael J. Ritt Jr. and Kirk Landers.
Illustrated. 241 pp.
New York: Dutton. $24.95.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: THE RICHEST -- The Richest and Poorest Blocks in Queens; Where the City Looks More Like The Suburbs
Summer mornings are quiet in Douglas Manor, a hamlet of country living within New York City lines.
Crickets chorus, a lawn mower whines and, on this particular morning, a water truck rumbles along the winding narrow streets and stops outside 315 Arleigh Road.
The doorbell rouses the McEleavy family just after 9 A.M.


hHED,25p,22,1Library's Goals: Beyond Books
Martin J. Gomez credits a high school librarian he remembers only as Mrs.
Moore with persuading him that libraries were in his future.
Last week, Mr.
Gomez, the director of the public library system in Oakland, Calif., was named to head the Brooklyn Public Library.
In an interview he outlined three priorities: to add extensively to the Brooklyn Library's computer capabilities, to better serve the borough's growing immigrant population and to create new programs to help its 58 branch libraries become more vibrant community centers.


Amy Strassler, M. S. Goldstein
Amy Jill Strassler, the daughter of Cynthia Strassler of Philadelphia and the late Victor Strassler, was married last evening to Matthew Scott Goldstein, a son of Ronne and Leonard Goldstein of Fort Washington, Pa.
Rabbi Cynthia Kravitz performed the ceremony at the Rittenhouse Hotel in Philadelphia.
The couple graduated from George Washington University, she summa cum laude and he cum laude.
Mrs.
Goldstein, 29, received a master's degree in teaching from the New School for Social Research and an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Next month, she is to begin teaching social studies at the High School for Leadership and Public Service in New York.


42-1 Shot Pretty Discreet Not Subtle in Winning Alabama
Maybe it was the sloppy track.
Maybe it was the way Mike Smith cut across the field from outside to inside and seized a lead he never yielded.
Or maybe it was the magic of demons past, who have made Saratoga Race Course legendary as the house of upsets.
Whatever it was, a 3-year-old filly named Pretty Discreet scored one of the dramatic upsets on a track where Man O' War, Gallant Fox, Secretariat and Affirmed all were outrun in their time.
She hadn't won in a year, she went to the post at odds of 42-1, she started from the No. 9 gate on the far outside and she faced the mud and the wizardry of the star of the show, Golden Bri, a filly who defeated mighty Serena's Song just five weeks ago.


Inquiry Unit Is Dismantled In Los Angeles
Seventeen years after Los Angeles County formed the country's first division of prosecutors to investigate every shooting by a police officer or death of a suspect in custody, budget cuts have placed that responsibility back in the hands of the police themselves.
Last week, District Attorney Gil Garcetti, who originally formed the unit, announced its end, meaning that after Sept. 1, no one from his office will investigate whether an officer acted properly in pulling the trigger.
Since there is no civilian review board, the only inquiry into a shooting by an officer would come from the police department's internal affairs division.


From the Sea, With a Splash of Italian
LITTLE by little, the Connecticut shoreline is opening up to restaurants, one of the newest being Sunset Grille in an East Norwalk marina, which as close to the water as you can get.
Sailors, in fact, could just step off the boat onto the deck and to a table, either open-air or under a metal awning.
In the mid-summer heat wave, we opted for the air-conditioned indoors, content to watch the water, boats and circling seagulls at a cool distance, surrounded by walls sporting colorful art and stuffed game fish.


Zen and the Art of 'Stuff'
TAKETO SHIMADA, 25, whose long black hair and rectangular dark glasses shadowed his face, stood at the entrance to Space Age Bachelor Pad, a record and odds-and-ends store in Greenwich Village, and appealed to the store's owner, Larry Fisher: "Do you have anything for me?"
Mr.
Fisher's face fell.
He had forgotten to bring in his suitcase full of 1940's and 50's hard-boiled fiction paperbacks for Mr.
Shimada to inspect.


A Student's Idea Becomes a Reality, However Briefly
It's not just private companies that see a need for child transport services.
Some municipalities have tried to provide transport, with varying degrees of success.
Take West Orange, where a plan to provide shuttle services for teen-agers in summer sounded great on paper, but didn't quite work out.


New Watchdog Group Ranks Nations in 'Corruption Index'
Everyone in global business, diplomacy or even charitable organizations is familiar with the problem of corruption.
But in a world where one person's bribe is somebody else's commission, corruption can be as hard to prove as it is to combat.
Two years ago a group of people with experience in international agencies and business who saw the need for a worldwide lobby against corruption formed a research and advocacy body they called Transparency International.
This year the group published its first Corruption Index, a poll of polls that takes a tentative step toward ranking the world's most corrupt and least corrupt countries.


Cornelia A. Carey, Paul W. Hannan
Cornelia Adelaide Carey and Paul William Hannan were married yesterday at the Old West Church in Calais, Vt.
The Rev.
Marjorie Rebmann, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony.
Ms.
Carey, 36, is keeping her name.
She is the grants officer of the Vermont Council on the Arts in Montpelier.
She graduated from Denison University and received a master's degree in education from Harvard University.
The bride is a daughter of Emily Carey of Syosset, L.I., and the late John P. Carey Jr., who was the president of the Carey Transportation Company in New York.
The bride is a maternal great-granddaughter of Gov.
Alfred E. Smith of New York.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
PHOTOS OF RARE BIRDS
Following in the footsteps of James Audubon, but carrying a camera rather than a sketch pad, William Burt records images of rare birds in America's remote marshlands.
An exhibition of his work may be seen at the Stamford Museum and Nature Center, 39 Scofieldtown Road, through Sept. 4.
The exhibition focuses on pictures for Mr.
Burt's first book, "Shadowbirds," and he will be on hand for a reception and book signing at the museum today at 2 P.M.


Jane Moriarty, Michael Fallon
Jane Mary Moriarty, a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Mortimer D. Moriarty, was married yesterday to Michael Edward Fallon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James M. Fallon of Seekonk, Mass.
The Rev.
Gerard Reedy, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
Mrs.
Fallon is a publications production coordinator at the Association for Computing Machinery, an international technical society in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Washington.
Her father retired as a vice president of the Good Humor Corporation, the ice cream manufacturers in Englewood Cliffs, N.J.


A Puzzle Unfinished -- A special report.; Despite Oklahoma Charges, The Case Is Far From Closed
As Roger E. Moore stepped outside for his newspaper on a crisp Arkansas morning last autumn, a man wearing camouflage battle dress and a black ski mask pointed a pistol-grip shotgun, slung with a loop of stainless-steel garroting wire, at his midsection.
"I'll never forget the sight of him," Mr.
Moore said.
"One look, and I knew this guy was a professional killer."


2 Officers Teach Chess As a Survival Skill
Camden is not famous for its chess masters, but if two city police officers have their way, that may change.
Tired of watching dozens of young people become crime statistics each year, Officers Bill Reed and Michael Williams have started a chess club to keep them off the street.
So far, the club, which meets on Monday nights at the East Camden Middle School, has attracted about 60 inner-city children.


For the M.T.A., Critics Abound, but So Do Fiscal Successes
High salaries for executives, chauffeured cars for board members and cost overruns on building projects were among the evidence cited last week to bolster the case against the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's proposed fare and toll increases.
The M.T.A. is too big, too bureaucratic and too wasteful, said the critics, chief among them Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
Instead of raising fares on subways, buses and commuter railroads, the Mayor said, the agency should cut the waste and make its operation leaner and more efficient.


E-Tickets for Flying
A shuttle flight, air travel at its most basic, has all the frills and ceremony of a trip to the bank.
Now, travelers with a United Airlines electronic ticket -- or E-ticket -- can carry that a step farther, by using a touch screen similar to an automated teller machine to buy shuttle tickets between Los Angeles and San Francisco.
The device even lets them choose their own seats.


Sharon Wartel And Keith Lurie
Sharon Lynn Wartel, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Lawrence J. Wartel of Woodbridge, Conn., is to be married there today to Keith Evan Lurie, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael E. Lurie of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Rabbi Richard L. Eisenberg is to perform the ceremony at Congregation B'nai Jacob.
The bride, 24, is the development assistant for major gifts at the New York Public Library.
She graduated cum laude from Brandeis University.
Her father is an obstetrician and gynecologist in New Haven and the associate chief of obstetrics and gynecology at Yale-New Haven Hospital there.
Her mother, Sheila A. Wartel, is the public programming coordinator for the Southern Connecticut Library Council in Hamden, Conn.


Wanna Buy a Ghost Town in the Rockies? Think Again
JACK DUKSIN was a high-powered tax-shelter lawyer in Manhattan before he gave up the rat race to move West.
Now he represents a group of investors who have bought up most of this nearly abandoned mining town in the spectacular San Juan Mountains of southwestern Colorado.
And while he and his partners envision hundreds of new homes in the hills, he says, they are certainly not about to bulldoze paradise.
"How is it that we prevent ourselves from spoiling any of this beauty?" he says.
"That's a question we constantly ask."
Jon Kornbluh, a 28-year-old beeswax candlemaker from Westchester County, lived as a squatter in the nearby resort boomtown of Telluride for four years before moving to Rico.
A few months later, with the town "hurting for warm bodies," he found himself chairman of Rico's Planning Council.
"We're talking construction moratorium issues right now," he says.
If and when new homes are built, he adds with a slight grin, they should definitely have composting toilets.


Sanders Gets Feet Wet On the Comeback Trail
When you start swimming competitively at age 4, you tend to get tired of the demands: Up before dawn, five hours in the pool every day, nine miles a day in a pool swimming here to there and then there to here.
Don't eat this.
Don't do that.
So in 1992, after Summer Sanders had won two gold medals, a silver and a bronze in the Barcelona Olympics, she said enough was probably enough.
At 19, she stopped competitive swimming -- stopped, not retired -- to explore the rest of the world.
She had a great time.


SPILLANE ALSO WRITES
Frank Gannon got the uncanny similarities between the prose styles of Mickey Spillane and Ernest Hemingway (Endpaper: "Spillane Also Writes," July 23) right -- almost.
But Gannon tipped his hand by loading the gloves against Papa.
Three of Gannon's seven Hemingway quotations come from the Old Man's late fiasco, "To Have and Have Not" (1937).
Two of Gannon's three Spillane bons mots come from Mickey's early (and only) masterpiece, "I, the Jury" (1947).


Exhibition on Lenapes Extended Until Oct. 15
Because of its popularity, the Scarsdale Historical Society Museum's current exhibition, "In Search of the Lenape: The Delaware Indians, Past and Present," has been extended until Oct. 15.
JUDITH HANDELMAN Scarsdale Historical Society


The Choir's Got a Grammy


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
In Queens, a New Center For Disaster-Plagued Firms
Disaster recovery centers, where major corporations can move vital operations in the event of a fire, flood or other catastrophe, have been around for more than 20 years.
"But companies started taking the concept seriously after the World Trade Center bombing," said Robert Felch, president of Chubb Services, a subsidiary of Chubb &amp; Son Inc., the global property and casualty insurer with headquarters in Warren, N.J.


Debbie Min, Glenn V. Kim
Hoeseung Debbie Min, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rip Min of Manila, was married yesterday to Glenn Victor Kim, the son of Drs.
Jae-Taik and Yang-Ja Kim of Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Gil Milhaven, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Camden, Me.
The Rev.
Jeanne Tuttle, a Congregational minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Kim, 27, who is known as Debbie, and Mr.
Kim, 32, are vice presidents in the Hong Kong office of Lehman Brothers, she in the derivative products department and he in the investment banking department.
She graduated from Brown University, and he from Rice University.


Editors' Note
A brief review on page 16 of The Times Book Review today, about "Live From Death Row," by Mumia Abu-Jamal, reports that the author, convicted of murder in Pennsylvania, is scheduled to be executed on Thursday.
Last Monday, after the Book Review had gone to press, Mr.
Abu-Jamal was granted an indefinite stay of execution.


BEST SELLERS: August 13, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
5
BEACH MUSIC, by Pat Conroy. (Talese/Doubleday, $27.50.) An American living in Rome returns to South Carolina and tries to cope with his troubled past.
2
1
3
MEMNOCH THE DEVIL, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The vampire Lestat is snatched from the world by a mysterious adversary who claims to be the Devil.
3
3
3
LIGHTNING, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $24.95.) The happy marriage of a lawyer and her husband is suddenly changed after she gets a routine checkup.
4
4
16
THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's multibillion-dollar scam.
5
5
157
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
6
7
76
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
7
6
7
ROSE MADDER, by Stephen King. (Viking, $25.95.) Fleeing an abusive husband, a woman seeks happiness in a strange city by creating her own myth.
8
8
7
THE WITNESS, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $21.95.) A public defender who seems happy in her work and her marriage is plunged into a morass of bigotry and hate.
9
10
3
DANGEROUS TO KNOW, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (HarperCollins, $24.) A journalist investigates the death of her former husband, a philanthropist.
10
9
5
DISNEY'S POCAHONTAS. (Mouse Works, $6.98.) The romance of an American Indian princess and an Englishman, told in words and pictures.
11
12
60
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
12
11
14
LET ME CALL YOU SWEETHEART, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) An unusual murder case haunts a prosecutor's career and her private life.
13
13
11
THE APOCALYPSE WATCH, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $24.95.) Tracking a neo-Nazi movement with designs on American and European officials.
14
15
16
LADDER OF YEARS, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $24.) At 40, a woman leaves her physician husband and children to start a new life in a strange town.
15
14
13
ONCE UPON A MORE ENLIGHTENED TIME, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $9.95.) Eight more "politically correct bedtime stories."
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
5
TO RENEW AMERICA, by Newt Gingrich. (HarperCollins, $24.) The Speaker of the House describes his solutions to the country's problems.
2
2
8
NEW PASSAGES, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $25.) How changing social conditions and longer life expectancies are affecting our lives.
3
3
75
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
4
4
8
A GOOD WALK SPOILED, by John Feinstein. (Little, Brown, $23.95.) A sportswriter reports on the P.G.A.
Tour in 1993 and 1994.
5
5
11
SPONTANEOUS HEALING, by Andrew Weil. (Knopf, $23.) A physician explains the ways in which the body heals itself.
6
1
BEYOND ALL REASON, by David Smith with Carol Calef. (Kensington, $18.95.) The estranged husband of Susan Smith, the woman convicted of killing their two sons, tells of their life together.
7
7
3
SLEEPERS, by Lorenzo Carcaterra. (Ballantine, $23.) The true story, the narrator claims, of four boys in a reformatory and the revenge they later take.
8
6
33
SISTERS.
Essays by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters.
9
8
11
DAVE BARRY'S COMPLETE GUIDE TO GUYS, by Dave Barry. (Random House, $21.) Humor.
10*
9
26
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the lives of all Americans.
11
10
5
WHEN ELEPHANTS WEEP, by Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson and Susan McCarthy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The emotional lives of animals.
12
11
3
THE EAGLE AND THE ROSE, by Rosemary Altea. (Warner, $19.95.) An English psychic's story.
13
14
86
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
14
12
2
THE LANGUAGE OF LIFE, by Bill Moyers.
Edited by James Haba. (Doubleday, $29.95.) Conversations with 34 American poets about their lives and work.
15
1
MY OLD MAN AND THE SEA, by David Hays and Daniel Hays. (Algonquin, $19.95.) A sailing yarn about a father-and-son voyage from Connecticut around Cape Horn.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
116
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
2
2
21
THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra. (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $14.) How to "generate wealth in all its forms."
3
1
STOP AGING NOW! by Jean Carper. (HarperCollins, $24.) Ways to combat aging and resist disease.
4
3
13
HOW TO ARGUE AND WIN EVERY TIME, by Gerry Spence. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) A lawyer describes ways to win arguments at home and at work.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 29, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) BEHIND THE WHEEL AT CHRYSLER: The Iacocca Legacy, by Doron P. Levin. (Harcourt Brace, $25.) A Detroit reporter interprets Chrysler under Lee Iacocca's management as a company far better at making sales and deals than cars.
DARK SUN: The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb, by Richard Rhodes. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $32.50.) Mr.
Rhodes's lucid exposition of technical issues combines fruitfully with his sharp eye for character, anecdote and political context.
THE ENGINE OF REASON, THE SEAT OF THE SOUL: A Philosophical Journey Into the Brain, by Paul M. Churchland. (Bradford/MIT, $29.95.) A philosopher's argument, clear, witty and scientifically up-to-date, that all of human mental life, however subjective it feels, is reducible to material activity taking place in the brain.
GALATEA 2.2, by Richard Powers. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $23.) Ingenious, ambitious and cerebral, this novel concerns a novelist (same name as the author's) who works to perfect a machine intelligence that can learn literature and sustain belief in purpose and meaning.
HANGING UP, by Delia Ephron. (Putnam, $23.95.) A compassionate, funny, satisfying first novel whose heroine and narrator can cope with anything but her awful father, who's an alcoholic, a manic-depressive and not very nice besides.
AN ITALIAN EDUCATION: The Further Adventures of an Expatriate in Verona, by Tim Parks. (Grove, $22.) By sending his children to school in Italy and thoughtfully watching them become Italians, Mr.
Parks studies the rules that govern a society other than his native England.
JOHN SLOAN: Painter and Rebel, by John Loughery. (John Macrae/Holt, $37.50.) A thoughtful, absorbing life of an illustrious member of "The Eight," artists who rebelled against the stodgy academic standards of American art at the beginning of this century.
MOVING VIOLATIONS: War Zones, Wheelchairs, and Declarations of Independence, by John Hockenberry. (Hyperion, $24.95.) Swaggering in a wheelchair isn't easy, but this candidly aggressive radio and television correspondent is up to the job (or any other).
THE NIGHTINGALE'S SONG, by Robert Timberg. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Mr.
Timberg, a graduate of the United States Naval Academy, examines some of his fellow alumni in government service (overrepresented in the Iran-contra affair) and finds that their conduct was influenced by fear of a second Vietnam.
THE RICHER, THE POORER: Stories, Sketches and Reminiscences, by Dorothy West. (Doubleday, $22.) Unsentimental, clear, crisp pieces about black middle-class life by a unique writer, at 87 the last survivor of the Harlem Renaissance.
SKINNED ALIVE: Stories, by Edmund White. (Knopf, $23.) Lovely, casually unfolding stories, edited from fugitive memories pulled together under the author's sense of mortality and of gay relationships as inherently impermanent.


THE REAL STARLIGHT PARK
To the Editor:
I am writing to correct your impression, expressed in a chart accompanying the "New York 1945" article, that Starlight Park in the Bronx was a soccer field.


The North Versus the South Over Public Transportation
To the Editor:
As someone who grew up in South Jersey (Cherry Hill) and now lives in North Jersey (Glen Rock), I cannot understand William Lutz's complaints about discrimination against southern New Jersey in his Aug. 6 letter, "Blatant Bias in Spending on Public Transportation." The high-speed line that stops in Haddonfield is far superior to anything we have in the north.
Only Metropark in Iselin comes close.


Streetscapes: 32 West 40th Street; At 1907 Engineers' Club, Technology Has Its Limits
IN THE EARLY 1980's, probably because of the most prominent features of its facade, an apartment converter renamed the 1907 Engineers Club at 32 West 40th Street The Columns after an extensive renovation.
But the marble is in rotten shape and the co-op board is removing large patches and replacing them with fiberglass replicas, not available to the engineers nine decades ago.


Erica E. Heard, Brian J. Reilly
Erica Eaton Heard, a daughter of Perrin B. Heard and C. Stephen Heard, both of New York, was married yesterday to Brian John Reilly, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Philip Reilly of Dedham, Mass.
The Rev.
Eugene Sullivan, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Martha's Church in Kennebunkport, Me.
The Rev.
Deborah Warner, an Episcopal priest, participated in the service.
The couple graduated from Franklin and Marshall College.


Correction
A report in the Postings column on July 23 about an exhibition of photographs by Karl Struss misidentified the architect of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Tower at Madison Avenue and 24th Street.
It was Napoleon LeBrun &amp; Sons, not Cass Gilbert.


Pakistanis Feud Over Fair
The Pakistan Day Festival, which is expected to draw tens of thousands of people to Coney Island Avenue next Sunday, gives Pakistanis a chance to celebrate their native country's independence day with food, music and children's rides.
But behind the scenes, a struggle has been raging.
Since the festival, or mela, began in 1990, it has given its organizers a highly visible position as the rapidly growing Pakistani community here establishes itself politically.
And two groups have been battling for the privilege.
"This is a fight for the power," said Khalil Rehman, the editor of The Urdu Times, a weekly Urdu-language newspaper published in Queens.


Three Men Under a Tree
IT is the Monday morning rush hour on West 72d Street.
Commuters pour out of their apartment buildings and stream toward the subway in a procession of glassy-eyed resolve.
A few floors up, in three apartments between Broadway and West End Avenue, three men quietly prepare for yet another day.


Young Women Gain, and Lose, Safe Haven
Betzaida Santana is a slim 18-year-old with plump cheeks and a bedroom that screams teen-ager.
Dozens of teddy bears sit atop her brightly colored bedspread, and posters fill the walls; a photo of her baby-faced boyfriend in his Navy uniform reigns next to her bed.
For the first time in her four years as a foster child, she lives in a house where she can leave her bedroom door open without worrying about her housemates.
"At other homes it got to a point where I was clothesless and moneyless," she said, adding, "I've never gotten into a fight here."


One Man's Word
To the Sports Editor:
I am a 14-year-old who lives in California.
I am also a fan of Mike Tyson.
I read Robert Lipsyte's article with much interest.
But I thought this article was disrespectful, uninformed and not thought out properly.


Dana Reisboard, A. P. Auerbach
Dana Michele Reisboard, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Reisboard of Penn Valley, Pa., was married last evening to A. Philip Auerbach, the son of Carol B. Auerbach of Penn Valley and the late Isaac L. Auerbach.
Rabbi Neil Cooper officiated at the Hotel Atop the Bellevue in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Auerbach, 24, teaches reading and language arts at the Benchmark School in Media, Pa.
She graduated from George Washington University and received master's degrees in reading and special education from New York University.
Her father is a clinical psychologist in Philadelphia.
Her mother, Beth Reisboard, is a partner in the Atkins Office Supply Company there.


A Summer to Value Garden Survivors
THE last few weeks have been testing times.
High temperatures, high humidity, little rain and relentless sun have made it difficult for both man and beast.
The plant world has had its challenges, too.
Some plants have not succumbed, however, and are, in fact, in full bloom.
Has anyone noticed?
They are native plants.


The Perfect Place To Make a Good Cigar; A Trend Revitalizes the Cigar Industry and a Way of Life in Connecticut
They call it tenting.
Since the 19th century, it has been a hot-weather hallmark of tobacco-growing in the sandy loam of the Connecticut Valley.
Now, once again, hundreds of acres of white netting have been deployed to protect delicate tobacco leaves so they can fulfill their destiny as luxury cigars.


Bicycles Can Fly Free On Some U.S. Airliners
The League of American Bicyclists has teamed up with the Sports National Reservation Center and five major airlines to provide a "Bikes Fly Free" membership program.
Over the years, airlines have charged an average fee of $45 each way for domestic travel to transport bicycles, whereas skis and golf clubs are free of charge.


Just Call Missile Defense America's Money Pit; We're Still No. 1
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 8 news article on the latest annual arms sales report of the Congressional Research Service left the reader with the conclusion that the United States has somehow lost its status as the world's No. 1 arms dealer.
This is not true.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
High-Level Art
LONG ISLANDERS rarely look up.
Even in an airport.
"An arrow pointing up would help," Phyllis Scher of Huntington said.
"Or a sign."
Ms.
Scher was at Long Island MacArthur Airport with her mother, Violet Friedman, who was heading home to Miami.
Neither woman had looked higher than eye level, "because we're finishing up on all the family gossip," Ms.
Scher said.


Jets Stumble in First Meeting With Kotite's Former Team
The Jets defined themselves on offense just a bit more tonight, but they still are far from frightening.
They bowed to the Philadelphia Eagles by 13-10, getting a touchdown only from the backup quarterback Bubby Brister on a pass to a backup rookie receiver against backup defenders.


Caution in Russia
To the Editor:
My husband and I felt Steven Erlanger's article was unduly harsh and negative.
My husband, who uses a wheelchair, and I just returned from Moscow and St.
Petersburg.
Our guides, drivers and hotels were excellent.
We spent five nights in the Nevsky Palace Hotel and were very pleased.
The hotel is new, the staff gracious, the buffet breakfast was plentiful and delicious.
It was expensive but worth it.
The Russian people we encountered were kind and helpful.
People stopped to help me when I appeared to be having difficulty reading my Cyrillic-English map.
They put rubles in my husband's hands when he was alone on the sidewalk.
He had to insist that they take their money back.


Lori DeMatteo and Marc Miller
Lori Ann DeMatteo, a daughter of the late Jean Maru DeMatteo, was married yesterday to Marc David Miller, the son of Drs.
June K. Miller and Martin A. Miller of Brookville, L.I.
The Rev.
Stark G. Jones, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the home of the bridegroom's parents.
Mrs.
DeMatteo-Miller, 33, is a legal administrative assistant at the Philip Morris Companies in New York.
She graduated cum laude from New York University, where she is now a candidate for an M.B.A.


POSTINGS: S.A.T. Concern Is Planning 3 Buildings; Testing Service's New Offices
After years of working out of leased office space in scattered locations around Princeton, N.J., the Educational Testing Service, best known for the Scholastic Assessment Tests administered annually to millions of high school students, has answered a question of its own: how to find more -- and better -- space for less money.
The testing service struggled hard in the 1980's for approvals to build on land it already owned on Rosedale Road in Lawrence Township, but community opposition at the time forced it instead to rent space in Carnegie Center, a nearby office park.


Law Center Wages a Fight Against Political Correctness
The Center for Individual Rights, a nonprofit conservative law firm, is fast developing an unusual niche: challenging colleges and universities on behalf of those who regard themselves as victims of political correctness.
The center, founded in 1989, has gained prominence by winning high-profile cases like Ronald Rosenberger's against the University of Virginia.
In a 5-to-4 decision in June, the Supreme Court held that the university was required to provide student-activity financing for a student-run religious magazine.


Saving Money on Mortages
EARLIER this year, the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development established new regulations for mortgage lenders that could put some cash in the pockets of millions of homeowners.
The new rules spell out the formula that lenders must use to calculate the escrow payments that lenders often require customers to make for payment of real estate taxes and homeowner's insurance.
Under formulas used before to the change, homeowners often paid more into their escrow accounts than was necessary.


Doesn't Anybody Out There Like Metric?
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 4 news article on a New York City program that helps minority children qualify for the city's specialized high schools was illustrated by a picture of two students studying metric conversions.


BABY PIGEON SIGHTED!
Tierney's paean to pigeons omits crucial information.
He refers to the squab's being male 15 times.
How did he find out?
Did the hatchling's feathers button left over right?
MARIE SHEAR Brooklyn


Satan Won't Go
To the Editor:
Leslie Houlden warns in his review of Elaine Pagels's book "The Origin of Satan" (June 18), "This demon will not go away." Indeed.
Poor old Satan is conveniently blamed for illness, madness, pure evil and simple naughtiness, and of course for such disagreeable traits as perversity, refusal to conform and heresy.
He is even credited (a clever turn) with supporting the enemy or rationalizing our addictions when that suits our purpose.
He won't go away because we don't want him to.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: August 13, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
THE BODY FARM, by Patricia Cornwell. (Berkley, $6.99.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates the murder of a small North Carolina girl.
2
8
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Bantam, $6.99.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
3
7
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $7.50.) Jack Ryan vs. a Japanese plot.
4
14
THE STONE DIARIES, by Carol Shields. (Penguin, $10.95.) The journey of a woman from childhood to motherhood through old age.
5
3
EVERYTHING TO GAIN, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) An act of violence destroys a woman's family life.
6
20
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $7.50.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing.
7
3
BORN IN ICE, by Nora Roberts. (Jove, $5.99.) An Irishwoman who owns a bed-and-breakfast plays host to a mystery writer from America.
8
3
REMEMBRANCE, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $6.99.) A writer who was jilted finds consolation when she travels back to Edwardian England.
9
4
WHITE SHARK, by Peter Benchley. (St. Martin's, $6.50.) A marine biologist battles a mysterious underwater monster.
10
3
THE FIST OF GOD, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $6.99.) Spies, traitors and brave warriors at work during the Persian Gulf war.
11
1
THE NIGHTINGALE LEGACY, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $6.50.) In Regency England, a young woman finds romance with a mystery-laden nobleman.
12
2
THE HOMING, by John Saul. (Fawcett, $6.99.) The daughters of a young widow are stalked by an evil force.
13*
14
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.99.) After an estranged couple reunite, they are haunted by a mysterious force.
14
2
THE 13TH JUROR, by John T. Lescroart. (Island/Dell, $6.50.) A lawyer undertakes the defense of a woman accused of murdering two husbands and her young son.
15
31
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $6.50.) The coming of age of women in an Irish village and in Dublin's academia.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
4
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Anchor/Doubleday, $6.99.) Fighting a deadly virus.
2
7
APOLLO 13, by Jim Lovell and Jeffrey Kluger. (Pocket, $6.50.) The 1970 moon mission.
3
20
REVIVING OPHELIA, by Mary Pipher. (Ballantine, $12.50.) Dangers for teen-age girls.
4
83
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Spirituality.
5
614
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
6
47
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
7
126
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) A poet's youth.
8
48
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
9
46
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Black sisters, both over 100, reflect.
10*
4
THE PRIVATE DIARY OF AN O.J.
JUROR, by Michael Knox with Mike Walker. (Dove, $5.99.) The recollections of a former Simpson juror.
11
14
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Delta, $12.95.) Experiencing loss.
12
5
THE CATCHER WAS A SPY, by Nicholas Dawidoff. (Vintage, $13.) The life of Moe Berg.
13
35
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships.
14*
4
LIFE OF THE PARTY, by Christopher Ogden. (Warner, $6.50.) A life of Pamela Harriman.
15*
8
THE KENNEDY WOMEN, by Laurence Leamer. (Ivy, $7.99.) Five generations of a family.
16*
24
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Vintage, $12.) A reporter's memoir.
17*
12
CREATING A NEW CIVILIZATION, by Alvin Toffler and Heidi Toffler. (Turner Publishing, $7.95.) A proposal for reshaping society.
18*
13
MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $6.99.) Inspirational essays.
19*
46
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) Monotheism over 4,000 years.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
46
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
2
7
TEN STUPID THINGS WOMEN DO TO MESS UP THEIR LIVES, by Laura C. Schlessinger. (Harper Perennial, $10.) Counsel by a therapist.
3
15
A 2ND HELPING OF CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) One hundred more stories.
4
224
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 29, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


There Goes (Varoom!) Esquire Magazine
IT WASN'T PRETTY, FOLKS,  BUT DIDN'T WE HAVE FUN?
Esquire in the Sixties.
By Carol Polsgrove.
Illustrated. 335 pp.
New York:  W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $27.50.


Sports of The Times; The Violence Far From the Court
John Walker beat his wife.
Half a century later, his youngest son, Chet, can remember the violence of the words, the violence of the hands.
"I tried to understand what made him so mad all the time," the son has written.
"He whipped all of his children for the usual misbehavior. Yet it was my mother who bore the brunt of his verbal and physical abuse -- when he was at home, that is."


An Anti-Violence Rally to Ease the Pain of a Killing


The Crowds, the Weather: The Rudeness of Them All
DOWNTOWN -- More than half of the crowd of 650 mostly gay men and lesbians attending the Aug. 2 kickoff party for Fruit, a hip new literary quarterly, did not want to stop talking and listen to Tony Kushner read.
"I don't know if this is the place to be reading this," Mr.
Kushner, the author of the play "Angels in America," said apologetically from a small stage in the back of the Lure, a bar in the meatpacking district.
"But I'll try. It's a new piece about my grandmother."


Octavia Hill's Green Mansions
Of the women who made a difference in this century, few are as little known in America as Octavia Hill.
Yet every hiker owes a debt to this remarkable Englishwoman, who pioneered the voluntary, nongovernmental fight to preserve woodlands and shorelines, and to save gracious, historic or curious old buildings threatened by bulldozers and death duties.
She was co-founder in 1895 of an ingenious and widely emulated institution, the National Trust, whose apt symbol is an acorn.
It now celebrates its centenary as Britain's largest private landlord: the guardian in perpetuity of around 600,000 acres of countryside, 530 miles of coastline, 159 gardens, including some of the best, several hundred stately and humble homes plus their contents, and all or part of 60 villages, with 39 pubs.


Fortune Cookie: Your Ignorance Clouds Asian Joy
WHEN America ordered Japan 50 years ago to surrender or face "prompt and utter destruction," the Japanese Government responded with the word "mokusatsu."
The Japanese Prime Minister claimed later, perhaps disingenuously, that he meant this to mean an ambiguous "no comment." But American translators took it as a firm rejection, based on the more common definition, "ignore, treat with silent contempt." President Truman immediately gave the go-ahead for dropping the atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and then Japan surrendered on Aug. 15, 1945.


New &amp; Notworthy Paperbacks
SHELTER By Jayne Anne Phillips.
Delta, $11.95.
It is July 1963 and four people wander the West Virginia forest: Lenny, a teen-age girl, and her sister, Alma, who are at camp; Parson, a former convict who has discovered religion; and Buddy, an abused young boy.
Their lives converge in "a spiritually charged parable of innocence betrayed," Ann Hulbert said here last year.
EXTRA INNINGS: A Memoir By Doris Grumbach.
Norton, $12.
Like the author's previous book, "Coming Into the End Zone," this one displays the candor of a woman who is in her 70's and finds aging an outrageous inconvenience.
But in addition to her contempt for her infirmities, she also reveals the joys of writing, of friendship, of family.
"Extra Innings" "is a document still too rare in literary history, an account of a woman who has lived by words," Kathleen Norris wrote in the Book Review in 1993.
She added, "Ms. Grum bach wittily chronicles the absurdities and ambiguities of the modern American writer's life."


Elizabeth Bigham, David B. Hotson
Elizabeth French Bigham, an assistant curator at the Museum for African Art in New York, was married yesterday to David Baier Hotson, a New York architect.
Canon Donald E. Boyer performed the ceremony at St.
James Episcopal Church in Woodstock, Vt.
Mrs.
Bigham Hotson, 26, graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a master's degree in art history from Columbia University, where she is a candidate for a Ph.D. in that subject.


Priscilla Johnson, Andreas Bender
Priscilla Eleanor Harrison Johnson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
F.
Coit Johnson 2d of New York, was married yesterday to Andreas Johannes Vincentius Marie Bender, a son of Dr.
Sophie W. Bender and Mathieu Bender of Sittard, the Netherlands.
The Very Rev.
James Parks Morton performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in New York.
Mrs.
Bender, 27, is a founding partner of the American Palate, an exporting firm in Amsterdam.
She graduated from Simmons College and received an M.B.A. from Georgetown University.
Her father and her mother, Holly Harrison Johnson, are psychotherapists in New York.


THE REAL STARLIGHT PARK
To the Editor:
I am writing to correct your impression, expressed in a chart accompanying the "New York 1945" article, that Starlight Park in the Bronx was a soccer field.


Three Men Under a Tree
IT is the Monday morning rush hour on West 72d Street.
Commuters pour out of their apartment buildings and stream toward the subway in a procession of glassy-eyed resolve.
A few floors up, in three apartments between Broadway and West End Avenue, three men quietly prepare for yet another day.


Creeping Back Into Vogue
ACHARACTER IN "LORD OF Illusions," Clive Barker's forthcoming pull-out-the-stops horrorfest, is told: "You're drawn to the dark side. It is your destiny. You must accept that." The same could be said to film makers these days.
Once again, terror stalks the earth.
With the success of such films as "Bram Stoker's 'Dracula' " and "Interview With the Vampire" (and despite the disaster of last year's "Mary Shelley's 'Frankenstein' "), horror movies are back -- and they want to suck your blood.


Corrections
The Good Eating column last Sunday misstated the rating for the Chelsea Bistro and Bar, on West 23d Street.
It received two stars, not one, when it was reviewed on June 9, 1995.


In Pursuit of a Dream
AT Goodspeed-at-Chester's Norma Terris Theater, which is entering its second decade dedicated to the development of original musicals (27 of them have been launched thus far), "The Gig" is on through Sept. 3.
The show, with book, music and lyrics by Douglas J. Cohen, is about "six urban professionals who shed their daily lives to pursue their dream of playing Dixieland jazz, taking off on a two-week engagement in the Catskills, where they learn about love, friendship, dreams and compromises."


In Unusual Partnership, Farmers Help Safeguard New York Water
In 1955, when he was 23, David Taylor watched his grandfather's 200-acre farm in Delaware County vanish beneath the rising waters of New York City's newly completed Pepacton Reservoir.
He had planned to take over the farm, and until last year had pursued a claim against New York City for the loss of the dairy business.
The claim, locked in 1950's economics at $2,500, had become virtually worthless.


Polished Elegance On the East Side
AUREOLE *** (212) 319-1660; 34 East 61st Street; $$$$; all major credit cards
Aureole's elegant town-house setting, with a striking wildlife motif in plaster relief gracing creamy-toned walls and accented by handsome flower displays, is the backdrop for Charlie Palmer's captivating cuisine.
Appetizers to look for include the sea scallops sandwich, seared sea scallops layered with thin, golden potatoes atop a lemony shellfish-stock sauce; foie gras terrine combined with smoked capon and celery root, and hot vichyssoise of lobster with leeks and potato wafers.
Alluring entrees include sauteed soft-shell crabs with lemony brown butter, served with roasted endive, snap peas and parsnip chips; seared quail accompanied by a sweetbreads-and-polenta pudding and topped with a red wine sauce, and spring lamb with morel sauce and a concert of peas: pea shoots, split pea puree and fresh peas. (Review: 5/10/91; article: 4/18/93)  FERRIER


Ruble Roulette
ON THE morning of July 20, I was busy ducking requests from the editors of this magazine to write a column about Alan Greenspan when I opened the newspaper and discovered Tatyana Paramonova.
The most recent nominee to head the Central Bank of Russia, Paramonova had been rejected for the second time by the Russian Parliament.
In her eight months as acting chairwoman, she had cut the annual rate of Russian inflation from around 1,200 percent to 225 percent.
But in the end she had run afoul of a superior force -- Russian bankers.
"Paramonova has declared war on large Russian banks," a banker was quoted in The Financial Times, "so we have no alternative but to declare war on her." It turns out that Russian banks borrow long-term at fixed rates of interest from the Central Bank of Russia, and lend short-term to their customers.
High inflation allows them to repay their debts to the Central Bank with cheaper rubles.
As a substitute for Greenspan, it is true that Paramonova had her disadvantages.
She was a long way from New York; she had little immediate effect on the United States bond market; and while the slightest monetary miscue in America is surprising and newsworthy, total chaos in Russia is not.
But that's almost the point.
The American way of life is now more likely to be screwed up by the Central Bank of Russia than by the Federal Reserve Board.
Central bankers in rich countries no longer have the power to commit serious crimes against their economies.
Greenspan would be stripped of his authority by American bankers long before he would be allowed to debase the dollar badly.
But whoever replaces Paramonova will be in precisely the opposite position: her successor's mandate from Russian bankers will be to hyperinflate the ruble and thereby pave the way for yet another Russian revolution.


The Serbs' Caravan of Fear
CROATIA'S offensive against secessionist Serbs, over in four days, last week virutally emptied the Krajina region of its Serbian population.
More than 100,000 fled, reducing the number of Serbs in Croatia to less than 4 percent of the population, in what one relief official said was the largest single movement of refugees in Europe since the Soviet Union crushed the Hungarian uprising in 1956.
Was it another round of ethnic cleansing in the Balkans?


'Rising Stars' Recital and Offerings of Bartok
YOUR last chance to take part in Caramoor's golden anniversary summer arrives today at 5:30 P.M. with a recital by members of "the next generation of virtuosi," as Andre Previn has dubbed the young players he selected for his "Rising Stars" project at the festival.
"We spent a lot of time looking back proudly over our first 50 years," said Paul Rosenblum, general director, "but we wanted to close the season by looking forward, and hearing some of the artists who will be the great music makers in years to come." Eight of the young players will be assembling for the event, their multiple talents to be heard on Schubert's Quintet in C -- the one with two cellos -- and the Mendelssohn Octet.
For reservations, call 232-1252.


Work at Home? Secret Vices?
Home is where the heart is.
Also where TV Guide is, your son's Lego set is and that leaky spigot is.
If you work at home but often veer from your labors during business hours, send your story of domestic distraction to On the Job, Money and Business, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York 10036.
Or by E-mail to onthejob@nytimes.com.
Include your phone number.
All submissions are the property of The Times and may be republished in any medium.


Habitats/60 East Eighth Street; The Long Journey From SoHo to Greenwich Village
THE fashion consultant and the aeronautics engineer had been living at her old place in SoHo, a small one-bedroom apartment they loved on Sullivan Street in what she described as "a very old-fashioned, very cozy Italian-American family neighborhood."
Their hunt started with a "spark," said Irenka Jacubiak, the fashion and accessories consultant.
"We were on a business trip in Seattle; the air was so fresh, and there were all these trees around, so we got this spark -- kind of a bug -- to live out in the country."


It Was a Dark And Stormy Night
Neither rain nor wind nor a sea of wet grass could deter nearly 1,300 partygoers from Southampton (L.I.) Hospital's 37th annual dinner-dance.
The rains began just as the guests arrived, sending cool breezes over the cornfields that bordered the mammoth white tent erected on the hospital grounds near Wickapogue Road.
Some guests appeared to enjoy the rain on their bare shoulders after days of 90-degree temperatures, but others tried to protect their hair and evening clothes as they ran from their cars.
Tickets were $250 each, and counting donations and raffle proceeds, the evening raised about $700,000 for the hospital's Cancer Care Program.
Pamela Schoen was the event's chairwoman.


Jury Duty, Part Two: The Fight on Lenox Avenue
THE STORY the jury heard began well after midnight one mild morning last February.
We were told by Augustine Diaz, 43, unemployed, that he and James Mitchell, homeless, had been thrown out of the Harlem apartment they shared with Rosa Rodriguez, 43, unemployed, after a squabble, perhaps over the crack they smoked.
They left with Mr.
Diaz's television set in a shopping cart.
On Lenox Avenue, Mr.
Diaz and Mr.
Mitchell encountered Jonathan Smith, 37, unemployed, who had been socializing and was losing his buzz from at least four beers, perhaps eight.


Sarah Vinnick, Andrew Chamlin
Sarah Anne Vinnick, a daughter of Helene and Dr.
Leonard Vinnick of Stamford, Conn., is to be married today to Andrew Jonathan Chamlin, a son of Susan and Matthew Chamlin of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Lester Bronstein is to officiate at the Stonehenge Inn in Ridgefield, Conn.
The bride, 29, will begin teaching the second grade at the Princeton (N.J.) Junior School in September.
She graduated from the University of Colorado and received a master's degree in education from the Bank Street College of Education.


Doors Are Open At City College -- Till Midnight
"Open the doors to all," Townsend Harris, a founder of the City College of New York, said nearly 150 years ago.
But that tradition has been threatened of late by curbs on the school's open admissions policy, and by tuition increases that will bring the annual cost to $3,200 this year.
Many of City College's neighbors have criticized these changes.
Now some are protesting what they see as another move by the school to shut out their community -- new gates that are locked at midnight to restrict entry to some parts of campus.


Spreading the Word
MARIA MAZZIOTTI GILLAN feels about poetry the way another may feel about her homemade pasta: she loves it; she revels in it; she loves making it, and she loves giving it away.
She wants you to love it, too.
Here, take some.
Have some more; it's wonderful.
Ms.
Gillan is a poet.
Her work has been collected in several books, and with her daughter, Jennifer, she edited an anthology of new American poetry titled "Unsettling America" (Penguin, 1994).
She is the founder and director of the Passaic County Community College Poetry Center and its cultural affairs department.
She is an immensely energetic and devoted doer in the arts, especially poetry.
All over Paterson, and in much of New Jersey, she finds poets and pulls them into the readings.


A Summer to Value What Grows Naturally
THE past few weeks have been testing times.
High temperatures, high humidity, little rain and relentless sun have made it difficult for both man and beast.
The plant world has had its challenges, too.
Some plants have not succumbed, however and are, in fact, in full bloom.
Has anyone noticed?
They are native plants.


Book Inflation
To the Editor:
Apropos Terry Teachout's essay " 'None Ever Wished It Longer': How to Stamp Out Book Inflation" (July 30): In response to an American reviewer's criticism that "The Magic Mountain" was too long, Thomas Mann said, "Only the creatively exhaustive is truly interesting." But that was before he was exposed to Mr.
Teachout's "bibliobesity" catalogue.
SHALE DWORAN  New York


Fact or Fiction?
To the Sports Editor:
I wondered, after reading "Tyson &amp; Co. Get Back to Basics," (The Times, Aug. 6) by Tom Friend: Is this fact or fiction?


A Summer to Value Garden Survivors
THE last few weeks have been testing times.
High temperatures, high humidity, little rain and relentless sun have made it difficult for both man and beast.
The plant world has had its challenges, too.
Some plants have not succumbed, however, and are, in fact, in full bloom.
Has anyone noticed?
They are native plants.


DIARY
Automotive The Long Goodbye General Motors is finally saying goodbye to Electronic Data Systems.
After trying for at least the last year to find a way to profitably separate from its subsidiary, G.M. has decided on a stock swap that will leave E.D.S. in the hands of its shareholders.
The computer services company has been a continuing source of minor management headaches since G.M. bought it from Ross Perot in 1984.
Mr.
Perot joined G.M.'s board of directors and spent years criticizing the company's management until it bought him out for $742.8 million.
Earlier this year, G.M. contributed its E.D.S. shares to the automaker's underfunded pension plans, meaning the company received little benefit from owning E.D.S.
"Parting," Shakespeare wrote, "is such sweet sorrow." Or maybe just sweet.
Music Looking for the Door In what could be another who-needs-the-headaches deal, Time Warner was said to be in negotiations to sell its 50 percent stake in Interscope Records back to the record company's executives.
Interscope has such artists as Tom Jones and gangsta rapper Snoop Doggy Dogg.
Time Warner has received a lot of grief, especially from the Republicans, for distributing gangsta rap music because of its violent and sexually degrading lyrics.
Selling Interscope is probably the simplest way for Time Warner to escape the controversy.
It is unclear whether the Republicans ever complained about Tom Jones.
Banking Bank Attracts Very Big Investor Yo!
Who just put down more than $3 million to become a major shareholder of a relatively obscure bank in Trenton, N.J.?
O.K., that's not fair because you'd never guess.
White Eagle Enterprises, a New Jersey investment group, notified the S.E.C. that it bought 23,100 shares of the Yardville National Bancorp and now owns 7.1 percent, or about 165,100, of its shares.
The man behind White Eagle is Sylvestor Stallone, who didn't exactly make his name on Wall Street.
But analysts said New Jersey banks are prime takeover targets, so owning a hunk of Yardville may be a good move.
This is the man who just signed a three-picture deal with Universal Pictures that was said to be worth more than $60 million.
Sounds like there may be more Warren Buffett than Rambo in Mr.
Stallone these days.
Securities Industry Another Victim at Prudential First, many of Prudential Securities' customers complained.
Now it's the brokers.
The company in 1993 settled securities fraud charges that it misled investors about the risks of limited partnerships.
The company agreed to set up a $1.4 billion fund to repay the thousands of investors who had lost money.
Those partnerships had been sold to them by the brokers of Prudential Securities.
One of those brokers, Betty S. Allen who had sold about $12 million worth of the partnerships, had complained to an arbitration panel that all the customer complaints about the partnerships made it impossible for her to find other work in the securities industry.
Her lawyer said the sales material for the partnerships that was provided by Prudential to its brokers was misleading.
But brokers also got prospectuses, which laid out the pros and cons of the investments.
Didn't Ms.
Allen read them?
Ms.
Allen wouldn't comment on that last week.
And now she doesn't have to.
The arbitration panel awarded her $327,000.
Wall Street A Good Start, Spoiled Netscape Communications, the Internet software company, had a stunning debut on Wall Street Wednesday.
The initial public offering was priced at $28 a share, but closed for the day at $58.25, up a dramatic $30.25.
A lot of people made a lot of money.
But a lot of people lost a lot of money.
The issue was so hot, that the size of the offering was increased and still many investors couldn't get stock at the offering price.
So they had to buy when the stock began trading.
The first trade: $71 a share.
And it stayed at around $70 until early afternoon before it started to decline.
It then fell almost $7 on Thursday and closed unchanged, at $51.375, on Friday.
That's a loss of almost $20 a share since Wednesday's first trade.
So, Netscape did have quite a stunning week, no matter from where you look at it.
Publishing Turn Off That TV At first it sounded like refreshing news.
Two new studies showed that over the next few years Americans would increase their spending on books and would even be spending more to read then they would on recorded music or home videos.
The key word here, of course, is spend.
Spending will increase because the cost of books will be going up, but the number of books sold is expected to almost flatten out by 1996.
It could be because of electronic publishing, as more books go digital.
Then again, maybe the reason will be that in 1996, we all could still be stuck in front of the TV watching the O.J. trial.
Tobacco The President Sets an Example President Clinton came down hard on the tobacco companies last week.
He proposed regulations to keep cigarettes away from teenagers.
He wants to ban cigarette sales from vending machines and wants tobacco companies to stop brand-name advertising at sporting events.
"It is wrong to believe that we can take a voluntary approach to this problem," Mr.
Clinton said.
How true.
When asked if he would voluntarily give up the cigars he occasionally smokes, he said, no, he wouldn't.
"I try to set a good example," he said.
"I try never to do it where people see. I admitted that I did, I did do it when Captain O'Grady was found because I was so happy. It was a form of celebration." Mr.
Clinton might have just added to the traditions of smoking.
Cigars are expected after a baby is born.
Smoking after sex is a classic icon.
And now, having a good smoke after resolving a national emergency.
Perhaps that's why amid all the turmoil, analysts continue to say that tobacco stocks are still a wonderful buy.
Sports Can Nike Be Far Behind?
It's always interesting to watch capitalism crop up in unlikely places: Vietnam, Russia, England.
Yes, England.
Money, and lots of it, is about to infect the very English, and amateur, sport of rugby.
England's national team is negotiating a $2.4 million deal to sell promotional logo space on its team jerseys, with about a third of the money going to players.
And more eye-popping in a sport in which the players often perform for nothing, Rupert Murdoch is paying $500 million to broadcast games from South Africa, New Zealand and Australia.
"The whole ethos of rugby has been about sport, about a kind of courtesy, decency and manners," one rugby expert said.
Yes, and basketball used to be played with peach baskets.


Curfew Laws Called Ineffective In Reducing Youth Crime
The law may say that minors can't be on the street late at night, but the reality is that they can because, the police say, the law is too difficult to enforce.
Even though there are estimates that as many as half the state's 567 municipalities have curfew laws, very few, if any, are enforced because the police are too busy with other matters.


BABY PIGEON SIGHTED!
A rare thing, pigeon praise.
So rare, I was inspired to evoke the other side of the encomium.
Consider this: Why doesn't anyone ever see a dead pigeon?
FRANK HEFTER New York


How to Buy Clothes That Don't Exploit
To the Editor:
It is remarkable to consider that less than 100 years ago clothing was made by the wearer herself or by a local dressmaker; or, if you were monied, ordered from a salon abroad.
Buying clothes was an intimate transaction based on a personal relationship with the purveyors.


Where Soft-Shell Crab Is Well Worth Trying
MANY of the people who go to the rustic, seaside Larry's Crab House in East Moriches will be drawn there by the steamed, hard-shell blue crabs of the sort that are served in Maryland but rarely, if ever, seen in Island restaurants.
Yet sometimes the most heralded dish is a disappointment, while other bit players are pleasant surprises.
Those crabs ($17.95 a dozen and $9.95 a half-dozen) did not contain the fine firm white meat anticipated.
They were either too old, held too long, cooked too much or all three.
Their contents had disintegrated to the extend that some of the meat was more liquid than solid.


Flat Wages Seen as Issue In '96 Vote
Wage stagnation, which has persistently held down the living standards of tens of millions of Americans, is finally emerging as a big economic issue for both Democrats and Republicans as the 1996 election campaign gets under way.
The Clinton Administration, in particular, is pushing the issue, convinced that by emphatically recognizing the problem, the Democrats can win back votes lost to Republicans in last November's Congressional election.
And both parties recognize that wage stagnation is at the heart of the debate over the budget.


In the Water, a Shape of Things to Come
WHAT The Speedray kickboard, a complete rethinking of the traditional tombstone-shape kickboards that have littered poolsides for years.
The Speedray, made of lightweight polyethylene foam, could be a bird or a plane, or even a boomerang.
The board received a 1995 Gold Award for Industrial Design Excellence from the Industrial Designers Society of America.
As one juror noted, "to create a new paradigm where the paradigm has seemingly been distilled down to its essence is a Herculean accomplishment."
HOW IS IT DIFFERENT?
Speedray's smooth aquatic performance is derived from its unusual shape, invented in response to reports of kick-training injuries.
The board is also a great relief to the shoulders and neck, which tire quickly from the arched-back position required to grasp a regular kickboard.
The designer, Paul Reeder, the 34-year-old president of Zura Sports and a former high school All-American swimmer, used a denser, low-buoyancy foam that floats just beneath the surface.
"In this way, the shoulders and arms ride under the water, flattening out the back in a natural, more relaxed manner," Mr.
Reeder said.
He carved out a semicircle to suggest the location of the head in a normal swimming position and to allow for smaller swimmers like children to use the board.
The palms of the hands fit over lobes on either side of the narrow, noselike front, while fingers fit loosely into grooves on the underside.
The surface has been molded with rounded edges to eliminate chafing from prolonged use.


McDowell's Seven-Hitter Helps Yanks Catch Breath
Buck Showalter needed a strong performance from Jack McDowell -- if only to stay away from a bullpen that had cost the Yankees the first three games of this five-game set with the Cleveland Indians.
McDowell delivered, and this time it was the Yankees who did the rallying, earning a 3-2 victory that stopped their four-game losing streak.


Caution in Russia
To the Editor:
Having visited Russia a few months ago, I found Steven Erlanger's advice indispensable.
Based on my few days there, however, I wonder whether Mr.
Erlanger's formidable experience as a foreign correspondent doesn't give him knowledge most of us don't have.


State Agencies Pressed to Trim Spending
The Pataki administration has begun pressing all state agencies to tighten spending amid concerns that Federal aid may be cut, leaving the state with a gaping hole in its budget.
The state Division of Budget has sent internal memos to all state agency heads directing them to reduce spending immediately and to prepare detailed plans for cutting costs over the next two years, with measures that could include layoffs.


A-Bomb's Radiation Took Its Heaviest Toll Among Children; Don't Forget Nagasaki
To the Editor:
"Japan's A-Bomb Project: One of War's 'What Ifs' " (news article, Aug. 8) mentions that the absence of information about these endeavors in Japanese textbooks and at the Hiroshima museum devoted to the bombing helps to sustain the prevailing victim consciousness in Japan.


In Yonkers, Hope Is Chiseled in Stone
THE European tradition of stone carving in the open air has been transported to the waterfront here this summer, turning a grassy field along the Hudson River into a sculpture park in progress.
Sponsored by Art on Main Street, a nonprofit group devoted to revitalizing downtown Yonkers through performances, workshops and exhibitions, the two-month project -- called the Stone Symposium -- has put 13 sculptors and students to work hammering out their visions on 40,000 pounds of white stone.


On the Highways: Trouble to Avoid
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.
1.
ROUTE 4 -- Fort Lee.
Eastbound left lane and ramp to northbound I-95 closed, through October.


Young Women Gain, and Lose, Safe Haven
Betzaida Santana is a slim 18-year-old with plump cheeks and a bedroom that screams teen-ager.
Dozens of teddy bears sit atop her brightly colored bedspread, and posters fill the walls; a photo of her baby-faced boyfriend in his Navy uniform reigns next to her bed.
For the first time in her four years as a foster child, she lives in a house where she can leave her bedroom door open without worrying about her housemates.
"At other homes it got to a point where I was clothesless and moneyless," she said, adding, "I've never gotten into a fight here."


R.I.P. in L.A.
THE star-studded memorial parks of Los Angeles are the mortuary equivalent of the footprints at Mann's Chinese Theater or Hollywood Boulevard's Walk of Fame.
In the course of a four-day visit to that city, my husband, Tom, and I manage to take in three of them.
We begin with Hollywood Memorial Park Cemetery, 60 spacious acres of grass and trees set behind grand iron gates on Santa Monica Boulevard and abutting the Paramount Motion Pictures studio.
This is Los Angeles's Old Money cemetery, founded in 1899; among its most prominent monuments are those of the Chandler family, publishers of The Los Angeles Times, and the philanthropist William A. Clark Jr., who has a whole Greek temple in the middle of a lake.
We are able to identify these from the road, with the aid of an illustrated map, provided by the office in the administration building.


Julie Armstrong, Andrew Deery
Julie Kathryn Armstrong, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Michael Armstrong of Manhattan Beach, Calif., is to be married today to John Andrew Deery 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Deery Jr. of Marblehead, Mass.
The Rev.
Lidabell L. Pollard is to officate at the Congregational Church in New Canaan, Conn.
The couple graduated from the University of Vermont.


NEWS AND TOPICS


L.I. Vines
Chardonette Hargrave Vineyard, Cutchogue, 1994. About $7.
Louisa and Alex Hargrave, ardent Francophiles, use the playful suffix "ette" to suggest a diminutive chardonnay.
But nothing is small about the appeal of this Chablis-like white, which is zesty, quaffable and light-bodied.


Polished Elegance On the East Side
AUREOLE *** (212) 319-1660; 34 East 61st Street; $$$$; all major credit cards
Aureole's elegant town-house setting, with a striking wildlife motif in plaster relief gracing creamy-toned walls and accented by handsome flower displays, is the backdrop for Charlie Palmer's captivating cuisine.
Appetizers to look for include the sea scallops sandwich, seared sea scallops layered with thin, golden potatoes atop a lemony shellfish-stock sauce; foie gras terrine combined with smoked capon and celery root, and hot vichyssoise of lobster with leeks and potato wafers.
Alluring entrees include sauteed soft-shell crabs with lemony brown butter, served with roasted endive, snap peas and parsnip chips; seared quail accompanied by a sweetbreads-and-polenta pudding and topped with a red wine sauce, and spring lamb with morel sauce and a concert of peas: pea shoots, split pea puree and fresh peas. (Review: 5/10/91; article: 4/18/93)  FERRIER


Lise Earle and Gavin Beske
Elizabeth Lehua Earle, the daughter of Jacqueline and John Earle of Honolulu, is to be married there today to Gavin Andrew Beske, a son of Carol and Dr.
Grant Beske of Princeton Junction, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
John Heidel, a minister of the United Church of Christ, performed the ceremony at the Punahou School chapel.
The bride, 27, and the bridegroom, 28, graduated from Princeton University and received law degrees from Columbia University.
The bride, who is known as Lise, was until recently a law clerk for Justice Sandra Day O'Connor of the Supreme Court.
In December she is to become an associate at the law firm of Munger, Tolles &amp; Olson in San Francisco.
The bridegroom is to become an associate in the law firm of Gibson, Dunn &amp; Crutcher, also in San Francisco.


A Vote for the Town Band, The Way It Used to Be
To the Editor:
Regarding the Jersey column about the Bloomfield town band ("Defying Time and Space, the Band Plays On," June 18): Wouldn't it be great if more town councils asked musicians to come forward to form a volunteer band, and the councils appropriated money for music, so our towns could have summer Saturday night band concerts the way it used to be all across the nation?
I recall those grand Saturday night concerts in the town square in Juneau, Wis.
I was the youth who ran the electric popcorn machine.


American Indian Art In Cooperstown, N.Y.
The Eugene and Clare Thaw Collection of American Indian Art, regarded as perhaps the most important privately owned collection of its kind, is the centerpiece of the Fenimore House Museum's new American Indian Wing in Cooperstown, N.Y.
The $10 million, 18,000-square-foot addition was created to showcase the collection, which was promised to the museum in 1992.
Amassed by the Thaws over the last decade, the 700 works span 2,500 years of native cultures across North America.
Notable objects include a Tsimshian tribe frontlet with a beaked image and reflective abalone, suggesting the Raven, or creator; a brilliant blue moon mask from the Heiltsuk tribe; a pair of Eskimo finger masks adorned with feathers and fur strips, and a a carved ladle showing a man drinking from a rum keg, from the Wyandot tribe.


ONCE UPON A REHEARSAL


The Perfect Rally
I FIRST PICKED UP A TENNIS RACQUET four years ago, at the age of 37.
I was working briefly as a writer on a television show and living in a furnished apartment complex in Los Angeles where there were not only four lighted courts but a resident tennis pro with the improbable name of Rod Dowell.
I was making good money that summer.
I sank a hefty portion of it into private lessons with Rod.
There was more to my newfound longing to become a tennis player than the proximity of a good court and a pro.
A couple of years earlier my husband and I ended our 12-year marriage.
More recently I emerged from a yearlong love affair that left me with a severely bruised if not broken heart.
I was in the midst of tortuous struggles with my former husband, and all the painful fallout a bitter divorce produces for children.
Three of them, in our case.


Caution in Russia
To the Editor:
As one who has for over 15 years sold independent travel to the former Soviet Union, I have to take issue with the article "To Russia With Caution" by Steven Erlanger (June 25).


A GOVERNOR'S DESCENDANTS
To the Editor:
Contrary to what you say in your "New York 1945" article, "Augustus Van Horne" was not the last descendant of Peter Stuyvesant.
Augustus Van Horne Stuyvesant Jr. (1870-1953) was the last in a direct male line, but hardly the last.


The 'M' in MTV Loses a Little Of Its Standing
WHEN MTV BEGAN broadcasting 14 years ago, its creators thought it could be a radio station with pictures.
The idea was to create a 24-hour-a-day channel where disk jockeys with faces played pop and rock songs by artists who had bothered to make videos for their hit singles.
With videos now a necessity instead of an option for most groups, MTV could easily fill its air time with music.
Instead, the music has been disappearing as MTV has metamorphosed into a youth-culture network with a heavy emphasis on the libido.
Seventy-five to 80 percent of MTV's programming remains music-oriented (as the network's publicity people are eager to point out), but two-thirds of its prime-time programs do not directly involve music.
MTV has been showing its own version of "The Dating Game" ("Singled Out"); swimsuit editions of its fashion show, "House of Style," and documentaries on 20-something sex ("Sex in the 90's").
Also filling up central programming hours are two real-life soap operas ("The Real World" and "Road Rules"), sketch comedy ("The State"), two sports shows ("Sandblast" and "MTV Sports") and an experimental animation program ("Aeon Flux").
And until recently, reruns of "My So-Called Life," the high-school drama that was canceled by ABC, ran on MTV as frequently as some videos.


Mr. Pierre-Louis, Ms. Williams
Natalie Elizabeth Ann Williams, the daughter of Beverly and Bobby Williams of Melville, L.I., was married last evening to Stanley Pierre-Louis, a son of Antonine and Herbert Pierre-Louis of Worthington, Ohio.
Judge Peter Newman of the Suffolk County District Court in Central Islip, L.I., performed the ceremony at Tavern on the Green in New York.
Ms.
Williams, 26, is keeping her name.
She is a writer in Cincinnati.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and received a law degree in May from Northwestern University.
Her father, a retired pharmacist, owned the Beverly Pharmacy, formerly in Brooklyn.


In Prosperous Singapore, Even the Elite Are Nervous About Speaking Out
Singapore's astonishing economic boom is reflected in a cityscape that has been totally transformed in three decades of independence.
What was a typical Asian port city, with stately buildings of colonial rule set apart from warrens of squalid quarters for most people, has been turned into a downtown devoted entirely to banking and business, dominated by skyscrapers and surrounded by vast, tidy blocks of public housing set among well-tended parks, ringed by superhighways.


Latino Cultural Center Endangered Even Before Opening
"What the kids in this neighborhood need is to learn some respect and understanding of our culture," said Angel Correa, 37, who was standing across from a self-service laundry on East 105th Street where his clothes were being washed.
"I would like the new center to have counselors who can really sit down and help them understand."
Mr.
Correa was talking about the Julia de Burgos Latino Cultural Center, planned for 1680 Lexington Avenue, at 106th Street.
East Harlem residents envision a center where children work with professional artists, take part in plays and learn that Latino culture goes beyond the Puerto Rican flags spray-painted on abandoned buildings nearby.


Neighbors Give 2 Cheers for Cut In Armory Plan
When the city announced plans two months ago to turn the empty armory on 14th Street into a job placement center for thousands of welfare recipients, neighborhood leaders were alarmed.
They quickly organized the Armory Action Association, an umbrella association of 44 local block and civic associations, to fight the move.
Last week the city responded, promising to operate the job program in the armory for just one year, starting in October.
While local leaders say they are somewhat relieved, they are still demanding a legally binding guarantee from Mayor Giuliani that the Human Resources Administration's workfare program would leave the armory by October 1996.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
UPPER EAST SIDE  In the Tom Waits Tradition, Holly Cole Stops In
Holly Cole comes from a family of musicians.
Her mother and father are classical musicians, her brother is a composer.
Ms.
Cole herself says she tried to keep away from the musical path.
It didn't work.


No Headline
Samantha Toby Fox, the daughter of Iris and Jonathan Fox of New York, is to be married today to Daniel Jason Bender, a son of Evelyn and Morton Bender of Woodbridge, Conn.
Rabbi David Lapp is to perform the ceremony at the Plaza in New York.
The bride, 23, is a Ph.D. candidate in clinical psychology at the University of Connecticut at Storrs.
She graduated cum laude from Columbia University.
Her father is an executive vice president based in the Brussels office of Grey Advertising.
Her mother is the assistant to the director at the International School of Brussels.


The Lonely Lifeguard, Scarcer Than Ever
ON a hot, humid early evening of the kind that has typified this sultry summer, about 15 people were cooling off in Long Island Sound, off Horseshoe Beach in Stamford.
Among them were two young men who had gone out about 300 feet from shore into deep waters well beyond the buoy that delineates the no-swimming zone.
Almost as far out, in water well over their heads, were two teen-agers who did not appear to be strong swimmers.
Nearer to shore another dozen or so people of varying ages also bobbed in the waves.
Despite all the activity, the lifeguard stand on the beach was empty.
For it was 6:30 P.M. and, as they do each evening, the lifeguards at Horseshoe Beach at Cove Island had gone off duty at 6, as they had at the larger adjacent East End and two other public beaches in Stamford.
Though the beach itself was unguarded, there were several attendants checking cars for beach stickers as they entered the Cove Island parking lot, along with an attendant monitoring traffic flow across the bridge leading to the beach.


A U.S. Debut, but She's No Debutante
WHEN ALANIS MORISSETTE gets riled, her sweet, folky voice turns into a cracking, caustic instrument of revenge.
That's what happens in her hit single, "You Oughta Know," as she confronts a man who left her and found someone else.
The music echoes Sinead O'Connor, with a hip-hop march beat, a surge of electric guitar in the chorus and the way Morissette's voice breaks as her anger explodes.
"Does she know how you told me you'd hold me until you died?" she spits out, her voice rising in fury.
"But you're still alive!"
"Jagged Little Pill" (Maverick) is the third album by the 21-year-old Morissette, who is making her United States debut after releasing two albums in her native Canada when she was a teen-ager.
She is to perform at Tramps on Wednesday.
The songs on "Jagged Little Pill" are tales of a young woman determined to make her own way, inventing herself as she leaves behind childhood indoctrination, manipulative lovers, sleazy business associates and, finally, her own self-doubt.


Phil Harris, 91, Radio Sidekick to Jack Benny
Phil Harris, the brash, bourbon-swigging, fast-drawling band leader who became a comic radio star as a Jack Benny sidekick in the 1930's and then enchanted new generations of fans as the unlikely voice of Baloo the Bear in Walt Disney's "Jungle Book," died on Friday night at his home at the Thunderbird Country Club in Rancho Mirage, Calif.
He was 91.
Whether as part of the famous Jack Benny radio ensemble from 1936 to 1952 or as the star of his own show with his wife, Alice Faye, from 1946 to 1954, Mr.
Harris, with his black curly hair, wide, toothy grin and trademark "Hi ya, Jackson," was the epitome of the slang-slinging, wise-cracking slacker, a drummer given to one liners and two fingers of bourbon.


Anxiety Over Social Service Cuts
IT was a familiar tableau for mothers who have spent countless hours on park benches watching their children.
But the scene had a particular poignancy for Linda Cormier, who was watching her 4-year-old daughter, Lauren, ride her bicycle around the well-groomed grounds of the HELP/Greenburgh transitional housing complex here.
Ms.
Cormier moved here in March from Tarrytown, where she left a difficult domestic situation, she said, adding that she saw the experience as an opportunity to get a new start for herself and her child.


White Moral Guardian
To the Sports Editor:
I don't know how old Robert Lipsyte is, but based solely on his last two columns I think it might be time to back up the van, roll out the wheelchair and take Bob on that one-way trip to the dog track.
I haven't heard from any white moral guardians of the sports world since Dick Young died.
KERRY M. DOUGLAS  Sheffield, Mass.


A GOVERNOR'S DESCENDANTS
To the Editor:
Contrary to what you say in your "New York 1945" article, "Augustus Van Horne" was not the last descendant of Peter Stuyvesant.
Augustus Van Horne Stuyvesant Jr. (1870-1953) was the last in a direct male line, but hardly the last.


F.Y.I.
A Lightboat's New Life
Q.
For the last few years, I have seen a lovely old ship called the Frying Pan anchored in the middle of the Hudson River.
It comes and goes, but recently it looks as though it might be being renovated.
Can you tell me anything about the ship and why it's out in the channel?


A Nautical Scene in Family Area on Fire I.
A MEAL at the Seashore Inn at Watch Hill on Fire Island is more than an evening out.
It is a small vacation that includes a cooling boat ride, an orange sunset reflected in the Great South Bay and dinner on a breezy deck overlooking dunes, seagrass and bobbing boats.
Each Fire Island community has its own personality.
Watch Hill, at the National Seashore, has an All-American-family feel.
When the last ferry in the evening departs carrying day-trippers to Patchogue, only rangers, campers and sailors remain.


BOOKSHELF
SHADOW CATCHER: The Life and Work of Edward S. Curtis.
By Laurie Lawlor.
Walker. $19.95. (All ages) A handsome biography of an influential photographer includes a sampling of memorable images from his life's work, "The North American Indian."  JAMES AND THE RAIN.
By Karla Kuskin.
Illustrated by Reg Cartwright.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $15. (Ages 3 to 7) Properly attired in a bright yellow slicker, James sets out in a downpour to ask the animals he meets if they have any "excellent rainy day games." In increasing numbers, he and his new friends stroll along having pleasant adventures.
DEAR FRED.
By Susanna Rodell.
Illustrated by Kim Gamble.
Ticknor &amp; Fields. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 8) Grace and her mother have moved to New York, but her older half brother, Fred, stayed behind in Australia.
Grace writes a letter to Fred describing her life and expressing great longing for him.
Funny, wistful illustrations capture the poignant loss that is explicit in the text.
CROCO'NILE.
Written and illustrated by Roy Gerrard.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $15. (Ages 5 to 9) Two Egyptian children befriend a baby crocodile, who in turn carries them off to tour the ancient land.
They encounter hieroglyphics nearly everywhere.
There's a key for interpreting them on the jacket flaps.
Challenging fun.
THE TWO BROTHERS.
By Minfong Ho and Saphan Ros.
Illustrated by Jean Tseng and Mou-Sien Tseng.
Lothrop, Lee &amp; Shepard. $15. (Ages 5 and up) A wise Cambodian monk gives two orphan brothers advice as they prepare to leave the monastery.
The traditional tale has many twists and turns: Kem becomes wealthy in China and Sem eventually becomes a king.
IT'S A SPOON, NOT A SHOVEL.
By Caralyn Buehner.
Illustrated by Mark Buehner.
Dial. $14.99. (Ages 6 and up) It's etiquette in 20 amusing multiple-choice problems involving decorous animal role models like Victor Vulture, Harold Hyena and Trevor Tarantula.
The correct answers are given at the end.
Good manners for everyone!


For Sale: Junk, Jewels and Mystery
Every August, the William Doyle Gallery auctions the contents of safe deposit boxes that have been abandoned owing rent at local banks.
The sale is tinged with enticing mystery, for Doyle offers the fragments of lost lives.
"It's a popular sale," said Peter Cleary, who has been running these auctions since 1985.
"It's kinky and everybody comes. You always find something new."
Take Lot 311 of the Aug. 2 sale.
It contained costume jewelry, a 1957 Island Park School medal (engraved with "N. Lesher,") a passport-size photograph of a young man in glasses and a horse's bridle ornament.
What was the tale behind those objects?
Did it involve a lost love, a dead son, or a shady racetrack deal?


Lisa Labalme, Michael Osterland
Lisa G. Labalme, a daughter of Patricia and George Labalme Jr. of New York and Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Kirk Osterland, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
C.
Kirk Osterland of Montreal.
The Rev.
Peter Hammond, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony at the North Cornwall Congregational Meetinghouse in West Cornwall, Conn.


POSTINGS: Former Warehouse on 41st Street Under Renovation; A Homeless Shelter For Times Square
The Times Square area is about to get a new homeless shelter -- the nine-story, 45,000-square-foot Isaiah House, a former warehouse at 260 West 41st Street.
The shelter will accommodate 400 people and includes dining facilities, dormitory-style rooms, two chapels, counseling offices, full laundry facilities and a commercial kitchen.


'Dreamgirls' Is Back
THE best Broadway musical in years is playing in Westchester.
And it took seven years to get it right.
In 1988, An Evening Dinner Theater staged a tourist-class "Dreamgirls," Michael Bennett's sumptuous show about the rise of a 1960's girl group, from amateur night at the Apollo to backup singers (the Dreamettes) to stars ("The Dreams," who are transformed from girls into women, with new gowns, new deals and new wigs).
"Dreamgirls" (there's plenty of resonance in that name) spans a decade of change in popular music, encompassing a new sound and a new look for the whole industry.


Like Summer Rain, a Steady Patter of Toe Shoes
THE TOE SHOE BRIGADE marches on.
The repertories of the New York City Ballet, American Ballet Theater and the Kirov Ballet this spring and summer at Lincoln Center abounded with works that demand dancing on point -- toe dancing.
That's no surprise.
Point work is a standard part of classical training for women.
Yet the omnipresence of point steps today could inspire a rebel to shout: "Stamp out balletic footwear fetishes! End the tyranny of the toe shoe!"


PILOTS: The Romance of Science
The Nobel Prize-winning physicist Leon Lederman is working on a TV pilot.
For a good cause, of course.
He wants to educate the public and strike a blow against "the crazies -- palmists, creationists, astrologers." Lederman, emeritus director of Fermilab and a professor at the Illinois Institute of Technology, and Gerald Wheeler of the American Association for the Advancement of Science have in mind something like "L.A. Law" or "E.R.," but with scientists.
They already have development money -- grants of at least $50,000 each from the National Science Foundation and the Department of Energy.
And they have some pros helping them with the script.
Lederman wants to replace Hollywood's standard techno-nerd characters with a more realistic image of skeptical, creative romantics.
"Scientists fall in love. But when was the last time you saw a physicist on TV galloping off into the sunset with a beautiful woman?" Wishful thinking?
"No, I think that happened to one of us once."


Call Them Classics (or Allegories), But Please Don't Call Them Reruns
It was with great sadness that I read a few months ago that Elizabeth Montgomery had died at the age of 57, or as some obituaries so unkindly noted, really 62.
I grew up with "Bewitched," and at the time I thought it was a great show because it was so funny and so grownup.
Now I find the jokes on "Bewitched" painfully predictable and the plot lines hopelessly unsophisticated.
But I still think it's a great show, and that's because I gew up with it.
I feel pretty much the same way about "Green Acres," "I Dream of Jeannie" and "The Mary Tyler Moore Show."


Three Men Under a Tree
IT is the Monday morning rush hour on West 72d Street.
Commuters pour out of their apartment buildings and stream toward the subway in a procession of glassy-eyed resolve.
A few floors up, in three apartments between Broadway and West End Avenue, three men quietly prepare for yet another day.


A Summer to Value What Grows Naturally
THE past few weeks have been testing times.
High temperatures, high humidity, little rain and relentless sun have made it difficult for both man and beast.
The plant world has had its challenges, too.
Some plants have not succumbed, however and are, in fact, in full bloom.
Has anyone noticed?
They are native plants.


Science Fiction
Science fiction has never paid much attention to sex.
Given the freedom that science fiction writers have to invent new social customs, new attitudes, even new bodies for their characters, their speculation about the future of sex has been disappointingly timid.
Notable exceptions include Robert A. Heinlein, Theodore Sturgeon, Ursula K. Le Guin, Joanna Russ, Norman Spinrad and Samuel R. Delany.
But by and large, more ingenuity has gone into devising new ways of getting on to the next galaxy than new ways of getting it on.
In SHADOW MAN (Tor/Tom Doherty, $22.95), by Melissa Scott, sex is on everyone's mind.
Which is not to say that this is sexy book.
Far from it.
None of the characters seems to derive any pleasure from sexual activity.
No one wastes time seducing or being seduced.
No one seems concerned about procreation or its prevention.
Sex, for Ms.
Scott's characters, is a political act; what turns them on is the struggle over gender labels, a cultural conflict that pits personal imperatives against public convenience.


When It's Your Word Against Your Broker's
THE BEEF: Norbert J. Sinski says he paid commissions and fees that his broker did not tell him about, including a $100-a-year fee for his Cash Management Account.
And it came as an even more expensive shock to discover that it cost him $1,600 to purchase $100,000 worth of unit investment trusts -- a charge he says he learned about only after a competing brokerage house reviewed his portfolio when he switched his account. .
THE BROKER: Richard S. Pluta of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in Manhattan.
In a letter to Mr.
Sinski on May 25, the compliance department of Merrill noted that Mr.
Sinski had been told of both charges by his broker and that the broker had spent many hours going over the details of the unit investment trusts with Mr.
Sinski.


Sports of The Times; Wild Chips On Line For Yanks
WELCOME, Yankee fans, to Compu-Race, the latest in playoff software.
In order to access the many teams and to calculate baseball's new math, you will need a special modem hookup to receive West Coast box scores as you sleep, along with the updated how-to manual, "Wild Card for Dummies."
Speaking of which, before they blew another ninth-inning lead and game to the Cleveland Indians at Yankee Stadium on Friday night, those silly Yankees tried to act as if they were still in an old-fashioned divisional race with streaking Boston.
By the end of the night, they were nine games out.
Did anyone catch the Texas and Milwaukee and Baltimore scores?
Who won the Kansas City-Seattle game?
Who was supposed to win?


Bonnie Feinsilver, Michael D. Seidel
Bonnie Deborah Feinsilver, a daughter of Judith and Irving Feinsilver of Melville, L.I., is to be married today to Michael David Seidel, the son of Heather and Walter Seidel of Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Morris Shapiro is to officiate at the Shelter Rock Jewish Center in Roslyn.
The bride, 26, teaches the second grade at the John Harvard School in Queens Village.
She graduated from Adelphi University and received a master's degree in education from Long Island University.
Her parents own the Globe Research Corporation, a marketing research company in Melville.


Italians Seek Tougher Laws Against Rape
After a summer marked by a rash of violent sexual crimes, Prime Minister Lamberto Dini of Italy urged Parliament this week to amend a 1936 law that defines rape as an offense against public morality, rather than an act of violence against individuals.
"Painful events of the past days have revealed a serious recurrence of crimes against sexual freedom, often against minors," said Mr.
Dini, calling for a "rapid and efficient response" to this latest wave of sexual violence.


Laurence Ehrhardt, Rebecca Allen
Rebecca Belknap Allen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Milton Allen of Pawling, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Laurence Williamson Ehrhardt, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Laurence White Ehrhardt of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
Paul Frederick Everett, a Presbyterian minister who is an uncle of the bride, officiated at Sugar Tree Farm, the home of the bride's parents.
Also taking part in the ceremony was the Rev.
Dr.
John Stafford Peale, another uncle of the bride, a minister of the Reformed Church in America.
The couple graduated from Yale University.


Miller Hopes He's Not Giants' Most Recent Vanishing Linebacker
It was Friday night and Giants linebacker Corey Miller was half angry, half worried.
He was talking about a potential shake-up on the defense and he felt he might be at the center of it.
In fact, Miller, whom the Giants signed in the off season to a four-year deal worth an average of $1.7 million a season -- including a $1 million signing bonus -- said he thought the Giants were considering benching him for the younger Marcus Buckley.
"They haven't said anything to me," Miller said after the Giants' 14-13 exhibition victory over the New Orleans Saints.
"But I feel like they are trying to replace me. They are giving Buckley every opportunity. They are pushing him hard. I can feel that something is going on. My thing is this: On or off the field I am going to work hard. And I will continue to work hard. All I know is that there are some parallels between what I think is happening to me and what happened to Carlton Bailey last year."


Blood in the Board Room: Thrillers of the Capitalist Persuasion
IS it impolite to note that reading the financial pages provides many of the same pleasures as reading comic books?
After all, here we find one melodramatic figure after another: the billionaire boy wonder William H. Gates, chairman of Microsoft; the "fugitive financier" Robert L. Vesco, alleged swindler of more than $200 million, recently arrested in Cuba; Kirk Kerkorian, who announced last spring, erroneously, that he was mighty enough to swallow the $18 billion Chrysler Corporation; the billionaire Rupert Murdoch, who seems to pocket politicians around the world like a kid shoplifting gum.
And how about the hero-rogues?
How thrilling to read about Nicholas W. Leeson, the 28-year-old bond trader who detonated the old British bank Barings from his office in Singapore!
And Joseph Jett, who cost Kidder, Peabody and its parent, General Electric, $210 million!
Gadzooks -- who can forget the bloated corpse of the media baron Robert Maxwell floating in the ocean, dead possibly by his own hand, leaving in his wake embezzlement in the hundreds of millions?
Such figures may appear larger than life, but in the pre-millennial wired world, we understand as never before that everything is connected to everything else and that the capital being risked by the financial supermen may well include some of our own.
More than 50 million American families now own stock, and information about markets and interest rates and stock averages and indexes and earnings reports and government statistics fizzes around us constantly.
We worry that we should know what it all means.
An army of tired men in their 50's collapses before the Cheshire smile of Louis Rukeyser each Friday night, waiting for sagacities, while younger investors of both sexes hunch over their radios seeking Bloomberg's report on the Nikkei.


One Cartel Dies and the Drugs Go On
THE tentacles of the Cali cartel stretch from the coca fields in the Bolivian Andes to the chambers of the Colombian Congress, from the ports and airfields of Mexico all the way to the bodegas of Chicago and the Bronx.
And its product ends up nearly everywhere from the Ivy League college dormitory to the Hollywood studio.
So it was not surprising that Clinton Administration officials cheered last Sunday when Colombian police raided the apartment of the cartel's most infamous chief, Miguel Rodriguez Orejuela, and caught him, dressed only in his underwear, behind the trap door of a concealed closet.
In a continuing crackdown spurred by intense pressure from the United States, Mr.
Rodriguez was the sixth of the cartel's seven known top leaders who has been arrested in Colombia this summer.
His brother, Jorge, was arrested in March.


INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3
Juan Colon, a lonely soldier in the city's war on rats.  NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4
A New York jingle writer teaches the Japanese how to navigate the big city.


A Day With a Dinosaur
Barney Warning: Anyone whose nerves cannot take another sighting of the purple dinosaur are advised to avoid Universal Studios Florida.
But those with smitten pre-schoolers may want to know about A Day in the Park With Barney, a 60,000-square-foot addition that opened July 11 at the theme park in Orlando, Fla.


Martha J. Clarke, Robert A. Loer
Martha Jane Clarke, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Owen R. Clarke of Bayville, L.I., was married yesterday to Robert Alexander Loer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James E. Loer Jr. of Medfield, Mass.
Msgr.
Charles H. Eckermann, the bride's uncle, performed the ceremony at the Tabor Academy Chapel in Marion, Mass.
Mrs.
Loer is an editor of science and technology video programs at the Chedd-Angier Production Company in Watertown, Mass.
She graduated from the Massachusetts College of Art.
Her father retired as a police officer in Laurel Hollow, L.I.
Her mother retired as a music teacher at Oyster Bay (L.I.) High School.


State's New Insurance Law Doesn't Cover All Mothers
New Jersey's new law requiring insurers to cover a two-day hospital stay for new mothers after delivery was supposed to usher in an era of better obstetric care.
But thousands of women are not covered by the law, The Associated Press reported last week.
Among them are women who work for employers based out-of-state, or whose employers are self-insured. (The self-insured group includes state employees, although state officials said they would abide by the law.) And women whose insurance policies took effect before June 28, the day the bill became law, are not eligible until next year.


The Whitewater Tax Questions
For a close follower of Whitewater -- and it takes a close following to keep up -- the week's most interesting information came from L. Jean Lewis and from the reconstruction developed by Representative Jim Leach of the tangled relationship between then-Gov.
Bill Clinton and James McDougal, the Clintons' partner in the Whitewater real estate venture.
Together, they point to the question of the Clintons' tax returns.
All along, taxes have seemed a powerful and logical reason for President Clinton's willingness to absorb damage to his popularity and credibility rather than yield a full public accounting of his and Mrs.
Clinton's Whitewater finances.
Mr.
Leach, an Iowa Republican, is the chairman of the House Banking Committee, which is conducting hearings into Whitewater at the same time that Senator Alfonse D'Amato of New York is conducting hearings in the Senate on the death of Vincent Foster.
It now appears that before his death, Mr.
Foster himself was deeply troubled by the Clintons' personal financial affairs.


The Reports of the Red Sox Collapsing Are Greatly Exaggerated
About the time the Yankees were losing a doubleheader to Cleveland and Boston was winning its eighth successive game the other night, the idea that the Red Sox would execute their usual collapse turned into wishful thinking by Yankees fans.
But the idea represented a highly questionable view of history in the first place.
That view has even been lyricized in a limerick written and delivered as his monthly message on his home-telephone answering machine by Gene Orza, the poet laureate of the Major League Baseball Players Association:


Changes in County Legislators' Pay
UNDER proposed new pay guidelines for Westchester County legislators, all extra fees for attending committee meetings would be abolished, along with stipends for some committee leaders and the minority and majority whips.
The base pay for the county lawmakers would go to $34,000 from $27,950, an increase of 22 percent and the first pay increase in six years.
But the total pay package for the legislators will drop 6.5 percent, from about $709,000 last year to $663,000, if the legislators vote the plan into law.


Safe Haven Gained, and Lost
Betzaida Santana is a slim 18-year-old with plump cheeks and a bedroom that screams teen-ager.
Dozens of teddy bears sit atop her brightly colored bedspread, and posters fill the walls; a photo of her baby-faced boyfriend in his Navy uniform reigns next to her bed.
For the first time in her four years as a foster child, she lives in a house where she can leave her bedroom door open without worrying about her housemates.
"At other homes it got to a point where I was clothesless and moneyless," she said, adding, "I've never gotten into a fight here."


On Sunday; From Kovacs To Letterman, Loud and Clear
FROM New York -- where right about now the subject of this column would do a joke -- it's "Late Show" without Bill Wendell.
Mr.
Wendell is the announcer who put the long "a" in Daaay-vid Letterman.
He is retiring.
Again.
The first time, in 1992, he retired from NBC, where for 37 years he was often heard but not seen.
He remained with the Letterman show and followed Mr.
Letterman to CBS in 1993.
This time, maybe he means it, maybe not, but he says it's time.
"All in all, it's been a good life," he said.
"And, as they say, no heavy lifting."


'A Song Then Was a Song'
To the Editor:
In his essay on American popular music of the 1940's, "Wartime Dreams Revisited"  [ July 23 ] , Stephen Holden missed an essential point: a song then was a song, not a single big-band recording.
It had a life of its own.
The songs of Jerome Kern, Cole Porter, Richard Rodgers, Irving Berlin and a host of talented others were recorded by many different artists, were live on the radio networks and in the dance halls, were performed in the movies and musicals they were written for, sold millions of copies of sheet music and -- most significantly -- were sung in millions of homes by people of all ages and levels of sophistication.


Round Them Up


Aug. 6-12; There's Nothing Quite Like the Asparagus Museum
BUSINESS at the big museums is booming.
Visitors are mashed against the mummies, and can barely glimpse the Monets, let alone the Mona Lisa.
But what for those souls thirsting for more accessible culture, something less haute than the Louvre, the Metropolitan or the Uffizi?
Perhaps the word culture overstates it a bit in the case of the Cumberland Pencil Museum in Keswick, England; the Beer Museum in Laa an der Thaya, Austria, the $15 million World of Coca-Cola in Atlanta or the Jimmy Stewart Museum in Indiana, Pa.
The forthcoming Rock 'n' Roll Museum in Cleveland stands on firmer ground.


Woman Killed in Abortion Leaves Family Missing Core
After a blink of his long black lashes and a thoughtful pause, the 5-year-old son of Guadalupe Negron and Jose Callejas drove his father to cry with a short phrase in Spanish.
"I miss my mother," said the child, Byron, his eyes glistening with tears as he sat next to his father.


Rena M. Cohen, Joshua Kopelman
Rena Marcy Cohen, a daughter of Miriam and Saul Cohen of Stamford, Conn., is to be married there today to Joshua Marc Kopelman, a son of Carol and Dr.
Richard Kopelman of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Ely Rosenzveig is to perform the ceremony at Congregation Agudath Sholom.
The bride and the bridegroom, both 24, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.


Extra Security Ordered at New York Airports
The Federal Aviation Administration and the Port Authority yesterday ordered extra security measures to be put into place at Kennedy, La Guardia and Newark airports, because of tips from law enforcement authorities about a possible safety threat.
The measures are in addition to ones already ordered nationwide last week by Federal authorities.
Officials from both agencies refused to discuss the information that led them to take the latest action.
But a spokeswoman for the F.A.A. said the most noticeable of the new security precautions would be that cars entering parking areas at the three airports could be searched and that unattended vehicles in departure and arrival areas would immediately be towed.
The spokeswoman, Arlene Salac, also said that some parking areas at the airports could be closed and that patrols would be increased.


Tracy L. Cole, Richard C. Barker
Tracy Lynn Cole, a daughter of Frances A. Cole of New York, and Barry G. Cole of Traverse City, Mich., was married yesterday to Richard Charles Barker, a son of Constance D. Petrie and Charles D. Barker, both of Pittsburgh.
The Rev.
James Karpen, a Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at the Stanhope Hotel in New York.
Ms.
Cole, 27, is to become a law clerk in September to Judge David M. Ebel of the United States Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit in Denver.
She graduated magna cum laude from Columbia University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and from which she received her law degree.
Her father was the visiting director of the Institute for Tele-Information at Columbia, and is the president of the Michigan Ensemble Theatre in Traverse City.
Her mother is an independent costume designer in New York.


Is London's Broadway Growing Irrelevant?
HAS THE WEST END OUTLIVED its usefulness?
A visitor to the London equivalent of Broadway would scarcely think so.
Foreigners -- Americans, largely -- can be seen lining up for half-price tickets at the booth in Leicester Square every day, drawn by London's reputation as a theater mecca.
On any given night, more than 30 commercial productions vie for ticket buyers in a city where, unlike New York, theaters are lighted more often than not.
Indeed, trumpeting the staying power of a show has become an industry all its own: "Ninth record-breaking year" ("Blood Brothers"); "Seventh spine-chilling year" ("The Woman in Black," a mystery tale); "Sixth stunning year" ("Buddy," the musical about the pop icon Buddy Holly).
"The Rocky Horror Show," back at the Duke of York's for a summer run, has been on and off the West End so often that it seems less to celebrate a time warp than to inhabit one.


With Figs in Season, Resistance Is Low
THE other night I was looking at the dessert menu in an Italian restaurant when the waiter told me they had fresh figs.
I looked no further.
Of all the fruits that come into season in summer and fall, I can never resist figs.
The figs at the restaurant (I Trulli at 22 East 27th Street in Manhattan) were served very simply, cut open and arranged on a plate around a dollop of mascarpone with a little honey dribbled over them.
They were perfect.
Figs are also wonderful served with a sauce made from pureed raspberries, or halved on a tart shell, accompanied by homemade honey-vanilla ice cream.
I also loved them as a first course with prosciutto.


The Ultimate Souvenir Shop
"WE Buy the Old," proclaims a sign over Princeton Antiques, which occupies most of a city block at Atlantic and Morris Avenues.
Robert E. Ruffolo Jr. has no idea how many old things he's bought -- and sold -- in the eight years since he took over the business from his father, who opened Princeton Antiques (naming it for the town where his first shop was) in 1967.
Mr.
Ruffolo, 43, the president of the Atlantic City Historical Museum and owner of the world's largest collection of Atlantic City memorabilia, in no way resembles the antiques dealers who haunt Sotheby's and Christie's.
On most days, he wears a voluminous tank top, faded shorts and Birkenstock sandals.
Add to this a distinctive North Carolina accent (he grew up in Greensboro and attended college in Raleigh), and he appears the perfect out-of-town rube.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
In Queens, a New Center For Disaster-Plagued Firms
Disaster recovery centers, where major corporations can move vital operations in the event of a fire, flood or other catastrophe, have been around for more than 20 years.
"But companies started taking the concept seriously after the World Trade Center bombing," said Robert Felch, president of Chubb Services, a subsidiary of Chubb &amp; Son Inc., the global property and casualty insurer with headquarters in Warren, N.J.


Fern S. Hamer, Michael A. Fergus
Fern Smalls Hamer, a daughter of Dr.
Judith A. Hamer and Martin J. Hamer of Westport, Conn., was married yesterday to Michael Arthur Fergus, a son of Barbara and Leroy Fergus of Boston.
The Rev.
Daylan Greer performed the ceremony at the Westport Unitarian Church.
Mrs.
Hamer Fergus is a computer training consultant based in Boston and a student at Simmons College.
Her father, who retired as a communications department manager at the International Business Machines Corporation in Danbury, Conn., is a writer based in Westport.
Her mother is a divisional vice president at Paine Webber in Weehawken, N.J.
The bride's parents are also the editors of an anthology, "Centers of the Self: Short Stories by Black American Women from the 19th Century to the Present," published last year.


3-Masted Visitor From Argentina
THE Libertad, a three-masted tall ship docked on the Hudson River at West 46th Street, looks as if it was built in some distant age.
In fact, it was christened in 1963, as a training frigate for the Argentine Navy.
Until Tuesday, it will be docked next to the Intrepid Sea Air Space Museum and open for tours.


Latino Cultural Center Endangered Even Before Opening
"What the kids in this neighborhood need is to learn some respect and understanding of our culture," said Angel Correa, 37, who was standing across from a self-service laundry on East 105th Street where his clothes were being washed.
"I would like the new center to have counselors who can really sit down and help them understand."
Mr.
Correa was talking about the Julia de Burgos Latino Cultural Center, planned for 1680 Lexington Avenue, at 106th Street.
East Harlem residents envision a center where children work with professional artists, take part in plays and learn that Latino culture goes beyond the Puerto Rican flags spray-painted on abandoned buildings nearby.


Writing to Governors To Pitch a State Song
To the Editor:
I was interested in J. Peder Zane's July 9 article "Telling Stories, Going Farther," about John Gorka, folk singer and composer, and the discussion about a state song.
On Jan. 1, 1989, I received a copyright for the lyrics to "Salute to New Jersey" and immediately mailed a copy to Gov.
Thomas Kean requesting that it be considered as the state song.
He offered me "best wishes."


A FAVORITE MAYOR
To the Editor:
The story enlightened me on the exploits of my other favorite mayor, Fiorello H. La Guardia, and I now know how the "capital of the world" became the "capital of the world." ANDY M. MASTRO  Manhattan The writer is chief of staff to Mayor Giuliani.


For the Newly Bereaved, a Shoulder
MARJORIE SLAVIN was a family therapist who worked with elderly people.
She thought she knew what it was like to grow old -- the aches of an aging body, the loneliness after the death of a spouse.
And yet, when her husband died eight years ago, Ms.
Slavin struggled with grief and pain.
There was that empty house to return to.
And the memories of her 26-year marriage saddened rather than cheered her.
"It would hurt and hurt and hurt to remember all those wonderful things," Ms.
Slavin said.


Aug. 6-12: Competition for McDonald's; Where Happy Meals Include 2-Ounce Shots of Vodka
It had to happen.
Chastened by the outrageous success of the world's busiest McDonald's (in Puskhin Square), a group of Russian businessmen have decided to open their own fast-food outlets.
Russkoye Bistro opened last week to dish out blini, mushroom soup and borscht, among other dishes, all at cheap prices and all in the shadow of the enormous golden arches across the street.


Nadia Breuer, Edward Sopher
Nadia Breuer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Tom Breuer of Sydney, Australia, is to be married there today to Edward Sopher, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
David M. Sopher of London.
Rabbi Michael Chriqui is to perform the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
The bride, 26, was until recently an account executive at Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas, the advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from the University of Sydney.


COLORS: Paint It Brown
Chanel should have known that black goes with everything.
The cosmetic company's Vamp Nail Colour, a Gothic-looking burgundy-black, was first produced in small numbers last year.
It caused such a stir that Bloomingdale's had a waiting list of nearly 1,000 names from November through March.
The rush for the product was not limited to New York.
On one occasion in Beverly Hills, Calif., a woman opened her bidding for the tester bottle at $100.


Aug. 6-12; A Furor Over Chimps
Dr.
C.
James Mahoney seemed incredulous as he sat cuddling a four-month-old chimpanzee named Cory.
But the reports were true: the highly regarded New York University primate research center at which the veterinarian had worked for 18 years was being taken over by a New Mexico foundation charged by Federal officials with a long list of violations of animal-welfare laws.
The primate center and its 225 chimpanzees were added last week to the holdings of the Coulston Foundation, a research group that already owns or leases 540 other chimpanzees for medical tests.


Katherine Bijur and Alain Renard
Katherine Anne Bijur, the daughter of Jeffrey and Mary Bijur of New York, was married yesterday to Alain Daniel Rene Renard, the son of Daniel and Sylvia Renard of Bellegarde, France.
The Rev.
Stephen J. Chinlund, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony aboard the Entrepreneur II in New York Harbor near the Statue of Liberty.
Mrs.
Renard, 27, teaches English in the nursery school, kindergarten and first grade at Ecole Aujourd'hui in Paris.
She graduated magna cum laude from Hamilton College and received a master's degree in French from Middlebury College.
Her father is a broker at Cooper Horowitz Inc., a mortgage brokerage company in New York.
Her mother is the owner of Mary F. Bijur Interior Design in New York.


U.S. Took a Calculated Risk In Not Curbing Croat Attack
In the days before Croatia attacked rebel Croatian Serbs on Aug. 4, Bill Clinton met repeatedly with his national security aides almost every morning to weigh a crucial question: How far should he go in pressuring the Croats to call off their offensive?
Anthony Lake, the national security adviser, and Madeleine K. Albright, the United States representative to the United Nations, were arguing that a Croatian attack probably could not be stopped, and might bring some benefits.


Fast Food and High Rent Do In Diner
Twenty-eight years ago, Larry Pilatos converted two garages on 25th Street between Eighth and Ninth Avenues into G &amp; P luncheonette, and ever since he has served lunch to business people.
But times have changed.
Instead of spending a leisurely lunch in an old-fashioned diner, people tend to eat on the run -- grabbing something quick at a deli or having food delivered to their offices.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-12  THE LESSONS OF CROATIA
The Croatian attack on the Krajina Serbs illustrates how the calculus of American power has changed in the post-cold-war world.  1  CROATIAN REFUGEES TAKE REVENGE
Some Croatian Serbian refugees who fled their territory last weekend have been evicting Croats and Muslims from their homes in Serbian-held Bosnia.  8  Bosnian and Croatian Government forces battled rebel Serbs.  8  DEFECTOR TARGETS IRAQI LEADER
President Saddam Hussein's son-in-law, who defected to Jordan, vowed to work for the overthrow of the Iraqi Government.  3  SINGAPORE, CLEAN AND DULL
Despite its expensive modernity, Singapore has much of the political and intellectual atmosphere of a dull Eastern European capital under Communism.  10  LIMITS OF DISSENT IN ISRAEL
Demonstrations by Jewish settlers against expanded of Palestinian self-rule have sharpened a debate on the limits of dissent.  4  50 YEARS LATER, SUING JAPAN
A growing number of Asians and Westerners are taking the Japanese Government to court for mistreatment during World War II.10  COLOMBIA IN CRISIS
Allegations that President Ernesto Samper Pizano accepted campaign contributions from drug dealers are plunging Colombia into its gravest political crisis in decades.  12  Study finds New Zealand the least corrupt country for business.  6  Italy considers toughening its laws on rape.  9  National 14-30  DECLINE IN URBAN MURDER RATE
Homicides have declined in many of the nation's biggest, most violent cities, and if current trends continue a number of urban areas will close out 1995 with the fewest killings in years.  1  ROBBERY MAY BE KEY TO BOMBING
Federal prosecutors say the robbery of an Arkansas gun collector is inextricably linked to the April car-bombing in Oklahoma City.  1  Officials do not believe the bombing was a broad conspiracy.  24  DOLE ON DOLE
Senator Bob Dole, the front-runner for the Republican Presidential nomination, is operating on this philosophy: "I'm running against Bill Clinton. The rest of the Republicans may be running against me." 1  A GIFT, FROM THE HEART
An elderly laundry woman used $150,000 she saved over several decades to finance scholarships for black students at the University of Southern Mississippi.  1  A WOMAN JOINS THE CORPS
Under court order, The Citadel reluctantly accepted the arrival of its first female cadet at the 152-year-old Southern military college.  14  RALLY AGAINST DEATH PENALTY
More than 1,500 people in Philadelphia protested the death penalty and demanded a new trial for a condemned former member of the Black Panther Party.  14  IN SEARCH OF CONSPIRACY
Richard Mellon Scaife, or more precisely his money, is helping to sustain conspiracy theories about the death of a former White House deputy counsel.  19  LESS HEAT, AND PROMISES OF LIGHT
The gathering of United We Stand, Ross Perot's political organization, has lacked the fire and friction that many people expected.  20  RUBY RIDGE, RECONSIDERED
The aftermath of a deadly Federal standoff with a white separatist in Idaho has given the F.B.I.'s director his biggest challenge.  21  CHALLENGING CORRECTNESS
A nonprofit conservative law firm is developing an unusual niche: challenging colleges on behalf of people who say they are victims of political correctness.  28  Metro 31-36  CITY AND COUNTRY
A pioneering program, paid for by New York City but run almost entirely by farmers, is finding ways to cut the flow of pollution and parasites from pastures, milkhouses, and barns into the city's drinking water.  1  A SECOND LOOK AT THE M.T.A.
Despite criticism that the Metropolitan Transportation Authority is too big, bureaucratic and wasteful, independent measures indicate that the agency compares favorably with other transit systems.  31  SAVED BY CIGAR MANIA
Three years ago, one of the nation's legendary tobacco-growing economies seemed near extinction because demand for its esoteric product was declining along with the popularity of cigars in America.
Enter, miraculously, cigar mania.  31  QUIETLY AMID THE NOISE
Into the Bronx's canyons of noise walks a soft-spoken man with a sense of mission, a ready fund of adjectives and a fledgling organization whose name evokes windmill-tilting: the Bronx Campaign for Peace and Quiet.  31  Fresh Air Fund 36  Obituaries 39  Harry Lipsig, lawyer.


INSIDE
A Woman Enters the Citadel
Shannon Faulkner reported to The Citadel, finally winning her legal battle to become the Southern military college's first female cadet.
Page 14.
Iraqi Defector Talks of Coup
A son-in-law of President Saddam Hussein who defected to Jordan vowed to work for the overthrow of the Iraqi Government.
Page 3.
Amid Criticism, Success
Criticism of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority ignores how well it performs compared to other urban transit systems.
Page 31.
A Bronx Push for Quiet
With the car alarms, boom boxes, and salsa, the Bronx is noisy.
Hence a campaign for quiet.
Page 31.


I AM THE GIRL IN THE PICTURE
To the Editor:
I have just received a copy of your article about the end of World War II ("New York 1945," July 30).
Above it is a photograph of a group of ecstatic people marching onto Times Square on that most eventful day in August that heralded the end of the war.


Hooked
AFTER nearly 18 hours at sea, 90 miles out in the Atlantic, trolling insignificantly along the spine of the continental shelf, Lou De Titta and his crew spotted their first trophy fish.
It was a swordfish, a 10-foot, 400-pound monster whose bocce-ball eye registered nothing at the sight of Mr.
De Titta or his gleaming boat, the Stress Management, equipped with gear enough to empty the oceans.
The fish swished its tail just below the surface.
Let me count the ways that Mr.
De Titta, his friend Greg Venturo, a veteran New Jersey offshore fisherman, and the crew of four other men did not catch this magnificent fish: For 45 minutes, they made passes with lures, threw out chunks of oily butterfish, taunted it with a squid looped through a heavy hook.
They considered, jokingly, a harpoon.


Anxiety Over Social Service Cuts
IT was a familiar tableau for mothers who have spent countless hours on park benches watching their children.
But the scene had a particular poignancy for Linda Cormier, who was watching her 4-year-old daughter, Lauren, ride her bicycle around the well-groomed grounds of the HELP/Greenburgh transitional housing complex here.
Ms.
Cormier moved here in March from Tarrytown, where she left a difficult domestic situation, she said, adding that she saw the experience as an opportunity to get a new start for herself and her child.


A Yank at Oxford
SPECIAL RELATIONSHIP  By Robyn Sisman. 325 pp. New York: Dutton. $22.95.


President's Lawyer Must Serve the Client Better
To the Editor:
Re "What I Did and Why I Did It" (Op-Ed, Aug. 8): Bernard W. Nussbaum, the former White House counsel, details why he restricted Justice Department access to White House papers after the death of Vincent W. Foster Jr., the deputy counsel.


THIS DIVA IS DIFFIDENT
I enjoyed Wayne Koestenbaum's article on Dawn Upshaw ("This Diva Is Diffident," July 23).
Your readers might like to know that when she appeared at the Metropolitan Opera as Blanche de la Force, who takes vows in Francis Poulenc's "Les Dialogues des Carmelites," she was a pregnant nun.
Upshaw was carrying her second child.
ERNEST G. D'AMATO Maplewood, N.J.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SECRET DREAMS  By Keith Korman. Arcade, $23.95.
Imagine a writer with the chutzpah to depict the sexual fantasies of Sigmund Freud and Carl Jung.
At the center of "Secret Dreams," Keith Korman's fascinating third novel, is Fraulein S, a shrieking girl wrapped like a mummy in Room 401 of the Burgholzli Mental Hospital in Zurich.
She turns out to be a formidable patient, and her savior -- and eventual lover -- is Herr Doktor Jung, who is eager to test the radical theories of his mentor in Vienna, Herr Professor Freud.
Much of the action in this elaborate psychological detective story is internal, crosscutting among memories, primal dreams, reveries and even mind travel.
Mr.
Korman takes some wild imaginative flights as he explores the wobbly baby steps of psychoanalysis, particularly in his portrayal of Jung's emotional life and of Freud as a raging old man racked with cancer, sitting alone in his office with a "little tribe of gargoyles" set upon his desk.
And the often harrowing accounts of Fraulein S's therapy give a strong sense of the courage that must have been required as the doctors skirted the edge of madness themselves in search of clues to the mind's puzzles.
SCOTT VEALE


A FAVORITE MAYOR
To the Editor:
The story enlightened me on the exploits of my other favorite mayor, Fiorello H. La Guardia, and I now know how the "capital of the world" became the "capital of the world." ANDY M. MASTRO  Manhattan The writer is chief of staff to Mayor Giuliani.


Girl Shot at Block Party
A block party on a street in East Flatbush, Brooklyn, turned violent yesterday evening when a shoving match between two men escalated into a brawl, with bottles thrown and shots fired, the police said.
An unidentified 15-year-old girl was hit by a stray bullet during the fray and was taken to Kings County Hospital, where she was listed in stable condition last night.


Music Festival Is Thriving in Bridgehampton
TWELVE years ago there were skeptics when Marya Martin, the flutist, founded the Bridgehampton Chamber Music Festival with the violinist Ani Kavafian, the cellist Fred Sherry and the pianist Andre-Michel Schub.
Was August really the time for chamber music?
Was Bridgehampton -- a beach retreat with few cultural pretensions -- the place?


Soupspoon's Blues
RL'S DREAM  By Walter Mosley. 267 pp. New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $22.


What Teacher Tenure Really Means
The savaging of public schools and teachers  [ "Dispute on Teacher Tenure May Widen," July 16 ]  by those who look only at the fiscal aspects of education is increasingly in vogue.
But please note: whatever quality is to be found in a child's experience in school cannot compensate for either a lack of parental nurturing or for amorality in the media or for the corruption that infects governmental institutions or for the combined effects of these phenomena.
And while schools have business aspects, they are not businesses!


Aug. 6-12:; Iraqi family feud


Sticking to the Basics
VISITING Californians don't scare this New Yorker.
I just get into my naked-tourist mode (no shame, no pride) and march my guests to the Central Park Zoo, or to any of the other local pleasure domes that sophisticates from the Coast are too cool to pursue on their own.
So it was only fitting, on a recent visit to Los Angeles, that three of my California friends should do the same for me.
To Ron, a U.C.L.A. professor with a dark sense of humor, playing tourist meant gawking at the dead things that archeologists had dug out of the La Brea Tar Pits.
We saw wondrous sights at the George C. Page Museum of La Brea Discoveries, where all the foot traffic was stuck in front of an outdoor exhibit of a trumpeting imperial mammoth sinking into the black muck.
"I don't know about the kids," a voice behind me said, "but this is freaking me out."


Israel Faces The Limits Of Dissent
A wave of demonstrations by Jewish settlers and their supporters, who have camped on West Bank hills and blocked Israeli highways to protest the planned expansion of Palestinian self-rule, has sharpened a debate on the limits of legitimate dissent.
The Government calls the actions dangerous assaults on law and order, while the settlers say they are following a democratic tradition of nonviolent civil disobedience.


Elizabeth Lannik, M. J. Branman
Elizabeth Dore Lannik, an artist and illustrator in New York, is to be married this evening to M. Jeffrey Branman, a managing director of Financo, an investment bank in New York.
Rabbi Carole Balin is to perform the ceremony at the Lotos Club in New York.
The bride, 37, graduated from Syracuse University and from Parsons School of Design.
She is a daughter of Mayda Gardner of Old Westbury, L.I., and Dr.
William M. Lannik of Merrick, L.I.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: THE RICHEST -- The Richest and Poorest Blocks in Queens; Where the City Looks More Like The Suburbs
Summer mornings are quiet in Douglas Manor, a hamlet of country living within New York City lines.
Crickets chorus, a lawn mower whines and, on this particular morning, a water truck rumbles along the winding narrow streets and stops outside 315 Arleigh Road.
The doorbell rouses the McEleavy family just after 9 A.M.


Elaine Zhou, Terrence Shen
Wei Elaine Zhou, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Guangyuan Zhou of Denver, was married yesterday to Terrence Loo Van Michael Shen, a son of Andrew C. C. Shen of Whitestone, Queens, and Annie H. Tung of Hauppague, L.I.
The Rev.
Kevin Madigan, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony in St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University in New York.
The bride, 23, is known as Elaine.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
In October, she is to become a corporate financial analyst at J.P.
Morgan Securities in New York.
Her father is a project manager at J.D.
Edwards &amp; Company, a computer software manufacturer in Denver.


Twisted, Beaded, Braided
This summer's heat has caused a revival of hair braids, from the short schoolgirl variety tied with ribbons to the long American Indian styles.
One young man (below and right) pulled his top hair back to form a third braid.
Some of the braids are wrapped in rawhide lacings and decorated with feathers.


Jonathan E. Rose, Gayle L. DeLong
Gayle Louise DeLong, a Ph.D. candidate in international business and finance at New York University, is to be married today to Dr.
Jonathan Ely Rose, an associate professor of history at Drew University in Madison, N.J.
Rabbi Alan Weitzman is to officiate at the Eden Resort Inn in Lancaster, Pa.
Ms.
DeLong, 36, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from American University and received a master's degree in international business studies from the University of South Carolina.
She is a daughter of Jeanne and George DeLong of Lancaster.
Her father retired as Pennsylvania's Deputy Secretary of Labor and Industry.
Her mother, also retired, was an investigator for the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue.


A Mate's Right to an Apartment
Q My widowed father remarried a dozen years ago and moved into the apartment that his new wife had been occupying for several years, but his name was never added to the lease.
I believe the apartment is rent-controlled or rent-stabilized.
His wife has now taken ill and may have to move to a nursing facility.
In the event of her moving to the facility, or her death, could my father be evicted from the apartment if the landlord felt like doing so? . . .
J.
Turisi, Brooklyn.
A Linnea Jayne Levine, a Westchester County lawyer who specializes in elder law, said that based upon the situation described, the letter writer's father should have no problem remaining in the apartment if it is rent-controlled or rent-stabilized.


One Source, Many Ideas In Foster Case
The killers silently entered the secret hideaway of Vincent W. Foster Jr., the deputy White House counsel, on July 20, 1993.
Their target knew too much.
He could blow the White House sky-high.
He had to die.
They broke his neck, jammed a gun down his throat and pulled the trigger.
They wrapped his corpse in a carpet, stuffed it in a van and drove to a park outside Washington.
There he lay, his fingers curled around the gun -- killed on orders of his oldest friend, the President of the United States.


Easing Jet Lag By Resetting The Body Clock
IT was 10 P.M., and I felt self-conscious putting on my sunglasses under the dim fluorescent lights of Newark Airport's Terminal C, just before boarding my night flight to Copenhagen.
Despite puzzled looks from fellow passengers, I kept the sunglasses on through the flight, taking them off only to don a black eye mask while I tried to sleep.
My goal: beating jet lag.
The sunglasses and mask are part of a system I've used now for close to two years.
It has saved me from all but the most minor jet-lag symptoms to and from Europe and, most impressively, on two round trips to Nepal.


Hot Spots
To the Editor
I was surprised that there was no mention of assistance companies in the issue focusing on "Hot Spots for the Cool at Heart" (June 25).


Liberties; Little Ceasar Salad
I'd forgotten what a many-splendored thing it is to spend time with Ross Perot.
That barbed-wire yapping.
That wet-otter hair.
Those endless renditions of "Anchors Away." Those terrifying pop quizzes.


Pier Group: 3 Bring Sand And Ideas
Standing in the shadow of the World Trade Center, with the Hudson River at his right, Tom Reilly swung his putter.
Hole in one!
A broker at Smith Barney, Mr.
Reilly was christening a miniature golf course on Pier 25, part of a public recreation area that opened last week on the site of the old Amazon Club, a disco that was the bane of TriBeCa before closing two years ago after a torrent of noise complaints from neighborhood residents.
"This is pretty incredible," said Mr.
Reilly, whose 23d-floor office overlooks the pier.
"Where else can you play golf in Manhattan and for 50 cents a game?"


Change Bankruptcy Law
To the Editor:
As a bankruptcy lawyer who often represents creditors sued for "preferences," I sympathize with Michael Blair ("Businesses' Plight; Lawyers' Delight," Viewpoint, June 18) and support a change that would limit bankruptcy preferences.


A Public Work That Ennobles As It Serves
HOW TO MAKE A COURT IN Israel?
It is not as easy an architectural problem as you might think.
In the United States, architects have usually fallen back on classical architecture as the easiest way to project the air of dignity, moral authority, permanence and grandeur that courthouses are expected to have.
But there is no such refuge here, where there is no real classical architectural tradition.
It is a paradox, given the Roman presence in the history of this land, that classicism is more legitimately a part of the architectural heritage of America than of this country, but so be it.
In Israel, Corinthian columns do not a convincing courthouse make.
The foundations of architecture here are threefold: a fondness for simple geometries, a reliance on the traditional vernacular of the Middle East and a tendency toward pragmatic, no-nonsense directness.
Architecture is not fluff in Israel; for too long, this country was too poor and too beleaguered to think of buildings as doing much more than providing cover from the rain.
But in the last decade, as Israel has become more certain of its continued existence, the notion of a permanent architecture has begun to take root -- and nowhere to better result than in the new Supreme Court building, which marks a critical point in the architectural maturation of this country.


Caution in Russia
To the Editor:
Having just returned from St.
Petersburg and Moscow, I applaud Steven Erlanger's balanced assessment.


Child's Play? For This 4-Year-Old, It's Distinctly Hip-Hop
When the sun sets each day, Justin Spaulding begins to perfect his craft in the living room of his two-family home in Springfield Gardens.
He straps on his headset and in an instant, the house explodes with the beat of Craig Mack, da Brat and Grand Puba.
The D.J., age 4, is at work.


ON THE TOWNS
An opinionated guide to cultural and recreational goings-on around the state this week.
To submit items for consideration, write to On the Towns, Sunday New Jersey Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or send a fax to (212) 556-7219.
MUSIC ALBERT MUSIC HALL The Pinelands Cultural Society presents "Sounds of the Jersey Pines," a series of Saturday night concerts, through the end of the year.
The program features live presentations of bluegrass, country and Pinelands music.
Show time, 8 P.M.
Admission: $4; $1 for children under 12. 139 Wells Mill Road (Route 532), Waretown. (609) 971-1593.


Netscape Fever: Will It Spread?
"This will end in tears."
When Miss Smith used that phrase back in kindergarten, she was referring to a clutch of tots squabbling over a new doll or dump truck.
Today, that toy is likely to be a kiddie computer or Nintendo game.


THE DEADLIEST D.A.
Perhaps Philadelphians should look at the homicide statistics when evaluating their city's aggressive use of the death penalty ("The Deadliest D.A.," by Tina Rosenberg, July 16).
I wonder if they know that in Manhattan -- a county with a nearly identical population to Philadelphia's and an identical number of homicides (503) in 1990 -- we reduced the homicide rate without the use of the death penalty.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
In Queens, a New Center For Disaster-Plagued Firms
Disaster recovery centers, where major corporations can move vital operations in the event of a fire, flood or other catastrophe, have been around for more than 20 years.
"But companies started taking the concept seriously after the World Trade Center bombing," said Robert Felch, president of Chubb Services, a subsidiary of Chubb &amp; Son Inc., the global property and casualty insurer with headquarters in Warren, N.J.


Fish Story
GIANT BLUEFIN  By Douglas Whynott. 242 pp. New York:  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $21.


Jem Macy, Johannes Wendt
Jeremy Cunningham Macy, a daughter of Claire and Maj.
Peter T. Macy of Groton, Mass., is to be married today to Johannes Robert Wendt, the son of Chrilla Wendt and Dr.
Dirk Wendt, both of Hamburg, Germany.
The Rev.
John F. Rice is to perform the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in Boston.
The bride, 26, is known as Jem.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford, and she and the bridegroom received M.B.A. degrees from Insead, the business school in Fontainebleau, France.


A Refuge for Birds First, People Second
ON a November day in 1805, Lewis and Clark and company beached their canoes on the sandy shores of a flat island in the lower Columbia River, about a dozen miles downstream from where Portland now sits.
As they settled in for a rainy night, Clark was not a happy man.
Complaining in his journal the next morning, the explorer wrote, "I slept but verry little last night for the noise Kept dureing the whole of the night by the Swans, Geese, white &amp; Gray Brant Ducks . . . they were emensely noumerous, and their noise horid."
The millions of waterfowl and other birds that continue to flock to Sauvie Island, Ore., still generate quite a racket.
But on this pastoral freshwater island where 12,000 acres of prime waterfront real estate are maintained for the benefit of wildlife, it's rare to hear a complaint about the honking of Canada geese or the warbling of songbirds.


Of Nutsiness and Madness
AN OFFENSIVE NUTSY STREAK" was attributed to a House historian by Barney Frank, a Representative from Massachusetts. A few days later, Speaker Newt Gingrich, taking back a proposal he had made for a laptop computer tax break, derogated his own brainchild as "a nutsy idea."
Mark Migotti, a lecturer in philosophy at Texas A &amp; M University, notes, "Representative Frank's use makes nutsiness something sinister and troubling, while Speaker Gingrich's is clearly meant to render his self-criticism innocuous rather than harsh." The philosopher seeks current usage, etymology and relative popularity of nutsy and nutty.


Streak by Red Sox Becomes More Imposing With Clemens
Red Sox 7, Orioles 0
Roger Clemens struck out a season-high nine last night for his first victory in nearly a month, leading the Boston Red Sox to their 10th consecutive triumph, by 7-0 over the Baltimore Orioles at Fenway Park.


Old Smoothies
I was sitting in a restaurant interviewing Abbey Lincoln, the jazz singer, and at the table next to us two women were discussing plastic surgery.
"You're too young to go for the lift, but you might want to get your eyes done," said the older to the younger.
I looked at Abbey Lincoln, whose skin is still flawless at 65, and smiled.
To laugh out loud would have been rude, but the truth is that black women don't talk about plastic surgery.
Reduced incidents of skin cancer aren't the only benefit of melanin.
Our darkness, the very thing that was considered ugly for so long, is like a favorite black blouse or pair of pants that hardly needs ironing and doesn't show spills.
Black is beautiful, yes.
But black is also durable.


In the Region: Connecticut; Custom Modulars Are Luring the Value-Conscious
VALUE, according to residential real estate brokers, is running almost neck and neck with location as the top priority for today's home buyer.
This heightened concern over costs has made many consumers receptive to techniques in home-building passed over a decade ago as declasse.


At the Casinos
What's happening on stage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.


A Fringe Benefit for the Gallery's Faithful
WHEN used in a name in England, the word new often signifies something pretty old, as in New College, Oxford, built in 1379.
Fortunately, there is no such perversion in the United States, especially not at the Watchung Arts Center, with its New Art Group.
The center itself has been around for 15 years, and the handsome white clapboard house it occupies is of pre-Civil War vintage.
Still, the group, which numbers 15 of the center's 300 members, is scarcely three years old. (Give or take a few months, the same goes for the administration of Jim Fuess.)


The Unassuming Player With the $22 Billion Bet
THE behemoth got a lot bigger under Jeffrey N. Vinik.
Now the question is whether it can be controlled -- and whether Mr.
Vinik can stay in the saddle or is heading for a fall.
In a mere three years, Mr.
Vinik has more than doubled the size of the Fidelity Magellan fund, long the country's largest.
Last month, for the first time, the fund reached $50 billion in assets, more than twice the size of its nearest competitor and as much as all equity funds combined in the early 1980's, when the bull market began.


The Quarrel
A.D.
A Memoir.
By Kate Millett.
Illustrated. 325 pp.
New York: W.W.
Norton &amp; Company. $25.


On the Highways: Trouble to Avoid
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency. 1.
ROUTE 4 -- Fort Lee.
Eastbound left lane and ramp to northbound I-95 closed, through October.


Anne Ebersman And Dan Caligor
Anne Alicia Ebersman, the daughter of Vivian and Justin Ebersman, both of New York, is to be married this evening to Dan Caligor, the son of Drs.
Leopold and Judith Caligor of New York.
Rabbi Melvin Sirner is to perform the ceremony at the Jewish Theological Seminary in New York.
Ms.
Ebersman, 28, graduated from Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
This month she is to begin her second year in the rabbinical program at Hebrew Union College in New York.
Her father is a senior vice president of Walter &amp; Samuels, a real estate firm in New York.
Her mother is an account manager in the optical technology division of the 3M company in New York.


Jurors and Judge Ito: Their Private Lives
MOST words uttered in the trial of O.J.
Simpson are parsed like holy writ by the congregation of television Talmudists following the case.
Less scrutinized, however, are transcripts, generated by a host of problems with his sequestered jury, that Judge Lance A. Ito recently released.
And in some ways they are more revealing, for they were amassed when lawyers, jurors and Judge Ito alike thought no one else was looking.
With one batch still to come, there have been few bombshells in the papers.
The judge's reasons for dumping various jurors -- lying during jury selection (Jeanette Harris), intimidating their fellows (Willie Cravin) or nosing into their lives, cracking under the strain of the job -- have long since leaked out through the Simpson sieve.
But buried in the heaps of legalistic slag are numerous nuggets about the players and their peculiar ordeal.


I AM THE GIRL IN THE PICTURE
To the Editor:
I have just received a copy of your article about the end of World War II ("New York 1945," July 30).
Above it is a photograph of a group of ecstatic people marching onto Times Square on that most eventful day in August that heralded the end of the war.


Polished Elegance On the East Side
AUREOLE *** (212) 319-1660; 34 East 61st Street; $$$$; all major credit cards
Aureole's elegant town-house setting, with a striking wildlife motif in plaster relief gracing creamy-toned walls and accented by handsome flower displays, is the backdrop for Charlie Palmer's captivating cuisine.
Appetizers to look for include the sea scallops sandwich, seared sea scallops layered with thin, golden potatoes atop a lemony shellfish-stock sauce; foie gras terrine combined with smoked capon and celery root, and hot vichyssoise of lobster with leeks and potato wafers.
Alluring entrees include sauteed soft-shell crabs with lemony brown butter, served with roasted endive, snap peas and parsnip chips; seared quail accompanied by a sweetbreads-and-polenta pudding and topped with a red wine sauce, and spring lamb with morel sauce and a concert of peas: pea shoots, split pea puree and fresh peas. (Review: 5/10/91; article: 4/18/93)  FERRIER


Colombia in Crisis as Drugs Tar Chief
Allegations that President Ernesto Samper accepted nearly $6 million in campaign contributions from drug dealers in exchange for promises of leniency in the courts are plunging this country into its gravest political crisis in decades.
With grainy images of Richard M. Nixon appearing on Colombian television and references to Watergate abounding in political circles, Mr.
Samper's possible resignation has become a matter of open debate.


MANY CITIES IN U.S. SHOW SHARP DROP IN HOMICIDE RATE
The homicide rate in many of the nation's biggest, most violent cities dropped significantly in the first half of the year, and if current trends continue, a number of urban areas will close out 1995 with the fewest killings since crack cocaine spawned a culture of gangs, guns and violence in the mid-1980's.
But some experts caution that the cause of the decline is unclear, with such possible explanations as more aggressive police tactics, an increase in the number of criminals in prison and changing patterns of drug use.


Corrections
The Good Eating column last Sunday misstated the rating for the Chelsea Bistro and Bar, on West 23d Street.
It received two stars, not one, when it was reviewed on June 9, 1995.


A GOVERNOR'S DESCENDANTS
To the Editor:
Contrary to what you say in your "New York 1945" article, "Augustus Van Horne" was not the last descendant of Peter Stuyvesant.
Augustus Van Horne Stuyvesant Jr. (1870-1953) was the last in a direct male line, but hardly the last.


Jury Duty, Part Two: The Fight on Lenox Avenue
THE STORY the jury heard began well after midnight one mild morning last February.
We were told by Augustine Diaz, 43, unemployed, that he and James Mitchell, homeless, had been thrown out of the Harlem apartment they shared with Rosa Rodriguez, 43, unemployed, after a squabble, perhaps over the crack they smoked.
They left with Mr.
Diaz's television set in a shopping cart.
On Lenox Avenue, Mr.
Diaz and Mr.
Mitchell encountered Jonathan Smith, 37, unemployed, who had been socializing and was losing his buzz from at least four beers, perhaps eight.


WHAT NOW? Fillet or Trophy? Some Suggestions
Now that you've caught it, what do you do with it?
The answer to that question depends in part on what kind of fish you've managed to haul out of the ocean.
DESTINED FOR SUSHI -- If you've landed a giant bluefin tuna, representatives of Japanese wholesalers waiting at the dock will probably make the best offer.
A giant bluefin that has been properly bled and gutted as soon as it is caught and immediately put on ice can be worth several dollars a pound -- as much as $20 a pound if it is in perfect condition and has a high fat content, which is preferable when the fish is to be eaten raw, said Capt.
Bill Brower of the Belmar Marina.
A giant tuna can weigh several hundred pounds, so forgoing the slice for the domestic dinner table can pay for the fishing trip.


Doors Are Open At City College -- Till Midnight
"Open the doors to all," Townsend Harris, a founder of the City College of New York, said nearly 150 years ago.
But that tradition has been threatened of late by curbs on the school's open admissions policy, and by tuition increases that will bring the annual cost to $3,200 this year.
Many of City College's neighbors have criticized these changes.
Now some are protesting what they see as another move by the school to shut out their community -- new gates that are locked at midnight to restrict entry to some parts of campus.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE LONG FUSE  How England Lost the American Colonies, 1760-1785.
By Don Cook.
Atlantic Monthly, $24.
In "The Long Fuse," Don Cook posits the American Revolution as less the beginning of one nation than the end of England's greatest period of world colonization.
It is for Cook the "great drama of England's political failure." The story as told by Cook, a former foreign correspondent for The New York Herald Tribune and The Los Angeles Times who died earlier this year, overflows with striking characters.
Robert Walpole, the Whig Prime Minister under King George I, built a bond with England's colonies based on tolerance and support.
Under his rule, England drank of the New World's prosperity while still allowing the colonies their political freedoms and even the dignity of some degree of self-rule.
But a paranoid King George III destroyed what Walpole had built.
George III followed England's 1763 victory over the French in North America with a campaign of political repression in the colonies.
"The Long Fuse" animates this history with Shakespearean intrigue, a tone far removed from the reverent one American authors tend to use when writing about our Revolution.
However, Cook's is so thoroughly a British story that many will find it almost unrecognizable.
It reads like one's own biography written by a stranger: the unexpected details illuminate, are almost seductive, yet more often than not they miss the point.
Can the story of the American Revolution be written virtually absent Jefferson and Tom Paine, with Washington merely a battlefield obstacle for the British?
PETER S. TEMES


HOOKED ON BOY BOOKS
Patrick O'Brian's books are as addictive as Stephen Maturin's laudanum (Hers: "Hooked on Boy Books," by Tamar Lewin, July 23).
Since I started reading them, I have spent my days in a fever of anticipation, awaiting the moment I can tell my husband, "I'm getting into bed with Patrick." CYNTHIA BERGER Freeville, N.Y.


INSIDE
MUTUAL FUNDS /Page 5  By tweaking their portfolios, managers of enhanced index funds are hoping to beat, not just match, the market.
By Timothy Middleton.
MUTUAL FUNDS /Page 5  Cyberspace is full of investment information these days; sorting it out is another story.
A guide.
By Sana Siwolop.
SPENDING IT /Page 8  The personal shopper, once an exclusive perk for the "best" customers, has gone mass market.
By Amy Myers Jaffe.
EARNING IT /Page 10  Prenuptial agreements are becoming ever more popular, and are being applied to a wide array of issues.
By Claudia H. Deutsch.


DNA: The Test of Choice in Rape Cases
Three Queens prosecutors met early this month to decide whether to order a DNA test in a case involving a 10-year-old Woodside girl who said she had been repeatedly raped by her stepfather.
The test would cost the District Attorney's office $5,000 and delay the case by months, raising the possibility that the man might be freed before he went to trial.
And it would put the girl through the ordeal of a blood test to show that the DNA in her vaginal secretions had mixed with that of the semen found on her underwear and comforter.


Jury Duty, Part Two: The Fight on Lenox Avenue
THE STORY the jury heard began well after midnight one mild morning last February.
We were told by Augustine Diaz, 43, unemployed, that he and James Mitchell, homeless, had been thrown out of the Harlem apartment they shared with Rosa Rodriguez, 43, unemployed, after a squabble, perhaps over the crack they smoked.
They left with Mr.
Diaz's television set in a shopping cart.
On Lenox Avenue, Mr.
Diaz and Mr.
Mitchell encountered Jonathan Smith, 37, unemployed, who had been socializing and was losing his buzz from at least four beers, perhaps eight.


Beating Kills Woman, 77
A 77-year-old woman was found bludgeoned to death in her Brooklyn apartment yesterday, and two suspects were being questioned last night, the police said.
The woman, Sarah Nunnally, was discovered at about 9:15 A.M. in her basement apartment at 742 Putnam Avenue, in Bedford-Stuyvesant, by a home health worker who attended to her, said Detective Dwight Cunningham, a Police Department spokesman.
It appeared she had been killed sometime during the morning.


The No. 1 Summer Song of Love
The Switchboard at Love Central
It's a blazing hot Tuesday, 4 P.M., which means that Monster Bill is on the request lines.
He gulps some iced tea, then hits one of the 30 buttons, not bothering to aim because they are all flashing with equal desperation.
"Hot 97!"


Childhood's End
TOBACCO STICKS  By William Elliott Hazelgrove. 308 pp.
Chicago: Pantonne Press. $18.95.
SONGS IN ORDINARY TIME  By Mary McGarry Morris. 740 pp.
New York: Viking. $24.95.


One New Hotel, and One Coming, in Albania
For travelers, Albania's nearly 50 years of isolation means vast stretches of Adriatic coastline that are still virtually untouched, offering some of the Mediterranean's most beautiful beaches.
To accommodate future tourism, work was recently completed in Tirana, the capital, on the 130-room Hotel Europa Park, which opened this month, and plans have been announced for a 262-room Inter-Continental hotel, scheduled to open in 1997.
The Hotel Europa Park was built by Rogner International of Austria.


Aug. 6-12: Crime Pays; From Italy's Prisons, Its Answer to Act-Up
"We rob because we are forced to," explained Ferdinando Attanasio, a member of the "AIDS gang," after he and the other two members were arrested last week in Turin, Italy.
They had held up their fourth bank in three weeks.
In interviews with the Italian press, the three -- all of whom suffer from full-blown AIDS and under Italian law are thus exempt from jail sentences -- said their high-profile life of crime was both a matter of survival and a way of drawing attention to their plight.
"Give me a job, a place to live and a cure," said Sergio Magnis, "and I'll stop robbing."


Whitman's Popularity A Gift from Florio
Between 50 and 60 percent of the New Jersey electorate thinks Governor Whitman is doing just fine.
Her one-term predecessor, the wildly unpopular Jim Florio, was lucky when his rating didn't dip below 25 percent.
So what's the secret?
What's she got that he hasn't?
The answer, perhaps, is simply that she's not Jim Florio.
How else to explain her success at warding off potential political liabilities that, during the Florio years, would have driven down his ratings even more?


For Sale: Junk, Jewels and Mystery
Every August, the William Doyle Gallery auctions the contents of safe deposit boxes that have been abandoned owing rent at local banks.
The sale is tinged with enticing mystery, for Doyle offers the fragments of lost lives.
"It's a popular sale," said Peter Cleary, who has been running these auctions since 1985.
"It's kinky and everybody comes. You always find something new."
Take Lot 311 of the Aug. 2 sale.
It contained costume jewelry, a 1957 Island Park School medal (engraved with "N. Lesher,") a passport-size photograph of a young man in glasses and a horse's bridle ornament.
What was the tale behind those objects?
Did it involve a lost love, a dead son, or a shady racetrack deal?


Diane Sweet, Lawrence Keane
Diane Marie Sweet, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lowell E. Sweet of Elkhorn, Wis., was married yesterday to Lawrence Gerard Keane, a son of Patricia Keane of New Hyde Park, L.I., and the late Thomas Keane.
The Rev.
Gerard C. Reedy, the president of the College of the Holy Cross in Worcester, Mass., performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Ms.
Sweet, 35, is keeping her name.
She is a senior vice president with the real estate investment-banking group at Paine Webber Inc. in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from St.
Mary's University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father is a partner in Sweet &amp; Reddy, a law firm in Elkhorn.
Her mother, Mary Ellen Sweet, is a computer consultant there.


Ardent Polka Fans Take to the Road to Pursue Their Irrepressible Music
They travel by the thousands, crisscrossing the country in vans and RV's, following their favorite performers, living for the music.
Each concert is an explosion of sweaty ecstasy and cultural affirmation.
They have come to do the polka.


3-Masted Visitor From Argentina
THE Libertad, a three-masted tall ship docked on the Hudson River at West 46th Street, looks as if it was built in some distant age.
In fact, it was christened in 1963, as a training frigate for the Argentine Navy.
Until Tuesday, it will be docked next to the Intrepid Sea Air Space Museum and open for tours.


A Summer to Value What Grows Naturally
THE past few weeks have been testing times.
High temperatures, high humidity, little rain and relentless sun have made it difficult for both man and beast.
The plant world has had its challenges, too.
Some plants have not succumbed, however and are, in fact, in full bloom.
Has anyone noticed?
They are native plants.


F.Y.I.
A Lightboat's New Life
Q.
For the last few years, I have seen a lovely old ship called the Frying Pan anchored in the middle of the Hudson River.
It comes and goes, but recently it looks as though it might be being renovated.
Can you tell me anything about the ship and why it's out in the channel?


Sentimental Journey


Murdoch-Led Newspaper War Threatens to Crush Britain's Independent
Conceived in secret just nine years ago by a band of ambitious journalists from the right-leaning Daily Telegraph, The Independent was born in a rush of optimism and excitement at the height of the big-spending 1980's in Britain.
Its ringing challenge of an advertising slogan -- "It is. Are you?" -- summed up the newspaper's mission nicely: to publish a paper free from the political and financial obligations that so often attend news coverage here.
For a few heady years, it all seemed to work.
But now, plagued by Britain's recent recession, the rising cost of newsprint, defecting readers and, above all, by a price war instigated by Rupert Murdoch, The Independent is floundering.
Circulation has slipped to about 300,000 from a high of 423,000 in 1989; more than 70 editorial employees have quit or been dismissed in the last year, and analysts say the newspaper and its sibling, The Independent on Sunday, are losing $1.6 million a month.


Ambling Through Eerie Sets in London
One by one, at pre arranged intervals of 10 minutes, theatergoers were led into the labyrinth of the long-abandoned Midland Grand Hotel, a castle-size Victorian building adjoining St.
Pancras Station.
Following a narrow white tape on the floor, the equivalent of the yellow brick road in "The Wizard of Oz," each visitor roamed alone through the endless corridors and took part in the reawakening of a classic architectural relic.
Deborah Warner had mapped the tour and, in collaboration with her designer, Hildegard Bechtler, had prepared the rooms of the hotel as if for an extensive series of museum installations.
Strange things were in the air and underfoot.
As created and directed by Ms.
Warner, "The St. Pancras Project: A Fantastical Walk" was a highlight of LIFT, the international experimental theater festival that is held in London every summer.
Because of the privacy of each person's visit to the environmental project and the brevity of the run, only several hundred people could attend.
But for those who did, the event was mesmerizing.
Christo wrapped the Reichstag in Berlin and, conversely, Ms.
Warner unwrapped the Midland Grand Hotel in London.


Some Whitman, Some King and Lots of Dedications
Passing no fewer than nine buses on the way into the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine on Wednesday evening, a listener could only imagine the sonic thrills that lay in store from the 300-voice Mormon Tabernacle Choir, the Arlington Symphony Orchestra of Virginia and four vocal soloists in James DeMars's "American Requiem." By evening's end, any such thrills were still left largely to the imagination.
Not that the performers proved disappointing in any major way.
Indeed, the choir was remarkable not only for its luxuriant sound but also for the clarity with which it managed to project the texts in one of the city's muddier musical acoustics.
But the music itself was mostly uninspired, perhaps dragged down by the weight of so many good intentions.


Consolidations Aim to Provide One-Stop Networking
When Cisco Systems Inc., the leading supplier of equipment for corporate computer networks, announced plans late last week to acquire Combinet Inc., a small provider of related hardware, the deal underscored the rapid consolidation of the $9 billion networking industry.
Though small, at $114 million, the Cisco-Combinet deal comes on the heels of the 3Com Corporation's $775 million agreement to acquire the Chipcom Corporation.


In Schools, Small Alone Doesn't Mean Better; The Right Track?
To the Editor:
Nathan Glazer asks (Op-Ed, Aug. 8), "What should New York City look for in its next Schools Chancellor," and "What should he or she do?"
Unfortunately, his answer to the first question is limited to the statement that "Ramon Cortines, whose resignation takes effect this fall, has been on the right track."


Martin Wins Third Straight at the Glen
Rusty Wallace lost a chance to win for the second week in a row today, and that helped Mark Martin win the Bud at the Glen stock car race for the third consecutive year.
Martin, who started from the pole in his Ford Thunderbird at the Watkins Glen International 2.45-mile road-racing circuit, passed Wally Dallenbach Jr.'s Pontiac going into Turn 1 on the 84th of 90 laps.
Martin held off Dallenbach, a road-racing specialist brought in for this race, by 1.01 seconds to win.


Mr. Clinton Can Save Yellowstone
Later this month President Clinton will vacation on a ranch near Jackson Hole, Wyo.
Here is a modest suggestion for him.
The President should take a short flight in one of his military helicopters to the upper reaches of Henderson Mountain in Montana, just over the Wyoming border.
There he will discover a beautiful and fragile wilderness.
He will also see the proposed site of a huge gold, silver and copper mine that a Canadian conglomerate wants to build.
This mine and its lethal wastes will threaten not only Yellowstone National Park, which lies three miles away, but also the adjacent wilderness.
This is a catastrophe-in-waiting.
The risks to the crown jewel of the national park system are so grave that Congress should appropriate $35 million to compensate the mining company, Noranda, for its exploratory expenses and then tell it to go away.


An Enlightened Farm Bill
There is nothing surprising about bills to dismantle Federal programs that subsidize farmers or prop up food prices.
Urban liberals perennially propose such bills to no avail.
But the sponsor of this year's version is none other than Pat Roberts, the conservative chairman of the House Agriculture Committee.
Has this Republican farm-belt Representative turned traitor?
Hardly.
He is an enlightened savior.
In these times of frenzied budget-cutting, bloated farm subsidies are almost certainly destined for large cuts.
They go overwhelmingly to non-poor families, push farmers to produce unneeded crops and encourage them to adopt damaging planting practices.
Mr.
Roberts's bill would preserve some farm subsidies but eliminate the collateral damage.


Captain Considers His Choices
This was just the sort of finish that United States Ryder Cup team captain, Lanny Wadkins, was hoping to see, and it had nothing to do with the 18th hole dramatics and the playoff victory by Steve Elkington over Colin Montgomerie in the P.G.A.
Championship today.
It had everything to do with Brad Faxon's round of 63, a final-day charge that played him right into a fifth-place finish and onto the United States squad that will meet Europe in the Ryder Cup matches Sept. 22-24 at Oak Hill.
And it had to do with Jeff Maggert's final-round 69 that boosted him to a tie for third and put him on the team.


Debate Starts on Clergy Quota
The Township Council will take up a proposal today that would require that three of the six members of the Edison Township Ethics Board be clergymen.


Parking Rules
Because of the Roman Catholic feast of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, alternate-side street cleaning regulations will be suspended in New York City tomorrow.
Other regulations will remain in effect.


In Schools, Small Alone Doesn't Mean Better
To the Editor:
Re "The Next Chancellor's Big Chance" (Op-Ed Aug. 8): I am amazed and dismayed that Nathan Glazer has joined the ranks of the duped regarding the schools of choice in East Harlem.
How does he "see these schools working"?
The percentage of students reading at or above grade level in the Central Park East Schools is 44 percent.
In the Coalition of Essential School High Schools, the typical day for a student includes only three hours of academic work (math, science, literature, social studies, foreign language).
The balance of the day is spent mastering conflict resolution and martial arts, and participating in advisories, study halls and homeroom.


Why Parliaments Seem to Run Smoothly
To the Editor:
"With Political Discipline, It Works Like Parliament" (Week in Review, Aug. 6) miscompares parliaments to the House of Representatives.
Parliaments owe their discipline to the power of the opposition, not to the opposing parties' weaknesses.
In Canada, for example, failure to pass even a single bill brought to the floor by the governing party can be grounds for new elections.


Mo Vaughn: Loyal, Emotional and Successful
When Mo Vaughn of the Boston Red Sox faces the Yankees tonight at Fenway Park, the powerful first baseman will exhibit in two fashions a quality most rare in the modern-day major leagues.
Vaughn will display loyalty, unapologetic and undying, for two men he says paved the way for his unquestioned super-stardom and, the Red Sox first baseman hopes, for his first post-season.


Market Place; The technology sector's new wave: Stocks that might have a future on the Internet.
WALL STREET'S appetite for technology investments still seems insatiable.
Institutional and retail investors are now rushing to invest in companies that may benefit from the Internet, the on-line universe in which more than 120 million computers in the United States and around the world can be connected to exchange data, applications and services.
As if to underline the continuing enthusiasm for the Internet, a public offering of two million shares for Desktop Data Inc., a small high-technology company based in Waltham, Mass., received an enthusiastic reception Friday.
Shares of the company, which is expected to benefit from the development of the Internet, traded as high as $25.25, from an initial offering price of $13 a share, before settling at $24.75.


Some Patients Won't Thrive in Group Homes
To the Editor:
While the goal to relocate our mentally retarded citizens to the community is noble in principle (news article, Aug. 8), there are problems.
Passionate pleas by clinicians and patient advocacy groups after World War II stimulated public policy aimed at transferring the mentally ill to community living.
The objectives, similar to those expressed by today's advocates, were to prevent egregious error and protect the civil rights of the mentally ill.


Sports of The Times  Even in the End, Mantle's Circle Remained Unbroken; Much More Than Just a Hall of Famer
ON this warm, sunny, gently breezy and otherwise perfect baseball afternoon yesterday, the American flag in left-center field of Yankee Stadium stirred at half-staff.
The game between the Yankees and Cleveland wouldn't start for another 15 minutes, but the scoreboard in center field listed a batter for the Yankees: No. 7.


Perot Leaves Door Open For '96 Presidential Run
Wrapping up his three-day national convention of independent voters, Ross Perot said today that Republicans and Democrats had still not properly reformed the American political system, and he left hanging the possibility of forming a third party in 1996 and running again for President.
The Texas billionaire, who captured 19 percent of the vote in an unusually strong independent run in 1992 and whose supporters helped put Republicans in control of Congress in 1994, insisted that he would prefer to remain a businessman and not run again, even though independent voters now constitute the largest and most profoundly disenchanted bloc of the electorate.


Accounts
Digital Pictures Inc., San Mateo, Calif., to Butler, Shine &amp; Stern, Sausalito, Calif., to handle the creative portion of the account for the developer of software for video games.
It previously was handled by Woolward &amp; Partners, San Francisco.
Creative Media, San Francisco, was named to handle the media portion.
The billings were estimated at $3 million to $4 million.
Aqua-Leisure Industries, Avon, Mass., to Calderhead &amp; Phin, New York, to handle advertising for the maker of swimming-pool products, which previously was handled by various agencies on a project basis.
The billings were estimated at $3.5 million.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about a fire at the Brooklyn Navy Yard caused by spontaneous combustion in cases of latex gloves misstated the shipping route that brought some of the gloves to New York.
They were sent directly to Oxford Distributors at the Navy Yard by the importer, SJS Supreme Corporation in Yorba Linda, Calif. -- not through IDM Medical Supply of Wyckoff, N.J., and Pro-Stat Medical Supply of Middlesex, N.J.


Phil Harris, 91, Band Leader And Radio Comedian, Dies
Phil Harris, the brash, bourbon-swigging, fast-drawling band leader who became a comic radio star as a Jack Benny sidekick in the 1930's and then enchanted new generations of fans as the unlikely voice of Baloo the Bear in Walt Disney's "Jungle Book," died on Friday night at his home at the Thunderbird Country Club in Rancho Mirage, Calif.
He was 91.
Whether as part of the famous Jack Benny radio ensemble from 1936 to 1952 or as the star of his own show from 1946 to 1954 with his wife, Alice Faye -- a major star of movie musicals in the 1930's and 40's -- Mr.
Harris, with his dark curly hair, wide, toothy grin and trademark "Hi ya, Jackson," was the epitome of the slang-slinging, wise-cracking slacker, a drummer given to one-line quips and two fingers of bourbon.


CHRONICLE
THOMAS F. LEAHY, who held seven jobs during his 30 years at CBS, including the presidency of the television network, before joining the Theater Development Fund, moved out of his office the other day so that it could be transformed into a set for "Central Park West," the series that will air on (where else?) CBS, this fall.
But Mr.
Leahy said that it was not the old CBS tie that moved him to move, albeit temporarily.
He is now the president of the Theater Development Fund, which runs the TKTS booths, subsidizes plays and supports performing arts, and, he said, "We were delighted to assist anything that gives actors in New York work."


Taking In the Sites; Grateful Dead Fans Mourn Garcia on Net
The Dead Web, the interlocking Web pages dedicated to the Grateful Dead, was a very busy place late last week.
The speed at which Dead Web pages were transformed into memorials after the death of the band's leader, Jerry Garcia, is a testament to the passion of the Grateful Dead's fans, who call themselves Deadheads, and the ease with which World Wide Web pages can be kept current.
Some sites transmitted pages at 10 times the normal rate after Mr.
Garcia's death on Wednesday.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday under a headline about Gov.
George E. Pataki's veto of a bill prohibiting doctors from making referrals to clinics in which they or their families have a financial interest was replaced in some copies by an outdated article on another subject.
Readers wishing copies of the correct article may write to the News Desk, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.


Elkington Captures P.G.A. Championship on First Playoff Hole
Maybe it figures that in a land where style is everything, golf's most stylish swinger and impeccable dresser would finally get some substance to go along with everything else.
Steve Elkington, the man with the best swing in golf, finally did the best thing in golf -- he won a major championship, and he did so emphatically.
He did it by shooting a 64 today, the lowest final round in the history of the P.G.A.
Championship, coming from six strokes back to overtake the faltering Ernie Els and then birdieing the first sudden-death playoff hole to turn back the charging Colin Montgomerie, who had merely birdied the last three holes for a 65 that tied Elkington at 17 under par.


Most Wanted; Summer Movies Lose Momentum
"Dangerous Minds" led the box-office list as a hot summer for movies cooled a bit.
It took in a soft $14.8 million in its opening weekend, not even close to the $26 million "Apollo 13" earned its first weekend, let alone the record $53.3 million opening for "Batman Forever." Indeed, only "Batman Forever," "Apollo 13" and "Pocahontas" have topped the $100 million mark so far this summer.
And then there's "Waterworld," which has earned $60.6 million to date but has slipped to No. 4 in its third weekend, on a gross of $8.6 million.


Bridge
There is an old saying: "The five-level belongs to the opponents." The reasoning is that it is usually right to defend unless the opponents can make exactly 11 tricks.
The world's top-ranked player, Bob Hamman of Dallas, offered this as his 1994 "Bols Tip," in the contest sponsored by the liqueur maker, but he spurned his own advice on the diagramed deal.
It was played in the World Pairs Championship in Albuquerque, N.M., in October, and he sat North.
His partner was Michael Rosenberg of Manhattan, and they were en route to winning silver medals for the runner-up spot.
After a one-club opening West leapt to four hearts and followed by doubling four spades to show he had defensive values as well as a long heart suit.
When East retreated to five hearts, Hamman carried on to five spades despite his own tip and despite the unfavorable vulnerability.
He was influenced by the double fit in the black suits, which always suggests a need to bid aggressively.


In Quest of CBS, Turner Meets Microsoft Chief
It has been a hectic month for Ted Turner.
In his continuing quest to buy CBS Inc., the chairman of the Turner Broadcasting System recently met with William H. Gates, chairman of the Microsoft Corporation, to discuss Microsoft's investing in Turner Broadcasting, according to a person with knowledge of the talks.
Mr.
Turner is said to be seeking several billion dollars that would enable him to make a bid for CBS, which Westinghouse recently agreed to buy for $5.4 billion and which Mr.
Turner has coveted since the 1980's.


Surplus Toll Revenue
The Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority is a division of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.
Surplus toll revenues from the T.B.T.A.'s bridges and tunnels is used to support the M.T.A.'s transit operations.
Last week, before the M.T.A. board approved a package of fare increases and service reductions, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani joined the list of New York City mayors who have called for a change in the distribution of this revenue.
In fiscal 1995, the city's subways and buses received an estimated 46% of the surplus, with the rest going to the Long Island Rail Road and Metro North.
City drivers pay about 75% of the tolls and city subways and buses carry 10 times as many passengers as the suburban railroads.
The city's share continues to shrink because of debt service on T.B.T.A. bonds.


Bosnian Army Presses Offensive Against Rebel Serbs in Central Region
The Bosnian Army pressed forward against rebel Serbian forces in central Bosnia today with infantry assaults and artillery barrages.
United Nations observers were not allowed in the immediate area of the fighting, north of the city of Bugojno, but reported they could hear well over a thousand artillery shells detonating, as well as machine-gun fire.


U.S. and Russia Seek Balkans Accord
Russia and the United States, which have separately proposed new diplomatic initiatives to halt the widening war in the Balkans, sought to coordinate their approaches at a meeting here today.
Moscow is eager to play a larger role in bringing an end to the fighting, but its support for Serbia, a traditional Russian ally, has often put it at odds with Western diplomatic efforts.


A Cold War Ruin, but With Potential
From the days of the Kaiser's rule through the Nazi era and the cold war, this town's sprawling military base has been home to armies whose power shaped world history.
Now, for the first time in living memory, there are no soldiers in Wunsdorf.
The last of the 70,000 Red Army troops who lived here until 1994 are gone, leaving behind a ghost town full of debris and memories.


Sports of The Times: The Death of Hero; An Imperfect Baseball Deity
People will mourn the tortured man with the hollow eyes and the prematurely wrinkled face, whose liver went fast, just as his knees had done.
But the real reason they are mourning Mickey Mantle today is that first he was a young lion who prowled green urban pastures, sleekly, powerfully, unpredictably.
Before he was Mickey Mantle the flawed Southwestern folk hero even to cynical Northeasterners, he was Mickey Mantle the athlete who awed people with a swing or a sprint.


The Middle Class Rediscovers Heroin
In what some characterize as an act of rebellion against the flashy cocaine culture of the 1980's, New York City's middle-class drug users are turning in greater numbers to heroin, finding it cheap, potent, easy to buy and free of the harrowing stigma associated with the 1960's junkie.
When Patricia Marback, a stockbroker and mother of two, died of an apparent overdose last week after a night of snorting heroin with her husband in their Upper West Side apartment, friends and colleagues were shocked.
But the death of Ms.
Marback, who typified success in many ways, also exemplifies the drug's growing clutch on the professional class.


Where's the Kvas?
To the Editor:
Re the new Russian fast food restaurant (Business Day, Aug. 9): I visited Moscow in 1993, and although impressed with the cleanliness and efficiency of the McDonald's, I found no equivalent serving Russian cuisine.
Although I was able to eat a 50-cent lunch at the University of Moscow cafeteria, the contents of some dishes were mysterious.
I was able to dine on fine Russian food at my hotel, but dinner cost $50.


Plan Streamlines Booking In 14 Brooklyn Precincts
Officer Anthony Cascella arrived just as the mugging victim spotted one of the three men who had slashed his fingers with a butcher knife and robbed him.
Within 10 minutes, Officer Cascella had the suspect in custody.
In another two and a half hours, the man had confessed and Officer Cascella had filed a criminal complaint.
And five hours later, after an informer phoned in a tip, the two other suspects had been arrested and were booked.


Let's Keep Trying To Predict Quakes
To the Editor:
Re your news article about earthquake forecasting (Science Times, Aug. 8): It's true that earthquake prediction may be complex and difficult, and it's true that building stronger structures will reduce deaths, but to abandon earthquake prediction research altogether is a grave mistake.
There are extremely promising techniques for predicting earthquakes that require only a modest investment in research.
Radon gas levels in well water and detection of low-frequency electromagnetic signals are two examples.
The journal Science for July 7, 1995, reported that radon in wells reached 10 times normal levels prior to the Jan. 17 quake in Kobe, Japan.
Many experiments are under way to detect the type of seismo-electrical signals discovered by Stanford's A. Fraser-Smith prior to California's Loma Prieta quake in 1989.


Animals Don't Hold Key to Spinal Cord Injury
To the Editor:
"Animal Studies Hint at Ways to Treat Spinal Cord Injuries" (Science Times, Aug. 8) offers what may be illusory hope.
Animal models have been unsuccessful in discovering treatments for spinal cord injury.
It was announced in 1988 that in the preceding 20 years, 22 agents had failed to help human spinal cord injury after success in animals.
The last reported effective treatment of spinal cord injury -- methylprednisolone in 1990 -- is not new. (High-dose steroid treatment of human central nervous system injury was reported in 1961).
But human, not animal, studies were what determined that methylprednisolone was effective in humans at high dose.


Slovakia Slips Backward
Since he returned to power last December Slovakia's Prime Minister, Vladimir Meciar, has thrown the country into fast reverse.
By slowing privatization, injecting the state back into private life and muzzling the media he is pushing Slovakia toward the authoritarian system it escaped in 1989.
Last month he scrapped a voucher system that boosted privatization by allowing Slovaks to buy shares in state-owned enterprises.
Once the stockholders were shoved aside, Mr.
Meciar's cronies began buying up prime hotels, resorts and businesses at bargain prices with only 10 percent down.
When Slovaks complained, Mr.
Meciar's spokesman described the property grab as simply a pre-emptive move against outside investors.


Man Fights Murder Extradition
A Chester, Pa., man who was indicted last week for a 1993 murder at a plastic cup factory is fighting extradition to New Jersey, said John Kaye, the Monmouth County Prosecutor.
Mr.
Kaye said the man, David Eric Kane, went to the Wincup plant in Tinton Falls two years ago and shot his wife's lover, Ronald W. Reed of Long Branch, eight times before fleeing.


Welcome, Nouveaux Riches
Is something weird happening at the top of the American class system?
Newsweek magazine, heavily borrowing from more serious works by writers like Michael Lind and Nicholas Lemann, has gone so far as to complain of the birth of an irksome new "overclass" -- a self-congratulatory new class of arugula-eating, nanny-employing, laptop-carrying former antiwar protesters.
It's always tempting to roll one's eyes at trend journalism.
But in fact, something -- if not weird, then at least peculiar -- is happening, and all the distress gives us our best clue as to what it is.
Just as writers and social critics savaged the vast new middle class that emerged in the 1950's -- its vulgarity, its banality, its taste for cars with tail fins and bungalows in the suburbs -- so writers and social critics are now expressing their discomfort with an even more unprecedented and outlandish social phenomenon: history's first mass upper class.


Bennett, 15, Soars Into the Spotlight
Brooke Bennett remembers the first time she met Janet Evans.
It was two and a half years ago at the United States spring swimming championships in Nashville.
"She won three titles there," Bennett recalled.
"I was just a 12-year-old in my first nationals. It was very exciting. She gave me an autograph and said, 'Good luck,' and I felt great."


Whitman to Sign Business Bills
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman is to sign a package of bills today intended to assist New Jersey businesses and to attract new companies to the state by enhancing cooperation between business and government and making it easier for companies to get loans and capital.


In America; The Fantasy Coup
Retired Gen.
Olusegun Obasanjo, a respected former President of Nigeria, was taken from his home one morning last March by henchmen of the Nigerian dictator, Gen.
Sani Abacha.
General Obasanjo was accused, along with about 40 others, of plotting to overthrow General Abacha.
A farcical set of proceedings was held before a secret military tribunal and convictions were handed all around.
General Obasanjo, it is believed, was sentenced to 25 years in prison.
His onetime deputy, Gen.
Shehu Musa Yaradua, was also given a long prison term.
Many of the alleged coup plotters were sentenced to death.


Wilbur Stark, TV Producer, 81
Wilbur Stark, a radio, television and film producer, died on Friday at New York Hospital.
He was 81.
The cause was cancer, said Naura Hayden, a friend.


Subway Fight Involving Off-Duty Officers Hurts 3
Three men were injured with knives in a crowded subway car on the Upper West Side early yesterday in a brawl involving two off-duty New York City police officers, the police said.
One of the officers' companions said the fight began about 1 A.M. on a C train when the officers and three companions saw an argument in which one man pushed another who was holding a baby, and tried to intervene.


Asian Youth Orchestra
The Asian Youth Orchestra, which is to tour the United States from Thursday to Aug. 30 under the direction of Sergiu Comissiona, has scheduled a performance of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony on Aug. 23 at 8 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall.
The ensemble, founded in 1987 by Yehudi Menuhin, changes its players yearly through a series of auditions in Asia.
The players then gather in Hong Kong for a week of instruction and rehearsal.
The American tour is to end in Los Angeles on Aug. 30 with a concert at the Hollywood Bowl.


Man's Body Is Found Near a Rail Line in Queens
A pedestrian walking near an Amtrak rail line in Jackson Heights, Queens, yesterday morning discovered a suitcase containing the body of an unidentified man possibly in his 20's, the police said.
The suitcase was found at 7:50 A.M. near the corner of 49th Street and 25th Avenue, said Officer Debra Kearns, a Police Department spokeswoman.
The Amtrak right of way passes beneath the intersection of the two streets.


INSIDE
Perot Keeps His Hopes Alive
At a convention of independent voters in Dallas, Ross Perot held out the possibility of forming a third political party in 1996 and running for President again.
Page A8.
Ethics Panels' Partisan Split
Congress's bipartisan ethics committees are being threatened by public party-line splits over Newt Gingrich and Bob Packwood.
Page A10.
Kashmiri Rebels Kill Tourist
Kashmiri separatists killed a foreign tourist they were holding hostage and threatened to kill others unless India frees 15 militants.
Page A2.
Farewell to Joe Camel?
Proposals to curtail teen-age smoking would restrict cigarette advertising in magazines and outdoors, and promotions in stores.
Page D6.
Overtime for Golf Title
Steve Elkington birdied the first sudden-death hole to take the P.G.A.
Championship from Colin Montgomerie.
SportsMonday, page C1.


It's Not Gangsta Rap, but It Is Raunchy
When it was reported last week that Time Warner was considering selling its 50 percent stake in Interscope Records, everyone assumed that the parent company was eager to divest itself of Interscope gangsta rappers like Snoop Doggy Dogg, Dr.
Dre and Tupac Shakur.
But there is another problematic artist on the label's roster, one long considered an innocuous crooner.
For the last 30 years, he has been making extravagantly suggestive gestures while belting out songs with violent and lewd lyrics.


Patents; On-line services and files on CD-ROM's are making patent searches a lot easier and quicker.
FOR decades, doing patent research meant going to the Patent and Trademark Office Search Room (or, more commonly, hiring a lawyer to send someone there).
The researcher would spend hours thumbing through indexes, reams of documents, or bound volumes of patent paperwork.
Times have changed.
In the last few years, a number of private companies have begun selling CD-ROM versions of the patent files, listing those awarded since 1976, when the agency began computerizing its records.
More recently, the creation of on-line searching systems has made research methods even easier for patent lawyers and inventors.
Here's a small sampling of ways to get at those patents from a home or office computer.


Dominican Festivities Spread to 2 Boroughs
Hundreds of people poured into two neighborhoods in Queens and Brooklyn last night as participants in yesterday afternoon's Dominican Day Parade in Manhattan continued their celebrations, the police said.
Five people were arrested for disorderly conduct in Corona, Queens, as about 200 police officers filled the area near 100th Street and 37th Avenue, said Doram Tamari, a police spokesman.
One man was arrested for throwing a bottle at a police officer, who was struck in the arm, said Tom Kelly, deputy commissioner of public information.


Into the Water, for Records and Fish


Kenneth Lo, 81, an Ambassador Of Chinese Cuisine to the West
Kenneth Lo, an internationally known authority on Chinese cuisine, died on Friday in London, where he lived.
He was 81.
The cause was cancer, The Associated Press said.


Victory by '95 Yankees Becomes Afterthought
The Yankees, black armbands on their sleeves, had tears in their eyes yesterday.
So did many of the 45,866 fans in attendance, the third-largest crowd of the season at Yankee Stadium, where the flags flew at half-staff.
There was a moment of silence, as there was at every major league ball park today, followed by a video remembrance of the late Mickey Mantle; the crowd gave a long standing ovation.


Mantle's Cancer 'Most Aggressive' His Doctors Had Seen
Pathology tests showed weeks ago that the liver cancer from which Mickey Mantle died yesterday was an aggressive type.
But the extraordinary speed with which the cancer riddled his body despite chemotherapy was surprising, particularly to his doctors at Baylor Transplant Institute in Dallas where the former Yankee star received a liver transplant on June 8.
Initially, the doctors and the Mantle family were encouraged by the technical success of the surgery.
Mantle began taking chemotherapy for the cancer, a tumor that started in the liver and known as a hepatoma.


Games With Another Disney at Controls
Thomas Dolby, the British electronic music wizard, dropped by because, he said, he just had to have a try.
Beside him was Peter Schneider, the elfin head of the Walt Disney Company's animation studio, who also wandered in uninvited for a spin.
Within minutes both had been transformed into delighted intergalactic virtual warriors.
There was much to inspire awe and amusement at the huge Siggraph computer graphics trade show here last week, but what had piqued the interest of these two men was Virtual World Entertainment, the creator of a theme park in a box, a new vision of what a video arcade game can be.


CHRONICLE
HAZEL O'LEARY, the Secretary of Energy, is traveling to South Africa on Friday to help the Government bring electricity to rural areas and even some urban ones, and she will be carrying precious cargo: 3,120 pounds of books.
A member of her staff, AL OWENS, who was there in May doing advance work for the trip, learned that many communities had no books for either adults or children.


CHRONICLE
The granddaughter of one of the "Fighting Sullivans" christened the Navy's newest destroyer Saturday in the name of her grandfather and his four brothers, who were killed in World War II.
"May the luck of the Irish always be with you and your crew," the granddaughter, KELLY ANN SULLIVAN LOUGHREN, said before smashing a bottle of champagne against the bow of The Sullivans at Bath Iron Works in Maine, The Associated Press reported.


Industry Rift Emerges Over Computer Data Secrecy Issue
Some of biggest names in the computer industry sent separate letters to the White House last week in pre-emptive moves aimed at a proposed regulation originally intended to insure that law-enforcement officials have access to encoded telephone and computer communications.
The proposal may be released as soon as this week.
But as the Government's task force on the encryption issue prepared to disclose the closely held details of the proposal -- the latest version of a measure revealed more than three years ago but subsequently reconsidered in the face of industry opposition -- unexpected divisions emerged from the last-minute, scattershot lobbying.


50 Years After V-J Day, the Memories Are Sweet
Squeezed in a neon canyon of billboards touting Sony, Samsung and Suntory, thousands of veterans made a sentimental journey to Times Square yesterday, remembering a delirious V-J Day celebration that spontaneously erupted in the same spot 50 years ago.
A half-century had naturally dulled the euphoria; this crowd kept to their chairs, humming softly to Glenn Miller, laughing at Henny Youngman ("I said, 'Doctor, how do I stand?' He says, 'That's what puzzles me.' "), leafing through memories of when they were lean, fearless and 19.


The Met and the Mets
The New York State Legislature budgeted $83.5 million this year to build or expand 18 sports facilities and just $30 million for grants to the arts.
Its priorities are skewed.
In New York City alone, art museums outdraw professional sports.
Just one, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, had 4.9 million visitors in the past year, which was more than the combined attendance for the Mets, the Yankees, the Knicks and the Rangers.


THE DEATH OF A HERO Even in the End, Mantle's Circle Remained Unbroken; Teammates Lifted Spirits In Final Days
In the end, the muscles that had made Mickey Mantle an emblem of athletic might were gone.
His physique was withered not by age but by a liver transplant, cancer and desperate rounds of chemotherapy.
He knew, but never told the public, that he had perhaps the most aggressive tumors his doctors had seen.
But he also had his Yankee teammates, his lifelong friends, whose arrival by his hospital bed beginning last Wednesday night rallied his spirits one final time, even when his doctors thought he had only hours, not days.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-7 RUSSIA'S THREATENED VILLAGE LIFE  Village life has always been regarded as the grim repository of the Russian soul, but with the lure of urban life and a breakdown in restrictions on moving, many small towns are threatened.
A1  A SHOCK FOR BOSNIAN SERBS  Serbs in a major city in Bosnia were in dismay over the defeat of the Serbs in the Krajina region of Croatia, as well as by the split in their own Bosnian Serb leadership.
A1  U.S.-RUSSIAN MEETING ON BALKANS  American and Russian officials met to try to coordinate their approaches to seeking peace in the Balkans, with a growing recognition by American officials that they must address Russian concerns.
A6  The Bosnian Army attacked rebel Serb areas.
A6  A BRITISH PAPER STUMBLES  The Independent newspaper was born nine years ago in a rush of optimism.
Now, beset by Britain's recent recession, the rising cost of newsprint and a price war instigated by Rupert Murdoch, The Independent is floundering.
D7
WEST BANK VIOLENCE  Israeli settlers killed a Palestinian protester in a dispute over expanded Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank.
Nevertheless, the process moved forward, with approval by Israel of a partial pact.
A3  ISRAEL TURNS TO FOREIGN LABOR  More than 70,000 foreign workers from places as remote as Thailand are in Israel, since the Government restricted entry to Palestinians who once did the work, but the move has caused its own problems.
A3  KASHMIRI REBELS KILL TOURIST  Kashmiri rebels who have been holding five foreign tourists captive killed one of them, a Norwegian, and threatened to kill the others unless 15 separatist militants are freed from jail.
A2  In Germany, recycling old Soviet military bases.
A5  Rome Journal: Gifts and gimmicks -- anything to sell newspapers.
A4 National A8-11, A16 FEAR OF BUDGET'S FAILURE  With Congress having left Washington for its summer recess, some Republicans are beginning to fear that their first year's effort on the budget will fall victim to the clock and to re-election politics.
A1  ETHICS PANELS TURN PARTISAN  Congress's bipartisan ethics committees that deliberate in private are being threatened by public party-line splits over two of the most powerful men in Congress, Newt Gingrich and Bob Packwood.
A10  INTERNMENT'S LASTING EFFECT  The internment of Japanese-Americans during World War II not only deprived an ethnic group of their freedom, it changed the face of America, setting off an eastward migration of Japanese.
A8  PEROT HINTS AT THIRD PARTY  Ross Perot said Republicans and Democrats still had not properly reformed the political system and he held out the possibility of forming a third party in 1996 and running for President.
A8  U.S.
POOR CHILDREN SUFFER  A study showed that poor children in the United States are poorer than the children in most other Western industrialized nations.
A9  SUSPECT'S SISTER INTERVIEWED  Jennifer McVeigh says F.B.I. agents showed her pictures of dead children to pressure her into talking about what they say was her brother's role in the Oklahoma bombing, Time magazine reported.
A9  KHMER ROUGE REBORN  More than 15 years after the Khmer Rouge were driven from the killing fields of Cambodia, they have been reborn in working-class communities across America.
A11  A leading theorist of the Khmer Rouge lives in New York City.
A11  A CHURCH'S INTERNET FIGHT  The Church of Scientology is battling dissidents who have used the Internet to mail out its secret scriptures for which some members pay thousands of dollars.
A12  DANGER FROM SOCCER BALLS  Soccer and other sports in which players are routinely hit on the head can lead to mild problems in thinking and concentrating, according to a new study.
A16  Three million Americans aged 20 to 37 risk catching measles.
A8 Metro Digest B1 COSTLY LAWSUITS ON LEAD  New York City is facing a liability explosion because of the nearly 1,000 claims filed on behalf of children exposed to lead in city apartments.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  Theater: Critic's Notebook.
C11  Music: Seattle Opera's "Ring." C11  James DeMars's "American Requiem." C12  Books: "So Close to Heaven." C14  Television: "Elia Kazan: A Director's Journey." C14  Sports C1-10  Baseball: Teammates helped Mantle's spirits.
C1  Yankees defeat Indians.
C4  Mets drop second straight.
C7  Column: Berkow on Mantle.
C1  Football: Jets' receivers show promise.
C2  Giants designed for speed.
C2  Golf: Elkington wins P.G.A.
C1 Obituaries B6-7  Phil Harris, radio star.
John Helm Pratt, Federal judge.
Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15  Editorials  Mr.
Clinton can save Yellowstone.
An enlightened farm bill.
Slovakia slips backward.
Topics: Beach niche.
Letters Bob Herbert: The fantasy coup.
David Frum: Welcome, nouveaux riches.
Mary Jo White: Collecting child support is a Federal matter  Michael Casserly: Too much despair in the search for a chancellor.
Chronicle A12 Bridge C12 Crossword C12


Cambodians in U.S. Say the Dark Shadow of the Khmer Rouge Is Back
In the rolling hills of northeastern Massachusetts, 42-year-old Yin Sarun thought he had finally found peace from the nightmares that had haunted him since he fled the killing fields of Cambodia nearly 15 years ago.
It was 1993 and he was starting a new life in this old mill town, as a teacher in the growing community of Cambodian refugees.
He had just settled his family into a white clapboard house, and his nightly visions of the rotting corpses of those killed by Khmer Rouge soldiers had begun to fade.


Proposed regulations may mean trouble for industries hooked on tobacco marketing dollars.
TO get an idea of how sweeping President Clinton's plan to curtail teen-age smoking could be, pick up a copy of this week's TV Guide.
Under the proposed regulations, which are under legal challenge by the tobacco industry, any publication with more than 15 percent of its readership under the age of 18 would be permitted to run only informational ads on cigarettes.


Wakefield Pitches Red Sox to 11th in Row
Red Sox 3, Orioles 2
Jose Canseco hit a three-run homer in the first inning and Tim Wakefield made it stand up with ninth-inning help from Stan Belinda as the Boston Red Sox won their 11th straight yesterday, 3-2, over the visiting Baltimore Orioles.
Wakefield (14-1) retired the first 10 batters and had a no-hitter going until Rafael Palmeiro's solo home run with one out in the seventh.
Orioles starter Rick Krivda (0-2) struck out a career-high eight batters in seven innings, but the Orioles couldn't overcome Canseco's three-run homer in the first.


Dissidents Use Computer Network to Rile Scientology
The Church of Scientology is battling a band of on-line dissidents who have used the Internet to mail out globally its secret scriptures, for which some members must pay thousands of dollars.
On Saturday, as a result of a copyright infringement lawsuit, United States marshals here seized the computer of a former church employee who had electronically posted a 136-page text that he said was available in court records.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Turner's Quest for Network Now Leads to Microsoft  The media world is watching yet another effort by Ted Turner to acquire a network.
In his quest to assemble financing for a bid for CBS, the head of the Turner Broadcasting System recently met with William H. Gates, Microsoft's chairman, to discuss an investment in Turner, according to a person with knowledge of the talks.
Mr.
Turner has already enlisted the help of Michael Milken, the financier, to work up a bid for CBS, which has agreed to be sold to Westinghouse for $5.4 billion.
He is also trying to negotiate a purchase of King World Productions that could provide cash for a run at the network.  [ Page D2. ] When Discarded Books Survive  McGraw-Hill expected a company called Guaranteed Destruction to live up to its name and destroy tons of unwanted textbooks in 1993.
But McGraw-Hill contends in a lawsuit that the company sold trailer-loads of the books to intermediaries who funneled them into the campus book trade.  [ D7. ] For Jerry Garcia, Electronic Grieving  The Internet pages dedicated to The Grateful Dead rock group, known as the Dead Web, have been extraordinarily busy since the death of Jerry Garcia, the group's leader.
The speed at which Dead Web pages memorialized Garcia was a testament to the passion of his fans and the ease with which such pages can be updated.
Taking In the Sites.  [ D8. ] Tiring of the Name Game  The company in charge of assigning "domain names" -- the Internet equivalent of vanity plates -- has wearied of the disputes about who gets to use what name in cyberspace.
So it is requiring registrants to indemnify it against lawsuits.
Peter H. Lewis: On Line.  [ D5. ] A Client-Stoked Consolidation Fever  Cisco Systems' plan to buy Combinet underscored the consolidation process going on in the networking industry, a response to corporate clients' desire for bigger suppliers rather than a variety of vendors.  [ D5. ] How to Strike It Rich On the Internet  Marc L. Andreessen, the 24-year-old co-founder of Netscape Communications, became the newest member of Silicon Valley's instant millionaires club when the company went public last week.
Bill Carter: Television.  [ D7. ] The Poverty Gap Among Children  A study shows that poor children in the United States are poorer than the children in most other Western industrial nations.  [ A9. ] Tobacco Marketing Under Siege  Plans to curtail smoking by teen-agers include new limits on cigarette marketing that would have a profound impact on magazine and outdoor advertising and on store promotions.
The rules could affect trademarks and brands that the companies have spent billions to develop.
Advertising.  [ D6. ] A British Paper Stumbles  The Independent newspaper of Britain is floundering, beset by a recent recession, the rising cost of newsprint and a price war instigated by Rupert Murdoch.  [ D7. ]


New Freedoms Churn a Quiet Russian Village
Not many people would stand all night in a damp field with a shotgun for a companion.
But this is the season of the potato thief in rural Russia, so Maria Petrovna is taking no chances.
After putting in a 16-hour day tending her animals (a cow, some chickens, a few pigs), baking bread, making cheese, culling the vegetable garden and chopping a little wood, the 68-year-old Mrs.
Petrovina slips out of the three-room house she shares with the cattle and heads into the gathering darkness.


No Headline
What can you say about Mickey after you say he was one of the greatest? -- GENE WOODLING, former teammate of Mickey Mantle.  [ B7:1 ]


So What's a Web Browser, Anyway?
The Netscape Communications Corporation introduced itself to Wall Street last Wednesday with an initial public offering that rocked the stock market.
The price of Netscape shares soared from $28 to $74.75, settling at $58.25 by day's end and $52 by week's end.
Netscape has created what many Internet users consider the best Web Browser.
Browsers allow people with a low tolerance for computerese to click-and-jump through the dense data fields.
The tour winds people around a region of the Internet called the World Wide Web.


Pulp Nonfiction: When Textbooks Refuse to Die
It would take a close reading of McGraw-Hill's all-time best-selling college text, the $61 "Economy," to understand why publishers sometimes have to destroy textbooks to save them -- or to make more money on them.
But it does not take too close a study of the company's current civil lawsuit against the publishing industry's garbage man to know that the same people who turn wood pulp into ideas expect equal diligence when it comes to turning ideas back into pulp.
When expensive texts on child psychology or chemistry hit the used-book market, sales of new editions dip, along with profits for the publishing house and royalties to authors.
So publishers would rather get rid of excess inventory than let it show up as bookstore discounts.


GSD &amp; M to Retain Texas Tourism
The Texas Department of Commerce Tourism Board in Austin has retained GSD &amp; M in Austin to handle its account for another five years.
The billings were estimated at $8.5 million.
GSD&amp;M was awarded the account last week after a four-month mandated review that also included two Dallas advertising agencies, the Richards Group and Moroch &amp; Associates.


North Castle Buys Ally &amp; Gargano Unit
North Castle Partners in Stamford, Conn., has acquired Addirect, the direct marketing unit of Ally &amp; Gargano in Norwalk, Conn., and has organized it in a new direct marketing division, called North Castle Direct.
The terms were not disclosed.
The sale of Addirect, which was announced last week, was the second purchase of an Ally division within a week.
Earlier last week, Ally agreed to sell its Dugan/Farley Communications unit in Upper Saddle River, N.J., to Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt.


Israelis and Others Feel the Sting of a Cellular Phone Bug
A software bug inside one model of Motorola cellular phone, coupled with the voracious appetite of Israelis for cellular calling, has demonstrated an area of vulnerability in the growing web of digital communications systems -- and prompted Motorola to issue a worldwide recall.
Motorola introduced the Alpha digital phone in December, and sporadic problems were reported in Hong Kong in February.
By April, after about 65,000 Alphas had been distributed in Israel by Cellcom, the second-largest cellular provider there, the Alphas were being blamed for sound quality that made voices inaudible, a lack of reception in areas where reception was promised, the cutting off of calls and long periods when the phones simply did not work.


NEW YORK GIRDING FOR SURGE IN SUITS OVER LEAD DAMAGE
New York City is facing a liability explosion because of the nearly 1,000 claims filed on behalf of children exposed to lead in city apartments.
Many of the children have learning disorders, mild retardation or other neurological problems commonly linked to lead poisoning.
Resolving the cases already filed, city officials said, could cost as much as $500 million during the next several years, more than twice the $230 million paid last year to settle all claims against the city, from police abuse cases to botched deliveries of babies at public hospitals.


Low Ranking for Poor American Children
Poor children in the United States are poorer than the children in most other Western industrialized nations, as young Americans suffer the brunt of several trends toward greater economic inequality, a new study shows.
Only in Israel and Ireland are poor children worse off than poor American youths, according to the study, an analysis of 18 nations by the Luxembourg Income Study, a nonprofit group based in Walferdange, Luxembourg.


Equity Offerings Set To Occur This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:


War Legacy: Japanese-American Diaspora
When his fellow Chicagoans find out that Sam Ozaki is a native Californian, they almost always ask: "How in the world did you end up in this cold, windy city?"
The answer, the 70-year-old Mr. Ozaki explains, is rooted in war and racism.


Cable TV's Quiet Victory
In the rush before the House passed its sweeping communications bill this month, Gerald Waldron was amazed.
Mr.
Waldron, who represents network television affiliates, was among the legion of lobbyists prowling the halls of Congress.
The local phone companies were out in force, as were the long-distance carriers, and every other conceivable sector of the communications industries.


Former Principal Depicted in 'Lean on Me' Takes on a Tougher Role
Joe Clark has been in his new job as director of the Essex County Youth House for only a few days and he does not quite have his bearings.
Bounding down four flights of stairs after speaking to a group of boys in the gym, he asks an aide: "What floor am I on?"


Settlers' Gunfire Kills Palestinian at West Bank Protest
A Palestinian was killed today when Jewish settlers fired at protesters who wrecked an encampment near this settlement.
It was the first fatal incident in a wave of demonstrations by the settlers, who have squatted on West Bank hills overlooking their communities to protest an expected agreement on expanding Palestinian self-rule beyond the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.


After a Roadblock, 37 Head for Camp
It was a day of lovely chaos at the Incarnation Children's Center in the Washington Heights section of Manhattan yesterday, with children throwing kickballs, ducking inside playhouses and exhausting every adult in sight.
There were smiles, occasional tears and sighs of relief as the 37 children, who are infected with H.I.V., boarded two buses bound for the Poconos in Pennsylvania to begin a long-awaited trip to summer camp that was almost derailed by the stigma attached to AIDS.


Public Libraries, Too, Draw the Big Crowds
To the Editor:
I was pleased to learn that New York City's art museums are drawing larger crowds than all New York professional sports teams combined ("Museums: The Sluggers of the Cultural Lineup," news article, Aug. 9), but art museums are not the only city institutions showing increased attendance.
Last year more than seven million people visited public libraries in Brooklyn -- almost three times the total population of the borough.
The Central Library, at Grand Army Plaza, saw its turnstiles turn more than two million times last year.
And on any given Sunday an average of 12,000 people use that library building during the four hours it is open.


Mickey Mantle, Great Yankee Slugger, Dies at 63
Mickey Mantle, the most powerful switch-hitter in baseball history and the successor to Babe Ruth and Joe DiMaggio as the symbol of the long reign of the New York Yankees, died of cancer yesterday in Dallas.
He was 63.
Mantle died at 2:10 A.M.
Eastern time at Baylor University Medical Center, succumbing to the disease that had spread from his liver to most of his other vital organs.
His wife, Merlyn, and son David were at his bedside.


Newark's Mayor Visits Soweto
Mayor Sharpe James toured the black township of Soweto, South Africa, yesterday and said it would make the perfect sister city for Newark, which he described as "a city that has seen similar problems," adding that Newark could identify with Soweto's "struggles and population."


Beach Niche
One of the pleasures of summer is walking barefoot on a beach, looking for pieces of colored glass and pottery that have been buffed by rocks and fine sand, then tossed up by the sea.
For children, it is a diverting treasure hunt.
For grown-ups, the fragments make colorful decoration in a bowl or the base of a lamp.
These days, alas, the supply seems diminished.
There was always more green than other colors, and blue was the rarest.
But, while there are no statistics on this, it appears that recycling reclaims a lot of what used to wind up on the beach, and plastic bottles have taken the place of a lot of what used to be glass.


It's Not Quite Paradise; Running an Inn on Block Island Teaches Owners All About Beauty and Balance Sheets
You discover things about life out here in your first season running an old Victorian inn on a windswept speck of tidal moors and bluffs.
Sheets, for example.
Brad and Anne Marthens can tell you a lot about sheets.
It was their first week in business in late April when the Marthenses discovered that the innkeeping guidebooks were wrong about linens.
On Block Island, because of the vicissitudes of the ferry schedule -- and the fact that the nearest commercial laundry is on the mainland -- an inn needs three full sets of linen, not two.
Dirty sheets go out on the 12:30 P.M. ferry to Point Judith, R.I., and they do not come back until the 9 A.M. boat the next day, at the earliest.


Bosnian Serbs, Angry at Setback And Tired of War, Blame Leaders
Accustomed to bragging of victory rather than swallowing defeat, the usually self-assured Bosnian Serbs here are saying they feel betrayed and are fed up with the war they have conducted with seeming invincibility for so long.
A sense of shock and bewilderment descended on this city, the largest the Serbs hold in Bosnia, as the truth sank in that the Serbian-held Krajina area had caved in without a fight to the Croatian forces.


Judge Halts Offenders Program
Chief Justice Robert N. Wilentz has suspended a program that keeps youths who have committed nonviolent crimes from being incarcerated.
The judge said he issued his order in response to reports that the teen-age suspects in a killing of a Camden youth last week were under the supervision of the Juvenile Intensive Supervision Program.
Edwin H. Stier, a former state and Federal prosecutor, was asked to investigate the program.


'The Mick. The Mick.' Sad Fans Remember Athletic Excellence
For baseball fans, the spirit of Mickey Mantle has probably never been entirely absent from Yankee Stadium during the past four decades.
But its hovering presence yesterday, hours after Mantle died of cancer in a Dallas hospital at the age of 63, infused the Yankees' victory over the Cleveland Indians with a palpable melancholy.
"It's really a sad day," said Fred Blickman, a 47-year-old insurance executive from Eastchester who grew up a Yankee fan in the Bronx and was waiting to enter the ball park yesterday with his 9-year-old son, Matthew.
"I didn't think it would hit me, but this morning, it really did. I have a large photo of him, taken in 1956. We had it autographed and it's sitting in the den. He was an icon, a man like any other, but still larger than life. He meant a lot to this city."


These Days, Giants Are Traveling in Fast Circles
Gary Harrell grew up in the tough neighborhood of Liberty City in Miami.
It was there he learned to play football.
And to be very, very quick.
He stood about 5 feet 7 inches tall and when you are that small you must make yourself hard to catch.
In the mold of David Meggett only faster, Harrell is a backup wide receiver who is a small symbol of what is happening to the Giants.
While keeping the core principle of what made the Giants' offense great -- a big offensive line and a bruising running game -- they have added speed to that brutal power.


Sword vs. Simile, in the 'Ring'
It is tempting to think that Wagner wrote "The Ring of the Nibelung" fully conscious of how impossible its aspirations were.
At the bottom of this magnificent, gluttonous musical act lie intractable contradiction and a certain self-destructiveness.
One can picture the great man, ever greedy for attention and a virtuoso at attracting it, calculating a work that would keep interpreters busy -- and tantalized -- well into the next millennium.
For "The Ring," while inviting cosmic speculation of every kind, remains stubbornly site-specific.
We can turn the Rhine into a hydroelectric dam or Valhalla into a backstage, but that spear, that sword, that dragon and that magic helmet do not go away.
They keep popping up, draining the blood from every ingenious simile we choose to devise.


Talking About Spies


Ethics Committees Stumble in Era of Partisanship
Three decades after Congress established bipartisan ethics committees that deliberated in private, the process is threatened by public party-line splits on major issues in the cases of two of the most powerful men in Congress, Speaker Newt Gingrich and Senator Bob Packwood.
In the trenches, Republicans and Democrats earnestly accuse the other side of allowing partisanship into committee meetings as a bumptious intruder.


Heroin's Hold On the Middle Class
When Patricia Marback, a stockbroker and mother of two, died of an apparent overdose after snorting heroin with her husband in their Upper West Side apartment, friends and colleagues were shocked.
But the death of Ms.
Marback, who typified success in many ways, also exemplifies heroin's growing clutch on the professional class in New York.
Article, page B3.


Foreign Workers Replacing Arabs on Israeli Farms
Yakov Neuman's farm is the stuff of Israeli legend, a lush, green spread wrested from the arid soil through the sweat and toil of new arrivals.
But the new arrivals these days are not the idealistic Zionists from Eastern Europe like Mr.
Neuman's late father, but contract workers from Thailand.
Their faces incongruously cloaked in knit ski masks to ward off the brutal sun, 10 Thai men moved steadily between the long rows of lush eggplants behind Mr.
Neuman's modern house, rapidly picking and packing them for markets in Tel Aviv and Jerusalem.


Study Links Injuries to Head Impacts in Soccer
Soccer and other sports in which players routinely receive impacts to the head can lead to mild problems in thinking and concentrating, suggesting minor effects on the brain, according to a new study by neuropsychologists.
In the study, reported Saturday at the American Psychological Association meeting in New York City, players who most frequently returned a soccer ball by hitting it with their head showed relative signs of impairment on neuropsychological tests when compared with players who headed infrequently.
The findings, by Dr.
Adrienne Witol, a psychologist at the Medical College of Virginia in Richmond, were based on tests of 60 soccer players, 18 to 29 years old.


METRO DIGEST
SUITS OVER LEAD PROVING COSTLY TO CITY
New York City is facing a liability explosion because of the nearly 1,000 claims filed on behalf of children exposed to lead in city apartments.
Many of the children have learning disorders, mild retardation or other neurological problems commonly linked to lead poisoning.
Resolving the cases already filed could cost as much as $500 million during the next several years, more than twice the $230 million paid last year to settle all claims against the city, from police abuse cases to botched deliveries of babies at public hospitals.


John H. Pratt, 84, Federal Judge Who Helped Define Civil Rights
John Helm Pratt, a Federal judge in Washington whose rulings over nearly three decades helped to shape legal definitions of civil rights and discrimination, died on Aug. 11 at his home in Chevy Chase, Md.
He was 84.
Judge Pratt served on the United States District Court in Washington from 1968 until his death.
His high-profile cases included the Watergate trial of G. Gordon Liddy and an unsuccessful appeal by James R. Hoffa, the Teamsters union president, to lift terms of a Presidential pardon that barred him from running for union office again.


With its Olympic megadeal, NBC sees itself as the network of big-time sports.
AFTER NBC made one of the most expensive sports deals in history last week when it agreed to pay $1.27 billion for the television rights to the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney, Australia, and the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City, the usual attacks by rival networks decrying the economic folly of overpaying for sports events were surprisingly muted.
In fact, executives from the other networks generally praised the pre-emptive strike by NBC.
Peter Lund, for example, president of the CBS Broadcast Group, said, "It was a very shrewd, opportunistic get on NBC's part."


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Agassi Wins 6th Title
Andre Agassi handled wilting heat and the two-time champion Michael Chang to win the Thriftway ATP Championship in Mason, Ohio, yesterday, matching a career high with his sixth tournament title of the year.
Agassi had no letdowns on a 96-degree afternoon as he outplayed Chang by 7-5, 6-2.
Agassi solidified his ranking as No. 1 in the world and equaled his 1988 benchmark of six tournament victories in a year.
The victory pushed his hardcourt record for the year to 41-2 and left him on a roll heading into the United States Open, which he won last year.


Arnell Group Gets Hanes Hosiery Ads
The Sara Lee Hosiery division of the Sara Lee Corporation has expanded its relationship with the Arnell Group in New York by naming that agency to handle advertising for its Hanes hosiery line, which had been handled by Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York since 1969.
Though the billings were not disclosed, Competitive Media Reporting of New York, which tracks ad spending, estimated them at $9 million for 1994.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to the bills market, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three-and six-month bills.
On Thursday, the Treasury will auction a one-year bill.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.40 percent and a six-month bill was at 5.44 percent; the rate on a one-year bill was 5.45 percent.


Some Republicans Are Wary Of Balanced-Budget Promise
The Republican-led Congress that left town last week for its summer recess heads home rightly boasting that it has made as much progress toward setting a Federal budget as Democrats made by this time of year when they ruled Capitol Hill.
But this is no ordinary year, or garden-variety budget.
Rather, it is the cornerstone of Republican fiscal policy, the first of seven budgets intended to erase the annual Federal deficit by 2002.
Yet despite some progress in cutting spending this summer, even some Republicans are beginning to fear that their first year's effort on the budget will fall victim to the clock and the irresistible pressures of re-election politics.


A Spot for Hot (and Very Fast) Licks
Terry Syrek picked his electric guitar with lightning speed.
Moving his hands across the strings, he fixed his eyes on a handwritten sign taped to his foot pedals that read, "Play faster." He did.
When he stopped, six teen-age boys clad in a variety of black rock T-shirts -- Queensryche, Ozzy Osbourne, Guns 'n' Roses -- stared.
Mr.
Syrek, 26, laughed.
"I haven't even warmed up," he said.


6 Tips on How to Earn $52 Million by Age 24
Meet Marc L. Andreessen, the newest member of Silicon Valley's instant millionaires club.
On Wednesday, on the strength of a phenomenal opening day of stock trading for the Netscape Communications Corporation, Mr.
Andreessen, the company's 24-year-old co-founder, became worth more than $58 million -- on paper, at least.


Harris Drury Cohen Wins 2 Accounts
Harris Drury Cohen in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., was named to handle two accounts, with combined billings estimated at more than $8 million.
Select Beverages Inc. in Chicago, which distributes soft-drink brands like Canfields and Graf's, named Harris Drury to handle its account, which was previously divided between Shaefer &amp; Condon in Chicago and Stone Advertising in Milwaukee.
The billings were estimated at more than $5 million.
Harris Drury was awarded the account without a formal review.


Threat of Terrorism At Kennedy Airport
The threat of a terrorist attack against Kennedy International Airport had the airport operating under the most stringent security measures since the 1991 Persian Gulf war, with each passenger without a ticket treated as an unwanted guest and each untended car or suitcase as a potential bomb.


49ers Play Their Familiar Tune
49ers 17, Chargers 6
With nothing at stake, the San Francisco 49ers still dominated the San Diego Chargers.
Nearly seven months after embarrassing the Chargers, 49-26, in the Super Bowl, the 49ers won last night's exhibition game, 17-6.
It was their fifth straight exhibition victory over the Chargers and eighth straight over all against San Diego.


Astros Send Meek Mets To Second Straight Loss
Tonight, the Mets played their 100th game of a season that already seems a century old.
Winning streaks that show promise and raise expectations quickly turn into losing streaks where the Mets display ample proof that they're the youngest team in baseball.
Once again Manager Dallas Green was left scratching his head after Astros left fielder James Mouton drove in four runs to lead Houston to a 5-3 victory at the Astrodome.
Mouton's performance provided a sharp contrast to the Mets, who couldn't generate much offense at all after scoring all three of their runs in the first inning.
Houston pitchers would combine for 12 strikeouts as the Mets managed just six hits for the second straight night.


After Terrorist Threat, Kennedy Becomes a Wary Fortress
The threat of a terrorist attack against Kennedy International Airport had the airport operating yesterday under the most stringent security measures since the 1991 gulf war, with each passenger without a ticket treated like an unwanted guest and each untended car or suitcase like a potential bomb.
Law enforcement officials were investigating the threat, which a State Department official said had come from inside the United States and which prompted J.F.K. to barricade parking lots and question passengers.
A New York City police official who spoke on condition of anonymity said a car bombing was thought to be the likeliest form of attack, but F.B.I. officials refused to comment on that account.


At U.S.O., Nostalgia And Spirit
It wasn't quite the spontaneous party of 50 years ago, when 2 million people jammed into Times Square to celebrate the end of World War II, but the city's V-J Day commemoration yesterday did its best to re-create the bygone spirit of the age.
Margaret Whiting crooned wartime swing standards.
Henny Youngman retold jokes that probably first bombed before Pearl Harbor.
But perhaps the most interesting bit of nostalgia was provided by Marcia Cillan, who opened the program with "The Star-Spangled Banner" in a clear and soulful soprano.


Ex-Official's Life in U.S. Evokes Fear
Chief among the Khmer Rouge figures living in the United States is a former diplomat who was close to Pol Pot and defended his regime before the United Nations.
The former official, Thiounn Prasith, the Khmer Rouge's representative at the United Nations from the late 1970's until 1993, leads a quiet life in the New York suburb of Mount Vernon.


Tiny Kingdoms Vulnerable to Progress
SO CLOSE TO HEAVEN The Vanishing Buddhist Kingdoms of the Himalayas  By Barbara Crossette  Illustrated. 297 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $25.
As the globe becomes ever more homogenized and the crossing of international boundaries brings an ever-diminished sense of arriving in truly distinctive places, travelers have become increasingly nostalgic for those few self-contained outposts of culture and nature that have somehow managed to hold themselves aloof from the rapacious effects of the world market system.
Barbara Crossette's "So Close to Heaven" concentrates on four such places: Bhutan, Sikkim, Nepal and Ladakh.
Even though these "vanishing Buddhist kingdoms of the Himalayas" have had an increasingly difficult time maintaining their cultural cohesion, they have managed to capture the imaginations of nostalgic individuals in flight from the developed world.


Steve Case At a Crossroad
Steve Case knows from painful experience how quickly technology markets can shift, destroying a once-promising business.
In 1983, Mr.
Case left a good marketing job at Pepsico Inc. to try to cash in on the latest trend in consumer technology, the Atari video game.
So he joined a fledgling company that was starting an on-line service for users of the popular Atari computer-game machines.


Kazan's Odyssey From Craft To Art
"Elia Kazan: A Director's Journey" does full justice -- and perhaps a bit more -- to the man who brought to the screen "A Streetcar Named Desire," "Viva Zapata" and "On the Waterfront." As generous samplings of his work roll by, a reflective Kazan offers insights into his ways of working and assessments, mostly appreciative, of the people he worked with, especially actors like James Dunn, James Dean, Marlon Brando and Montgomery Clift.
The narration, written by Richard Schickel and delivered by Eli Wallach (seen here hamming it up in "Baby Doll," his first movie), reviews the Kazan career, beginning with his days as an actor with the communelike Group Theater in the 1930's; bits from a screen test help explain why he decided to be a director instead.
Then came his early movies ("A Tree Grows in Brooklyn" was the first), his resounding successes on Broadway with the plays of Arthur Miller and Tennessee Williams and, in the 1950's, his enduring Hollywood achievements.


Young Receiver Corps Breathes Signs of Life Into the Jets' Offense
They are young and they have known disappointment.
But the Jets' receivers were hardly among the long-faced losers in the locker room Saturday night.
That's because there finally had been something resembling a passing game for the Jets, even though they lost, 13-10, to the Philadelphia Eagles.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:


Rome Journal; Hot Off the Presses: Videos, Combs, Necklaces
Movie buffs pick up L'Unita on Saturdays, when the old Communist Party newspaper virtually gives away videos of Italian movie classics.
Hypochondriacs prefer La Repubblica, which for months offered installments from an illustrated medical encyclopedia.
Corriere della Sera, the Milan-based grand old lady of Italian journalism, scored a big hit this year with a world atlas that came wrapped inside the paper.
This is what newspaper competition in Italy is all about these days -- gifts, games and gimmicks, anything to increase circulation in a country where newspaper readership, historically low compared with most of Europe, is on the wane.


Inside Information Falls to Classy Mirage
One day after an even-money favorite was outrun by a 42-1 shot in the Alabama Stakes, another startling upset roiled the Ballerina Handicap at Saratoga today.
Inside Information, the queen of the fillies and the 2-5 favorite after winning her last five races, buckled to her knees at the start and was defeated by Classy Mirage.
Even for Allen Jerkens, the master of the upset, this was a feat of storybook proportions.
Classy Mirage went to the post as the second choice at 5-1, but still was considered no match for the team surrounding Inside Information: the owner Ogden Mills Phipps, the trainer Shug McGaughey and the jockey Mike Smith.


New Jersey Gets a Labor Grant
New Jersey was awarded a $4.8 million Federal grant from the Labor Department this week to set up one-stop career centers throughout the state.


Estimate for a School Cleanup
Carol Perry, acting chief of staff for the Newark school district, has estimated that cleaning up and repairing the neglected buildings of the state-run system could cost between $4 million and $7 million, The Associated Press reported.


With World Championship in 800 Meters, Quirot's Comeback Is Complete
She swung wide out of the final curve and suddenly there was nothing in her way, no lingering restraints from the fire that had burned her upper body, no runners who could withstand her punishing kick, nothing that could prevent Ana Fidelia Quirot of Cuba from winning the world championship at 800 meters.
The final day of the championships belonged to the Americans, who won three gold medals in the relays -- more than any other country had won in the entire meet -- but there was not a more heartening story of determination and willpower than Quirot's.


Paramedic's Widow Wants Criminal Inquiry Into His Death
The widow of a New York City paramedic called yesterday for a criminal investigation into the death of her husband, who died Thursday after receiving the wrong type of blood in a transfusion at Coney Island Hospital.
She said she had retained a lawyer to press a wrongful-death lawsuit against the City.
The 30-year-old paramedic, Ira Medjuck, was being treated at the hospital for critical injuries suffered during a July 20 car accident on the Belt Parkway.


Tax Break or Extortion?
To the Editor:
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is labeling the $400,000 fund that the proposed Springfield Gardens, Queens, Pathmark is offering for small-business improvement a "side payment" (news article, Aug. 10).
He has been encouraging the Economic Development Corporation in very generous tax breaks to companies threatening to leave New York City, particularly Manhattan.


The Internet's nomenclature becomes harder to sort out; guess who becomes busier?
IT was bound to happen.
Lawyers are now officially a part of the infrastructure of the Internet.
They are trying to make it less confusing.
They make it more so.
The company that assigns the Internet "domain names," the equivalent of vanity license plates on the information superhighway, has grown weary of getting caught in the middle of legal disputes over who gets to use what name in cyberspace.


With Israelis Depending on Cellular Phones, a Recall Can Really Hurt


Mental Health Chief Nominated
Gov.
George E. Pataki nominated the top mental health official of Monroe County to be the state's Commissioner of Mental Health today.
The nominee, James L. Stone, 55, will move from running a department in a mid-sized county to overseeing one of the nation's largest mental health systems.
He will be Acting Commissioner until confirmed by the State Senate.


Iowa Assistant Replaces Stringer
ANGIE LEE, C. VIVIAN STRINGER's top assistant at the University of Iowa for the past six years, will replace Stringer as the Hawkeyes' women's basketball coach.
Stringer stepped down last month after 12 years as Iowa coach to coach at Rutgers University.
Lee was named interim coach until she got the word last Friday from Stringer that she had been chosen to succeed her mentor. (AP)


Workers Are Locked in Freezer In a Queens Fast-Food Robbery
Five employees of a Wendy's fast-food restaurant in Queens were locked inside the restaurant's freezer by a robber who bound them at gunpoint before escaping with $1,000.
Their ordeal began after the robber approached a Wendy's worker cleaning the parking area before the restaurant opened for the day.
The man then pulled a gun and demanded to be allowed inside, said Leonard Katz, a manager-trainee at the restaurant, at 69-01 Northern Boulevard in Woodside.


A Year After Boat Exodus, Threat to Castro Dissipates
A few blocks from the tourist hotel where rioters had shattered the windows, a few more from the downtown stores they had dared to loot, an industrial mechanic named Roberto sat with some friends in the afternoon heat, recalling how the Revolution had trembled.
"We never saw anything like that before," the lanky 37-year-old said, leaning in the doorway of his decrepit apartment building.
"They were throwing rocks at the police!" The gathering fell silent for a moment, and then Roberto added, "But that passed."


Daniels to Play for Italian Club
The former New York City high school star LLOYD DANIELS now has a job overseas.
Daniels, who was waived by the Los Angeles Lakers in April, has signed a one-year contract worth $400,000 with the Italian first-division team Scavolini Pesaro. (AP)


Get Out the Calculator, It's Wild-Card Math
It is the last day of the season, and the Yankees beat the Blue Jays in Toronto, Milwaukee loses to Boston at home, the Rangers edge Seattle in Texas and Kansas City loses in Cleveland.
The Royals' loss is not good for the Royals, but it is a relief to American League officials because the outcome of that game and the other games leaves four teams tied for the league's wild-card spot in the playoffs.
A four-team tie is difficult enough to resolve; five teams?
Forget it.
They haven't even concocted a tie breaker for that scenario.


PREMIER OF JAPAN OFFERS 'APOLOGY' FOR ITS WAR ACTS
Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama of Japan today did what no other Japanese leader has dared to do: he extended his "heartfelt apology" for atrocities his country committed in World War II.
"In the hope that no such mistake be made in the future, I regard, in a spirit of humility, these irrefutable facts of history, and express here once again my feelings of deep remorse and state my heartfelt apology," Mr.
Murayama said.


Japanese Stocks Rise


Leading Man Ovitz Takes New Role
For Michael S. Ovitz, the talent agent who has mapped out his career with military precision, it was a striking about-face.
After running his own show for two decades, Mr.
Ovitz said yesterday that he would become president of the Walt Disney Company -- and submit to one of the most formidable bosses in Hollywood: Michael D. Eisner.


Using Pulses of Ultrasound to Deliver Drugs
IN a step that may one day free diabetics from painful needles, researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology have shown that pulses of ultrasound can inject drugs like insulin through the skin.
The skin, which is one of the body's first lines of defense against infection, is highly impermeable, so only a few small-molecule drugs like nicotine can now be administered through the skin with skin patches.


When Boredom Turns to Murder; Youths' Vicious Attack Echoes a Neighborhood's Despair
Lawrence Gates spent his 16th birthday in jail early this month, accused with four other youths of burning a homeless man alive.
The teen-ager crossed paths with the 38-year-old man, Albert Jackson, in Mount Morris Park in Harlem one night in May.
By day, the leafy retreat is filled with the squeals of children on swing sets and in the aquamarine pool.
But at night, the park becomes the shadowy domain of homeless people who sleep on dark green benches and neighborhood youths who cruise the knolls in "crews," emboldened by their large numbers.


By Design; Romance Blooms Again
One of the most romantic images in the fall collections was a huge flower on a ribbon around the neck of an Armani model.
Soft fabric flowers also appeared in other designers' shows, pinned to a shoulder or a lapel or tucked into a low-cut back.
The fabric flower is an evening accessory that hasn't been seen for a while but looks right again, especially when worn at the throat with the simple clothes now in favor.
Saks Fifth Avenue has an oversized floppy cabbage rose in black velvet and organza ($88) and a stiff red satin rose ($58), both by Dulken &amp; Derrick.


METRO DIGEST
MAYOR ASKS FOR RADICAL SCHOOL CHANGES Saying the New York City public school system is close to collapse, Mayor Giuliani demanded that education officials begin a program of "radical reform" that he said should be modeled on the city's Catholic school system, from which he graduated.
But in recent years, a cycle of drugs and crime twice landed him in prison.
In addition, three other companies have formally expressed interest in developing the casino.  [ B5. ] Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves B5


Immigration Agency Holds Up Citizenship
To the Editor:
The tragic downside of the surge in applications for citizenship (news article, Aug. 11) is the Immigration and Naturalization Service's slothlike pace in processing the applications.
Many applicants desperately need citizenship so that they can live again with their husbands or wives, children or parents: there is a quota unless the spouse in the United States is a citizen.
They may have to wait as long as two years from application to getting sworn in.


Changing of the Guard Takes the Field
She proudly held up her gold medal for the photographers, and it was only after the awards ceremony that Ghada Shouaa realized she had been given a medal for the men's 200 meters instead of the women's heptathlon.
She hurried back inside Ullevi Stadium to retrieve the correct medal.
It was not just any prize, after all, but the first gold medal ever won by a Syrian track and field athlete either at the world championships or the Summer Olympics.


Moscow Threatens to End Peace Talks With Chechen Rebels
Moscow threatened to cut off peace negotiations in Chechnya tonight after Chechen rebels refused to agree to Russian terms for putting a demilitarization agreement signed on July 30 into effect.
And it also warned that the war in the breakaway republic could start up again.
Trying to press the Chechen rebels to lay down their weapons, Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin said that Russia would take "extreme measures" unless the Chechens reaffirmed their commitment to disarm their troops.


Costly Battle to Save a Beach
High surf pushed by moderate northeastern winds has swept away large sections of the first stage of the nation's largest beach replacement project.
The swiftness with which the beach has dwindled has given added credence to those who argue that pumping sand along the coast below Sandy Hook is like pouring tax dollars into the ocean.  [ Page A1 ]


Meggett Finally Finds a Full-Time Job
It was well after lunch on a recent afternoon when David Meggett wandered out of the dining hall at Bryant College and sat down under a tent for a chat.
The Patriots' all-purpose, all-everything back said he could use a nap -- and the season hadn't even started yet.
When you're David Meggett, there's no time for sleeping.
There are new pass patterns to learn.
You have to get accustomed to the velocity and spin of the ball coming from a new quarterback.
You have to get the timing down with the new offensive linemen.
You have to figure out how the fullbacks block.
And if you're David Meggett, you must work on those elusive moves that serve a punt returner so well.


Mickey Mantle
Even by the once grand standards of the New York Yankees, the transition from Joe DiMaggio to Mickey Mantle was a remarkable stroke of good fortune and smart management.
How many times in any sport has a DiMaggio been followed by a Mantle?
In all his years of churning the Yankees, the owner George Steinbrenner has not come close to engineering such a majestic succession.
Word of Mickey Mantle's death summons memories of those days of dynastic Yankees, when giants of the game played center field and baseball was still the nation's fancy.
Forty-four seasons ago a strapping, switch-hitting kid from Oklahoma with a guileless grin came to Yankee spring training and met the Yankee legend he would replace and eventually rival in achievement.
It was a moment to savor.


At the world track and field championships, big marketers find a quick path to 206 countries.
LESS than a year before the Summer Olympics, the world track and field championships here illustrated how important the sport is to global marketers.
At the event, which ended on Sunday, marketers like Coca-Cola, Visa International, Mars Inc., Mercedes-Benz and the Panasonic unit of the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company poured in millions of dollars to promote their products.
The championships included 1,959 athletes from 192 countries.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.69
5.67
4.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.42
5.40
4.59
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.42
5.44
4.99
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.57
6.60
7.29
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.95
6.97
7.50
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.85
7.87
8.37
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.31
6.30
6.42
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
An article on Aug. 3 about families of Holocaust victims seeking to recover funds that may have been deposited in Swiss bank accounts mischaracterized remarks on May 7 by President Kaspar Villiger of Switzerland, in which he apologized for his country's restrictions on the arrival of Jews from Germany in 1938.
This policy was public at the time, not part of a secret pact with Germany, and it was not tied to Swiss concerns over a possible German invasion.


International Briefs; Profits Climb by 19% For HSBC Holdings
HSBC Holdings P.L.C., the bank holding company, reported yesterday that pretax profit for the first half rose 19 percent, to $:1.737 billion ($2.74 billion), compared with the corresponding period a year earlier.
The company, based in London, said it would also lift its dividend for the period to 9.25 pence, from 8 pence.
Net interest income in the period rose to $:2.448 billion, from $:2.237 billion, while net interest margin rose to 2.86 percent from 2.74 percent at the end of the year.


Mexican Report Accuses State Aides in Killing of 17 Peasants
In a case that has become an important test of Mexico's commitment to human rights, a Government ombudsman's agency today blamed police officials for the killing of 17 peasants in the western state of Guerrero and accused senior state officials of trying to cover up the crime.
In a report to the Guerrero Governor, the federal agency, the National Commission of Human Rights, called for criminal prosecution or administrative sanctions against 20 state officials, including the Governor's top aide, his Attorney General and his chief of police.


Most Leaders Of Separatists In Kashmir Assail Killing
A little-known separatist group's killing of a Norwegian hostage and its threat to kill four other Westerners were condemned today by other groups advocating Kashmir's independence from India.
"This is sabotage and betrayal of the struggle for which we have fought for so many years," said Shabir Shah, leader of the People's League, a major separatist group.
"It is a heavy blow to our credibility."


CHRONICLE
Although there were plenty of parties in the Hamptons last weekend, the only one on everyone's lips was the screening and celebration on Saturday for the HBO production of "Truman." MICHAEL FUCHS, the chairman of HBO who was the evening's host, gives a party with a screening every year, one of the most celebrity-studded events of the season.
The topic of conversation was who was on the guest list and who had been excised from it.
The list had been pared down from last year's 700 to 100 by PEGGY SIEGAL, the publicist.


Uncovering The Grit And Bite In Ravel
The locale of the Bargemusic concerts at the Fulton Ferry Landing in Brooklyn is mostly what has captured the attention of audiences.
Rocking gently on an air-conditioned barge with the lapping waters of the East River and the New York skyline visible through picture windows is a mighty pleasant way to hear chamber music.
But this is a substantive series that regularly presents outstanding artists who also clearly enjoy the Bargemusic ambiance.
And in Thursday night's all-French program, the artists could not have been more excellent.
Two stellar members of the New York Philharmonic, the longtime flutist Rene Seibert and the principal violist, Cynthia Phelps, joined by the Boston-based pianist Randall Hodgkinson, began the program with a captivating performance of Maurice Durufle's Introduction, Theme and Variations.
It is music that hovers on a stylistic divide between Ravel in his sumptuous mode and Messiaen in his disorienting modern mode.


Lights, Camera, Swing


Chess
For the third straight time, a team of the best women players in the world defeated a team of illustrious senior men.
The event was the fourth running of an informal annual series sponsored by the Max Euwe Association and held this year in early July in Prague.
The women won by a tally of 26 1/2-23 1/2.
They were led by the grandmasters Judit Polgar of Hungary and Pia Cramling of Sweden, who both scored 6 1/2-3 1/2, followed by the women's world champion, Xie Jun of China, at 5-5, the grandmaster Zsuzsa Polgar of Hungary, at 4 1/2-5 1/2, and the international master Nana Ioseliani of the Republic of Georgia, at 4-6.


Harrah's Seeking to Build Bridgeport Casino
Two major casino operators have dropped out of the competition to build a casino in Bridgeport, but another large gaming concern, Harrah's Entertainment, has jumped in.
In addition, three other new companies have formally expressed interest in developing the casino.


Yanks Just a Speed Bump as Sox Streak to 12th Straight
Forget sweeping the Red Sox.
That notion vanished in about the fifth inning for the Yankees.
Forget stopping Boston's momentum.
Forget winning the division, too.
If the Yankees cannot muster a performance far superior to tonight's -- very soon and very often -- their pennant chase will become a pennant crawl for the wild-card position.
All the Yankees could be grateful for after stumbling to a 9-3 loss against the sharpest team in baseball was that a dugout-clearing incident did not escalate into a serious brawl.
Since the Red Sox have won 12 straight and have turned Fenway Park into a daily block party, they probably would have pummeled the Yankees in a fight, too.
Instead, the Red Sox demolished them with power and pitching.
Sweep?
Maybe for the Red Sox, who now lead the Yankees by 10 games in the American League East.


Has Harassment Become the Plan for Reducing Welfare Rolls?
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 8 news article on Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to save $200 million by drastically reducing New York City's Home Relief welfare rolls leaves the clear impression that saving will occur simply by weeding out ineligible citizens whose attempts to receive public benefits are fraudulent.
Our experience working with thousands of welfare recipients in New York's soup kitchens and single-room-occupancy hotels suggests that nothing could be further from the truth.


Carl Wartenburg, 48, Dean Of Admissions at Swarthmore
Carl Wartenburg, a leader in efforts to widen educational opportunities for disadvantaged youths and to curb alcohol abuse among young people, died last Wednesday while vacationing in the Rangeley Lakes region of Maine.
He was 48 and lived in Swarthmore, Pa.
The cause was a heart attack, according to Swarthmore College, where Mr.
Wartenburg was dean of admissions.


Defending Tough Decisions In a Case Open to Hindsight
MICKEY MANTLE'S is arguably the most famous failed liver transplant.
The organ he received at the Baylor Transplant Institute in Dallas on June 8 was aimed at curing his liver cancer.
While the new liver functioned well, the cancer was extraordinarily aggressive, so much so that the doctors could feel it grow each day until his death on Sunday.
With the tumultuous course of his case, skeptics have raised many questions about the transplant.
Among them were these: Were others passed over to give Mr.
Mantle a liver 48 hours after his name was put on a waiting list?
Was his condition exaggerated to help him get a liver?
Did the surgeons operate too hastily?
Why didn't the doctors use a new blood test to detect the spread of liver cancer cells?
Did the doctors waste a scarce organ that could have extended another person's life?
And were the doctors eager to give Mr.
Mantle a new liver as much to enhance the reputation of their institution as to help him?


3,100 Teachers Planning to Retire Early
Officials of the New York City Board of Education said yesterday that more than 3,100 teachers, or 5 percent of its teaching corps, have accepted an offer for early retirement but that number did not appear high enough to avert the first teacher layoffs since the 1975 fiscal crisis.
In tallying the applications from teachers seeking to retire before the start of the school year, board officials learned that they had lost hundreds of badly needed mathematics and science teachers, who must now be replaced, but still had a surplus of more than 1,500 special education teachers, whose ranks must be reduced.


Sports of The Times; Beantown's Burden Of Proof
RED SOX fans have a fragile relationship with success.
No lead is safe -- ever -- and the concept of a comfort zone is nonexistent.
But this is one place where fragility feels good.
For Elizabeth E. Dooley, the team's longest-running season-ticket holder, the heartbreaks have even been redemptive.
A season-ticket holder since 1944, Dooley may well be the personification of a Red Sox fan: pensive, hopeful, patient.


Rich Nation, Poor Children
The gap between rich and poor in the United States is huge.
That is reason enough for some in Congress to fight to preserve cash assistance, health insurance and child care benefits for the poor.
But the majority sentiment on Capitol Hill seems to be that while poor Americans might be falling behind their neighbors, they are well off by international standards.
Not so, says a new study by a nonprofit group in Luxembourg.
Poor children in America are worse off than poor children in 15 of the 18 Western industrialized countries included in the study.
The annual incomes of the poorest 10 percent of families average about $19,000 in Switzerland, $14,000 in Canada and only $11,000 in the United States.
Only Israel, at $8,000, and Italy, at $7,000, lag behind the United States.
These figures include Government benefits like food stamps and adjust for differences in family size and consumer prices.
But because the data exclude Government-provided health insurance, the United States may rank even worse than the numbers indicate.


Former Florio Aide Spared Prison Term
Joseph C. Salema, onetime chief of staff and political confidant of former Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey, was spared a prison sentence for his role in a 1990 municipal bond kickback scheme.
Instead, he was sentenced to six months in a halfway house and an additional six months of in-home electronic monitoring.
He was also fined $10,000.
Article, page B5.


Fifth Death in Van Collision
A fifth parishioner from St.
Augustine Presbyterian Church in Paterson has died from injuries suffered when the van she was riding in collided on the Garden State Parkway with a car being driven in the wrong direction.
Johnnie Ruth Buie had been hospitalized at University Hospital in Newark since she and her husband, Matthew, who survived the July 3 crash, were rescued by a passing motorist from the wreckage of the van.


Mantle Memorial for Family, Friends and Fans
Almost two years ago, Roy Clark, the country music singer, recalled today, he began to sing Mickey Mantle's favorite song, "Yesterday When I Was Young," at a golf tournament Mantle ran each year in his native Oklahoma for the Make a Wish Foundation.
As Clark sang of squandering the energy of youth and feeling old before his time, Mantle sat down on stage and began to cry.


Fatal Kick From Roller Coaster
A 36-year-old maintenance worker was killed yesterday when he was accidentally kicked in the head by a tourist who was riding in a new $6 million roller coaster on Morey's Pier, the police said.
Det.
Lieut.
George Greenland said the worker, who was not immediately identified, was struck when the Great Nor'easter, traveling at speeds up to 55 miles an hour, passed overhead.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Traded Chris James, outfielder, to the Boston Red Sox for Wes Chamberlain, outfielder.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Assigned Woody Williams, pitcher, to Syracuse of the International League for a 30-day rehabilitation assignment.
National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Placed Brian Hunter, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list retroactive to Aug. 7.
Activated Eric Anthony, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Activated Carlos Garcia, second baseman, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Mark Johnson, first baseman, to Calgary of the Pacific Coast League.
Football  National Football League
ARIZONA CARDINALS -- Placed Cedric Davis, cornerback, on the injured reserve list.
Waived Chad Eaton, defensive tackle; Ed Howard, wide receiver; Wayne Cook, quarterback; Bobby Gray, Sam Hardy and Leroy Truitt, offensive linemen; George Terrell, tight end; Troy Mills, running back; and Mike Gillock and Keita Crespina, defensive backs.
ATLANTA FALCONS -- Waived Abdul Jackson and Maurice Miller, linebackers, and Bobby Evans, safety.
BUFFALO BILLS -- Released Adrian Hill, wide receiver, and Michael Hendricks, linebacker.
JACKSONVILLE JAGUARS -- Waived Shannon Baker and Will Harris, wide receivers; Chris Dausin, center; and Marcello Simmons and Eric Stephens, cornerbacks.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Waived Scott Szeredy, kicker, and Lawann Latson, wide receiver.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Waived Jason Winrow, guard, and Mitch Davis, linebacker.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Released Malcolm Marshall, fullback; Jeff Wilkins, kicker; Clarence Williams, tight end; Shaumbe Wright-Fair, running back.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Signed Levon Kirkland, linebacker.


Tyson Is Keeping Low Profile in Check
For $50, you can watch Mike Tyson's return match Saturday night on pay-per-view television.
And for up to $1,500, you can watch it live at ringside.
But before then, don't talk to him. Don't even try to watch him.
In a situation unprecedented for a fighter of such acclaim, Tyson has not held a sparring session in which the public or the news media have been allowed to see.


New York Life in Accord On Class-Action Settlement
The New York Life Insurance Company said yesterday that it had agreed to a plan for settling class-action lawsuits and other customer complaints that could give three million policyholders $250 million or more of benefits.
The agreement covers all the company's customers who bought life-insurance policies between 1982 and 1994, on which the company pays an investment return.
By merely asking, those policyholders can collect low interest-rate loans or money from the company, to increase their life insurance or annuities.
The amounts depend on the size and age of the policy, and will range from $50 to the tens of thousands of dollars.


CHIEF OF AIR FORCE GROUNDS 5 PILOTS
The Air Force plans to announce on Tuesday that it is effectively ending the careers of at least seven officers who were initially given slaps on the wrist for their role in the downing of two Army helicopters over Iraq last year.
The unusual action comes as the result of a growing anger by lawmakers, surviving family members and even senior military officials that no one had been held accountable for the incident, which killed 26 people, including 15 Americans.
This feeling intensified after the acquittal in June of the only person to face a court-martial in the accidental shooting, Capt.
Jim Wang.


No Nuclear Tests
President Clinton struck a timely blow against the development and proliferation of nuclear weapons on Friday when he committed the United States to negotiate an absolute ban on all nuclear tests.
The President turned aside the argument that small-scale testing was needed to assure weapons reliability.
By doing so he greatly increased the chances that the world's five declared nuclear powers will be able to negotiate a comprehensive test ban treaty by their declared target date of next year.
Nuclear test advocates wanted Washington to reserve the right to conduct extremely low-yield test blasts, and the Republican-controlled Senate voted this month to spend $50 million to prepare for such tests.
But days later a senior scientific advisory group to the Energy Department concluded that low-yield testing was unnecessary.
The group, which includes some of the main designers of the American nuclear arsenal, found that computer simulations could provide ample assurance that the weapons remained reliable.


Cigarette Vending Machine Debate Is Broadened
President Clinton's proposal to ban all cigarette vending machines is broadening a debate that has been unfolding in recent years in cities and towns across the nation.
Since the late 1980's, more than 120 municipalities have banned cigarette vending machines in an effort to discourage smoking by children and teen-agers, said Robin Hobart, a spokeswoman for Americans for Nonsmokers' Rights, an anti-smoking group in Berkeley, Calif.
At the same time, a further 137 communities, including major cities like New York, Chicago and Seattle, have restricted where machines can be placed, often in areas where only adults are allowed, Ms.
Hobart said.


It's a Molecule. No, It's More Like a Wave.
A LIVING creature that could assume the insubstantial form of a wave may seem as improbable as the machines that magically teleported the heroes of "Star Trek." But based on recent experiments and calculations, physicists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology suggest that an object at least as large as an amoeba might actually be forced to display itself as a wave, if it could be sufficiently chilled and propelled through a special apparatus at the glacial speed of a few inches per year.
Scientists are not likely to make amoeba waves any time soon, and beams of people waves are probably impossible even in principle.
But Dr.
David E. Pritchard and his colleagues at M.I.T. remind skeptics that quantum theory permits any object to behave as either a particle or a wave, depending on how it is viewed.


Investment Adviser Jailed in Child Support Case
A state judge threw a prominent investment adviser into jail for the night after he returned to New York City yesterday to face Federal charges of failing to pay more than $580,000 in child support.
Yesterday morning, the analyst, Jeffrey A. Nichols, 47, was arraigned in Federal court in Manhattan on charges that he abandoned his first wife and three children in 1990, fleeing from state to state to avoid paying $8,000 a month in child support.
After a short hearing, Federal Magistrate Ronald L. Ellis released Mr.
Nichols on $500,000 bond.


Popular Drug May Damage Brain
IN experiments on animals, a popular street drug called Ecstasy caused the brain to form abnormal connections that could lead to problems like chronic depression, scientists have reported.
The changes, which affect nerve cells throughout the brain, have been shown to occur in monkeys given recreational doses of the drug.
Thus the finding is likely to apply to humans as well, said Dr.
George Ricaurte, an assistant professor of neurology at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine in Baltimore, who carried out the research.


No Wrongdoing by McCall
The World Boxing Council heavyweight champion OLIVER McCALL escaped a fine yesterday for saying he hoped to inflict serious damage on FRANK BRUNO in their Sept. 2 title fight.
The British Boxing Board of Control cleared the American of any offense and said the fight could go on as scheduled at Wembley Stadium. (AP)


Treasury Securities Prices Are Firmer in Thin Trading
Prices of Treasury securities were firmer yesterday in thin volume, despite last week's heavy supply of new issues and prospects of fresh supply just ahead.
The only new economic data out was the report on June business inventories, which was more a rear view of the economy than a forward one, and the July Atlanta Fed regional survey of manufacturing conditions.
Most of the day's market activity was attributed to technical trading.


U.S. Presses Bosnian Rivals to Accept Updated Peace Plan
A team of American diplomats arrived in the Balkans today on a mission to press Bosnia's Muslim-dominated Government and the Bosnian Serbs to accept an updated peace plan.
The American plan, to be presented by Assistant Secretary of State Richard Holbrooke in Bosnia, Serbia and Croatia, includes penalties as well as inducements.


Q &amp; A
Cobwebs
Q.
What makes those gray strings on the ceiling in my house, things I have always called cobwebs?
They don't look much like traditional spider webs.


Judge Who Ruled Pro-Tobacco Named to Hear Companies' Suit
A lawsuit by the nation's five largest tobacco companies seeking to block the Food and Drug Administration from regulating cigarettes has been assigned to a Federal judge who ruled favorably for the tobacco industry in a lawsuit involving the Environmental Protection Agency.
And as a lawyer before reaching the bench, the judge successfully represented the heir to a tobacco fortune in a stock-manipulation suit.
The judge, William L. Osteen Sr., is one of five in the United States District Court for the Middle District of North Carolina who could have drawn the case, filed last Thursday.
A separate suit filed in the court by five advertising groups last week has also been assigned to Judge Osteen.


Baseball Network's Last Day?
The Baseball Network is expected to formally end today.
Although ABC and NBC angrily declared their intention to divorce themselves from major league baseball in late June, this is the first day that one party can officially pull out of the two-year-old network television venture.
ABC and NBC were quiet about whether they would send a letter to baseball.
RICH LEVIN, a spokesman for Major League Baseball, said last night: "We'll know better tomorrow. Our guys know what they'll do, but I can't divulge it."


Despite Costly Efforts, a New Jersey Beach Erodes
High surf pushed by moderate northeastern winds has clawed tons of sand from the shore here in recent days, sweeping away large sections of the first stage of the nation's largest beach replacement project.
The erosion apparently does not dismay the Army Corps of Engineers officials in charge of the project; they say the new beaches were designed to lose up to two-thirds of their volume before stabilizing.
But the swiftness with which the beach has dwindled in the course of ordinary summer weather -- even without tropical storms and hurricanes like Felix, which began to affect the shore today -- has reinforced those who have said all along that pumping sand along the turbulent coast below Sandy Hook was like pouring tax dollars into the ocean.


Excerpts From Mayor's School Address
Following are excerpts from Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's speech yesterday at the Wharton Club of New York, entitled "A Vision for Education," as recorded by the New York Times:
I believe that right now the New York City public school system has reached a turning point.
And if we don't do something, and do something dramatic, it's close to collapse.
If we fail to act now to bring the system under control, to guarantee the safety and the security of children, teachers, principals and staff, to insure that the $8 billion we spend on this system is spent on students, not on bureaucracy, and to raise educational standards, and restore sensible educational priorities to the classroom, if we don't do all of that and more and quickly, the entire system really is in great, great danger of collapse.


Hillary Clinton Urges Attention to Gulf War Ailments
Hillary Rodham Clinton urged a Presidential commission today to leave no stone unturned in investigating why thousands of veterans of the Persian Gulf war returned with various illnesses, even as a panel of independent medical experts suggested that the Pentagon might have been too hasty in concluding that there was no evidence of a "gulf war syndrome."
"No issue is off-limits and every reasonable inquiry should be pursued," Mrs.
Clinton told the first meeting of the President's Advisory Committee on Gulf War Veterans' Illnesses.
President Clinton formed the commission to evaluate the undiagnosed illnesses that have afflicted many who served in the Persian Gulf during military operations in late 1990 and early 1991.


A Tale of Two Teen-Agers: Williams Loses, Hingis Wins
For Venus Williams, the 15-year-old tennis phenom whose renown has so far eclipsed her results, this work week in Canada wound up exactly like last week's in Los Angeles: Shown no respect by an elder, she was defeated in straight sets in the first round.
The teen-ager's underwhelming 1995 match record is 0-2, with her third and last tournament of the year nearly two months away, but tonight Williams lost with a certain flair.
She went up by 2-0 in both sets, twirled her racquet like a baton as she entered her first professional tie breaker and even saved a match point against the 17th-seeded Sabine Appelmans before exiting into the arms of her anxious family.


How High Court Saw Affirmative Action
To the Editor:
Re "How the Right Hijacked the Magic Words" (Op-Ed, Aug. 13):


What Earlier Reports Proposed
Following are excerpts from recommendations in earlier reports on the Division of School Safety:
1971 "Stability and Disruption in the Public Schools of New York City," a report to Schools Chancellor Harvey B. Scribner from the School Stability Resource Team.


Fans Welcome Dar-ryl, Dar-ryl Back to Boston
The derisive chant was born almost nine years ago on a chilly October evening at Fenway Park, where Darryl Strawberry was treated like a cartoon character and serenaded with choruses of "Dar-ryl, Dar-ryl" by Red Sox fans.
The chant followed him after the 1986 World Series, through good fortune and failure, and returned to its birthplace tonight.
Darryl returned, so "Dar-ryl, Dar-ryl" returned.
The Yankees, trying to create a legitimate pennant race by derailing the streaking Red Sox, had Strawberry in their lineup to produce runs and, along the way, to absorb a chunk of the fan abuse.
A three-game series between the first-place Red Sox and the second-place Yankees does not need to be spiced up, but Strawberry's presence injected new flavor into the rivalry.


Economy and Homicide
To the Editor:
"Many Cities in U.S. Show Sharp Drop in Homicide Rate" (front page, Aug. 13) and the experts you consult to explain recent homicide trends seem to have missed the forest for the trees.


Crosby N. Boyd, 92, Newspaper Leader
Crosby Noyes Boyd, a retired president and former chairman of the Washington Star Newspaper Company, died on Saturday at his summer home in Cape May, N.J.
He was 92 and also lived on Islamorada in the Florida Keys.
His father, George W. Boyd, was a vice president of the Pennsylvania Railroad; his grandfather, Crosby S. Noyes, was a founder of The Washington Evening Star and its editor from 1863 until his death in 1908.


Review/Fashion; 'Resort' Wear, The American Way
They look like summer clothes and even feel like summer clothes, but the designs in the shows on Seventh Avenue last week are meant for the season labeled "resort." These clothes are to be worn when it's cold up north and nonskiers head for southern climes.
They can also be taken out of the closet when the temperature heats up next summer.
The European designers who showed resort collections last month concentrated mainly on citified styles in lightweight fabrics for midwinter shoppers who might want to perk up their wardrobes.
But Europeans don't have the tradition of winter vacations in Florida or the Caribbean.
The Americans had sultry weather and sandy beaches in mind.


Patterns
Union Label: The Models Guild
The modeling profession has always thrived on wildly disparate pay scales and working conditions.
Add a working population of young innocents, and you have a business ripe for a union.
Amie Bonay, a former model, has started the Models Guild, Local 51 of the Office and Professional Employees International Union of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.
The guild, believed to be the first such union, has 44 charter members.
It hopes to gain the support of the marquee names in modeling, as well as agents.


No Headline
"We are held to a higher standard by the public, and we are held in high regard by the public because of the integrity we demonstrate by holding ourselves accountable." GEN.
RONALD R. FOGLEMAN the Air Force Chief of Staff.  [ A15:1 ]


When a Hard-Nosed Producer Insists on New York
Dick Wolf, executive producer and creator of "Law and Order," was "pouring" money, as he puts it, into the economy of New York City.
He had rented the parents' association room of the Collegiate School on West End Avenue in Manhattan for an actors' run-through. (Cost of room rental: $200 the first three hours, $25 each additional half-hour.)
A few blocks away, on West 81st Street, another episode of the show was being shot with a cast and crew of nearly 100 and some 22 trucks and cars.
All night long, two "parking P.A.'s" (parking production assistants) had sat alone in their cars in the darkness, holding spaces for "Law and Order" vehicles. (Cost, $85 per man per 12-hour shift.)


Harold Lamberg, 87, Philanthropist, Dies
Harold Lamberg, a philanthropist and retired manufacturer, died on Friday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
A resident of the Upper East Side of Manhattan, he was 87.
At his death he was the president of the Anne &amp; Harry J. Reicher Foundation, a charity that provides grants for health-care and human-service institutions in the New York metropolitan area.
Among his personal beneficiaries were the Hospital for Joint Diseases' Orthopedic Institute and the hospital's research and development foundation.


5 Greenpeace Leaders Detained at Beijing Protest
Five activists for the environmental group Greenpeace unfurled a banner in Tiananmen Square this morning to protest nuclear testing in China and were promptly taken into custody, witnesses said.
After posing for photographs, like tourists, under an enormous portrait of the Chinese leader Mao Zedong, the activists opened an eight-foot-long banner saying "Stop All Nuclear Tests" in Chinese and English.
It took about a minute before plain-clothes police confiscated the banner, witnesses said.


CHRONICLE
Some celebrities, it was rumored, chose not to venture out at all in the Hamptons rather than publicly acknowledge that they were not on the Fuchs list.
Or so it was said at a benefit for the Family Service League of Suffolk County that did attract more than 500 people to the Bridgehampton estate of Walter and Molly Channing.
Some 35 chefs from Long Island and Manhattan (including Pat Trama from Della Femina) put up tables laden with offerings ranging from barbecued loin of Australian venison to Southwestern sushi rolls to sarsparilla.


Jordan's King Speaks of 'New Era' for Iraq
In his first public comments on the defections of the Iraqi President's sons-in-law and daughters to Jordan, King Hussein called the episode "a very hard blow" to Iraq's leadership and expressed hope that it would "usher in a new era" for that country.
The King's remarks, published today in an Israeli newspaper, were the clearest indication yet of his break with President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, reflecting a widespread perception here that Baghdad's power is waning and that it cannot retaliate against Jordan.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CRYSTALLUME, Santa Clara, Calif., , announced that it had a definitive purchase agreement to acquire Electronic Designs Inc.
Westborough, Mass., for $13 million cash, contingent upon financing.
GREENFIELD INDUSTRIES, Augusta, Ga., a maker of cutting tools and related products, agreed to buy Rule Industries, Burlington, Mass., for about $40.4 million and $39 million in assumed debt.
Greenfield will pay $15.30 for each of Rule's 2.6 million shares outstanding.


Cowboys' Jones Issues (Pepsi) Challenge to the N.F.L.
Jerry Jones, the owner of the Dallas Cowboys, spends a lot of time thinking about how to make more money.
But he claims that he is not making the kind of return that he wants on the $140 million investment he made in 1989 when he bought the team.
No, not by a long shot.
On Aug. 4, he created confusion in the National Football League, which counts Coca-Cola as an official sponsor and marketing partner, by replacing Coke as Texas Stadium's soda with Pepsi-Cola in a 10-year deal valued at a reported $40 million.
Of the league's 30 teams, only the Cowboys and New England Patriots stadiums do not pour Coca-Cola.
The Patriots have also signed with Pepsi.


Corrections
The At the Bar column on the Law Page on Aug. 4, about the length of criminal trials, misidentified the organization with which Stephen B. Bright, an Atlanta lawyer who is concerned about televised murder trials, is associated.
Mr.
Bright, who specializes in defending people facing the death penalty, is director of the Southern Center for Human Rights, not the Southern Poverty Law Center.


Agency Networks Are Joining Forces
Two independent agency networks are being combined.


2 Police Officers Charged With Raping a Colleague
Two New Rochelle police officers were formally charged today with raping and sodomizing a civilian police dispatcher in her apartment in July after drinking with her at a nightclub late at night.
The officers, Gary Lucchese, 30, and John DeLeno, 26, appeared in Westchester County Court with their lawyers and wives this afternoon, each pleading not guilty to two counts of first-degree rape, two counts of first-degree sodomy and one count of first-degree attempted sodomy.


If Jerry Garcia Had Carried Anti-Drug Message
To the Editor:
Bravo!
Just when I thought there was no hope, your paper (obituary, Aug. 10) printed the real reason for the guitarist Jerry Garcia's death: drugs.
While the majority of the media hides the facts, he essentially overdosed, as his body could not take the drug abuse anymore.
As you report, his heart stopped while he was in a drug rehabilitation center, again.


In Quincy, Mass., Bittersweet Memories of the Day the War Ended
Don Brown was just out of South Boston High School when he joined the Army Air Forces, and was sent to the South Pacific.
It was January 1944.
"I felt, 'I'm a Catholic, I'll leave this up to the Lord,' " Mr.
Brown, who is 72 now, recalled.
" 'If He sees fit that I don't come back, O.K., but I'll do the best I can while I'm there.' "


Takeover Bids Made for Two Big Utilities
Two big power-company takeovers -- one hostile, one friendly -- were proposed yesterday, providing an early sign that the coming free market for electric power will lead to a major consolidation among utilities amid a struggle to cut costs.
In an attempt to unite the two companies that serve eastern Pennsylvania, Peco Energy Company, the parent of the Philadelphia Electric Company, made a hostile offer of $3.8 billion, or $24 a share in stock, for PP&amp;L Resources Inc., the parent of the Pennsylvania Power and Light Company, which serves a number of cities outside the Philadelphia area.


Burden on Straphangers
To the Editor:
Despite the rosy picture you paint of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's fiscal success (news article, Aug. 13), I am disturbed by the apparent complacency with which you view the proposed New York City transit fare increase.


'The Tempest' to Broadway
The New York Shakespeare Festival's highly acclaimed production of "The Tempest" will begin a limited 12-week run at the Broadhurst Theater on Oct. 10, with Patrick Stewart returning in the role of Prospero.
Several members of the original cast will also make the trip to Broadway, including Teagle F. Bougere as Caliban, Aunjanue Ellis as Ariel and Carrie Preston as Miranda.
"The Tempest" drew full houses at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park from the first previews in late June.
By the end of the play's brief run on July 19, desperate ticket hunters were camping out in the park to establish position in front of the box office, and ticket seekers were being turned away by the hundreds.
When Broadway theater owners began turning up in the front rows at the Delacorte, a transfer to Broadway seemed virtually assured, provided that Mr.
Stewart could be signed up.


Contract Rejected by Metro-North Workers
Train cleaners, inspectors and helpers rejected a proposed four-year contract with the Metro-North Commuter Railroad, the Transport Workers Union announced yesterday.
The 600 Metro-North workers represented by the union, who voted by mail, also authorized the union to call a strike, if necessary, said a union spokesman, Jim Gannon.


Remembering World War II's End


Account Returns To DeVito/Verdi
Empire Kosher Poultry in Mifflintown, Pa., has returned its account to DeVito/Verdi in New York after a year at Jerry &amp; Ketchum Inc. in New York, the joint venture of Jerry Della Femina and Ketchum Communications.
The billings were estimated at $1 million.
DeVito/Verdi, which had handled the account for two years before it left for Jerry &amp; Ketchum, was rehired without a review.


If Jerry Garcia Had Carried Anti-Drug Message; Among Friends
To the Editor:
I went to my first Grateful Dead concert in 1973, when I was a high school student.
Yesterday, while traveling home after spending the day defending a case in Federal court, I learned of the death of Jerry Garcia.
Many things in my life have changed since 1973; however, there has always been one thing that remained constant.
I could always go to a Grateful Dead concert and feel I was in a familiar place among friends.


Oh Yes, Pots and Pans, But No Kitchen Sink
The music history texts usually cite the German composer Karlheinz Stockhausen as the pioneer of spatial music, music that uses the space between separated groups of instruments as a defining compositional component.
But the American experimental composer Henry Brant was there first.
His breakthrough spatial work, "Antiphony 1," from 1953, predates Stockhausen's more intellectually touted "Gruppen" by five years.
And ever since, Mr.
Brant, like some compositional ringmaster, has been gathering large groups of people together in public spaces and surrounding them with strategically positioned batteries of instruments and sound-producing gadgets.
Mr.
Brant was at it again on Sunday evening at Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center, where "Dormant Craters," his latest spatial composition, a one-movement, 30-minute work for 16 percussionists commissioned by Lincoln Center for its Out of Doors festival, was given its premiere.


INSIDE
Double-Decker Crackdown
New York's largest double-decker tour bus company was ordered to ground its fleet after charges it switched license plates among buses to avoid inspections.
Page B1.
Big Utilities Seek Mergers
Two billion-dollar takeover deals have been proposed for power companies in Pennsylvania and the Midwest, reflecting new pressures in the industry to consolidate.
Page D1.
Sweatshop Inquiry Widens
The Government said some large retailers may be selling apparel made by immigrants working in virtual slavery.
Page A14.
Father Jailed Over Payments
A prominent investment adviser was thrown in jail after returning to New York to face charges that he fled to avoid child support.
Page B1.


At The Citadel, a Day to Remember


A Whole New Script
The decision by Michael D. Eisner and Michael Ovitz to join forces hit Hollywood like an earthquake yesterday, promising to shake up the entertainment industry and the talent agencies, movie studios and networks that have dominated its landscape for years.
Together, Mr.
Eisner and Mr.
Ovitz will run the most powerful entertainment company in the world, the newly formed Walt Disney Company, which is about to control the nation's most popular television network by acquiring Capital Cities/ABC Inc. for $19 billion.


Wadkins Shows He's A Captain Courageous
Lanny Wadkins is a tough guy, a hard guy.
At the end of the day, he is a guy who says what he wants, does what he wants and picks whomever he wants to play on his team.
True to form yesterday, that's how he handled his captain's selections for the 1995 United States Ryder Cup team.
When he announced his two choices to round out the 12-man squad that will face Europe Sept. 22-24 at Oak Hill Country Club in Rochester, Wadkins characteristically cut to the chase.
He named Curtis Strange and Fred Couples and he squared his shoulders and stuck out his chin.
His team, his picks.
Anybody have any questions?


Life Is Like A Box Of Sequels
GUMP &amp; CO.  By Winston Groom  242 pages. Pocket Books. $22.
Hello, my name's Forrest, Forrest Gump.
People call me Forrest Gump.
Maybe you've already heard of me.
More and more people has, ever since all these fellers come along to tell my life's story.


Everett's Audition Displays His Power and His Pitfalls
When the Mets recalled outfielder Carl Everett from Class AAA Norfolk on July 24, they immediately made him the starter in right field and also gave him the important role of No. 3 hitter.
Nearly everyone in the organization was looking to see whether he would ever live up to the expectations that have constantly surrounded him.


People
*
Shipley Munson was named to the new position of president and chief operating officer at Duval Woglom Brueckner &amp; Partners, Boston.
He was previously an executive vice president and managing director at BBDO Dusseldorf (Germany), a unit of the Omnicom Group. *
Wendy Riches, managing director at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct, London, a unit of the WPP Group, was named to the new position of president at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct's New York office.
Mike Cornwell, client services director at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct in London, was named to succeed Ms.
Riches.


International Briefs; Fake NEC Chips Found in Computers
The NEC Corporation, the largest maker of memory chips in Japan, said yesterday that it had discovered chips illegally labeled with its brand name in computers sold in the United States and Southeast Asia.
NEC said 3,000 to 4,000 memory modules, or packages of chips used in computers to store data, were found in computers made by several Asian companies.
NEC declined to name the companies.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-11  APOLOGY FROM JAPANESE LEADER  Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama of Japan has done what no other Japanese leader has dared to do: He has extended his "heartfelt apologies" for atrocities his country committed in World War II.
A1  CALM REIGNS AGAIN IN CUBA  Despite discontent that led to riots and many refugees last year in Cuba, the situation has calmed down, in part due to the Government's reforms -- though there are more circuses than bread.
A1  IN IRAQ, LONGTIME FEUD  The infighting in Iraq's ruling clique that led two sons-in-law of President Saddam Hussein to defect to Jordan is the most intense round of fighting in a regime that has been marked by feuding.
A3  JORDAN EDGES AWAY FROM IRAQ  King Hussein of Jordan said the defections from Iraq had been a hard blow to its Government, indicating that Iraq's power is waning and that Jordan is distancing itself from Iraq's leader.
A3  CHECHNYA PACT THREATENED  Russia threatened to cut off peace negotiations with separatist rebels from Chechnya unless they carried out an agreement to disarm, but they refused, saying they disagreed with some of the terms.
A5  PRESSURE FOR BALKAN PEACE  A group of diplomats left for the Balkans to press for peace, with the United States contending that recent Serbian losses in Croatia presented a chance to press the Serbs to accept an agreement.
A10  MEXICO POLICE CITED IN KILLINGS  Mexico said that police killed 17 peasants in June and that senior officials had covered up the killings, in a case that has become a test of the Government's commitment to protect human rights.
A6  Some separatists condemned the killing in Kashmir.
A11  Paris Journal: From a Gaul, a challenge to the mouse.
A4  National A12-15, A18  DISCIPLINE IN COPTER DOWNINGS  Responding to pressure from Congress and public concerns over accountability, the Air Force is effectively ending the careers of eight officers who initially were given slaps on the wrist for their involvement in the downing of two Army helicopters over Iraq last year.
A1  DISNEY NAMES PRESIDENT  The Walt Disney Company announced that Michael Ovitz, the head of the Creative Artists Agency who has been called the most powerful man in Hollywood, would become its president, working with its even more powerful chairman, Michael D. Eisner.
A1  HOLLYWOOD'S SEISMIC EVENT  For Hollywood, the Eisner-Ovitz combination is a seismic event, expected to shake up the talent agencies, movie studios and networks that have dominated the entertainment industry for years.
D7  REMEMBERING V-J DAY  Men from the Boston area who fought in World War II gathered beside Boston Harbor for a small Victory Day parade.
A12  REDISTRICTING IN GEORGIA  Georgia's Legislature convened to draw new Congressional lines after a map that was designed to elect blacks was rejected in court.
A12  2 KILLED IN RESCUE EFFORT  Two rescue workers looking for an injured climber fell to their deaths on Mount Rainier.
A14  FEMALE CADET FALLS ILL  The Citadel's first female cadet, Shannon Faulkner, was the first new cadet out of the barracks yesterday, but later she was unable to take her cadet oath because she was overcome by heat.
A14  CHARGES FOR PHONE MARKETERS  Five people who marketed goods and services over the telephone were charged with violating a new law that prohibits using another merchant's credit card terminal for transactions.
A15  Metro Digest B1  MAYOR CALLS FOR SCHOOL REFORM  Saying the New York City public school system is close to collapse, Mayor Giuliani demanded that education officials begin a program of "radical reform" modeled on the city's Catholic school system.
A1  NEW SAND BEING SWEPT AWAY  High surf and moderate winds has swept away large sections of the nation's largest beach replacement project, reinforcing those who have said all along that pumping sand along the turbulent coast below Sandy Hook, N.J., is like pouring tax dollars into the ocean.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C15-20  A gift to help preserve cultural sites.
C15  New York's production boom.
C15  Music: Pots and pans at Lincoln Center.
C15  Mostly Mozart.
C16  Ravel with grit and bite.
C17  Lords of Acid and My Life With the Thrill Kill Kult.
C18  Books: "Gump &amp; Co.," by Winston Groom.
C15  Fashion B6  'Resort' wear, the American way  Science C1-12  Radical new designs for ship hulls move into the water.
C1  On being a particle and a wave, all at once.
C1  The Doctor's World: Mantle's physicians defend their judgment.
C1  Sports B8-14  Baseball: Mantle's death, a day later B9  Streaking Red Sox maul Yankees.
B9  Football: Giants' Brown speaks out against artificial turf.
B9  Dave Meggett finally has a full-time job.
B9  Obituaries B7  Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  Editorials  No nuclear tests.
Mickey Mantle.
Rich nation, poor children.
Jane Roe recants -- or does she?
Letters  Russell Baker: Noel for Napoleon.
Walter Russell Mead: The danger of bigger trouble with the Chinese.
Carla Seaquist: Pete Wilson's gorgeous mosaic.
Alex Abrams: If you're young, they get you coming and going.
Chronicle A18  Chess C12  Crossword C18


Immigrant Insect Makes an Entry
The Asian tiger mosquito, first discovered in the United States in 1985, has made its first appearance north of Delaware, Monmouth County officials said.
In Southern states, the insect has been a suspected cause of Eastern equine encephalitis, a disease that can be fatal in horses and humans.
But Martin S. Chomsky, superintendent of the Mosquito Extermination Commission in Monmouth County, said there was no cause for New Jerseyans to become alarmed.
He said the insects posed more of a danger in tropical climates and were not found in sufficient numbers to constitute a public health hazard.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Federal Farm Credit Bank is selling $120 million of medium-term notes due in 1997 through Morgan Stanley.
The issue is callable in one year and priced at par to yield 6.28 percent.


On School Security, Some Familiar Advice
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines issued his recommendations for improving the Division of School Safety yesterday, and to experts in the field they seemed oddly familiar.
In summary, Mr.
Cortines ordered his staff to screen school security officers more carefully, train them more thoroughly and supervise them more closely.


Man Is Indicted in Gun Theft
A former foreman for United Parcel Service was indicted yesterday on charges of stealing about 300 guns that were being shipped through the warehouse where he worked.
If convicted on the two-count Federal indictment, the former foreman, Dexter Thomas, could face 20 years in prison and a $500,000 fine.


Thunder Gulch Easing Up to the Travers
Travers Week dawned at Saratoga Race Course today with Thunder Gulch, the winner of the Kentucky Derby, easing through a casual maintenance workout while half a dozen other colts were being primed to challenge him for the leadership of the 3-year-old division.
The star of the D. Wayne Lukas barn galloped five furlongs in a slow 1:05 this morning, prompting his trainer to explain: "We're just trying to keep him happy."


Hollywood's Top Talent Agent To Become President of Disney
Surprising even the most sophisticated entertainment executives for the second time in two weeks, the Walt Disney Company announced yesterday that the talent agent Michael Ovitz would become Disney's president.
The move pairs Mr.
Ovitz, widely considered the most powerful agent in Hollywood, with Disney's chairman, Michael D. Eisner, the most powerful man in the entertainment industry.


Giuliani Sees Catholic Schools as Model for City
Saying the New York City public school system is close to collapse, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday demanded that education officials begin a program of "radical reform" that he said should be modeled on the city's Catholic school system, from which he graduated.
In a speech entitled "A Vision for Education," the Mayor said that Catholic schools have higher graduation rates and higher test scores than city schools.
If city schools could do away with their bureaucracy and give principals the same authority that Catholic school principals have to manage their budgets and expel unruly students, he said, they could avert the wholesale abandonment of the system by parents.


Ramirez Gives Edge To Indians
Indians 9, Orioles 6
Manny Ramirez singled in the go-ahead run in a three-run ninth inning as visiting Cleveland handed Baltimore its fifth straight loss, 9-6, last night.
It was the 19th time this season that the Indians have won in their final at-bat.
Kenny Lofton opened the ninth with a single off Armando Benitez (1-4) and stole second.
After Omar Vizquel popped out, Carlos Baerga was intentionally walked.
Albert Belle popped out before Ramirez, who had homered, grounded a single inside third base.
Paul Sorrento followed with a two-run double off Jesse Orosco.


Georgia Tries To Redraw Voting Map Based on Race
With states around the country watching anxiously, Georgia's Legislature convened a special session today to draw new Congressional districts after the United States Supreme Court rejected a district map designed explicitly to elect black representatives.
The special session will focus on issues that are central to the new political and racial dynamic in the South, a region where the electoral interests of blacks and Republicans have suddenly coincided.


Conference Board Chooses a Harvard Dean as New Chief
Richard E. Cavanagh, the executive dean of the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University, was appointed president and chief executive yesterday of the Conference Board, a worldwide organization of 2,500 leading executives, yesterday.
Mr. Cavanagh, 48, succeeds Preston Townley, who died last year.


The Cost Of Saving Money On Printers
SELECTING a personal printer can be confusing.
There are so many, at a wide range of prices and features.
Four factors can narrow the choices.
Uses.
A printer intended strictly for the home, for things like letters, homework and miscellaneous projects, can be minimal.
A letter to Uncle Frank does not have to spew out at six pages a minute.
Nancy can wait five minutes for a junior high school report.
The speeds of printers claimed by the makers must not be taken too seriously anyway.
Those six pages a minute are six copies of the same page, without a mixture of typefaces or the inclusion of graphics.
But who can resist putting Bodoni and Blackletter and a cartoon or two even in a letter or book report?
And if "miscellaneous" includes turning out a newsletter for the Little League team, a variety of typefaces and a selection of graphical elements are almost inevitable.


Comcast Loss Offset by Rise In Cash Flow
The Comcast Corporation said yesterday that its net loss had more than doubled in the second quarter from a year earlier, but that its operating cash flow -- a key measure of a cable television company's financial health -- rose strongly.
The company, which is based in Philadelphia, reported a net loss of $29.3 million, or 12 cents a share, compared with a net loss of $12.9 million, or 5 cents a share, a year earlier.
Analysts had expected a loss of 8 cents in the latest quarter.


Calming Stormy Seas With New Kinds of Ship Hulls
FROM the ancient Egyptians onward, ship makers have been relatively quick to change the means of powering their vessels to increase speed and range, going from muscle to wind, steam, oil and eventually the atom.
But hulls during those propulsion revolutions remained essentially the same.
The great arc known as the monohull prevailed by virtue of its simplicity, buoyancy and dynamic lift.
For millenniums it ruled the waves.
Now, however, a number of upstarts are racing to challenge the leader, perhaps bringing changes as fundamental as those that have marked the history of maritime propulsion.
The aim is greater speed and stability than is feasible with monohulls.


Charles E. Adkins; College President, 85
Charles E. Adkins, former president of Briarcliff College in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., died on Sunday at St.
Luke's Hospital in Utica, N.Y.
He was 85 and lived in Syracuse.
Mr.
Adkins became president of Briarcliff in 1960, when it was a two-year women's college.
It adopted a full four-year program in 1965 and awarded its first B.A. degrees in 1967, while he was president.
He stepped down in 1968.
The school closed in 1977.


Subway Riders Seize Man After Cries of Child Abuse
About a dozen subway riders captured a 42-year-old man yesterday on a platform in Pennsylvania Station after a woman screamed that he had sexually molested her 4-year-old daughter, the police said.
The police said several other passengers on a northbound No. 2 express train told the mother that the man had placed his hand under the girl's dress.
The mother, the police said, then screamed at the suspect, who fled through several cars with the mother right behind him.


Griffey Gets the Go-Ahead To Start Tonight for Mariners
KEN GRIFFEY Jr., who broke his left wrist when he crashed into the center-field wall in Seattle on May 26, was cleared by doctors yesterday to rejoin the Mariners.
He will start in center field for the Mariners tonight in Minnesota, Manager LOU PINIELLA said.
"Whatever he does is a bonus," Piniella told The Seattle Times.
"Whatever he does is a positive contribution to the club. We'll put him in center field and let him play."


After 45 Years, Free at Last


Ovitz Leaves a Legacy Of Jolting Madison Ave.
When Michael Ovitz, the chairman of the Creative Artists Agency, joins the Walt Disney Company, his second career, as a marketing strategist, will end.
But he leaves a legacy in work for the Coca-Cola Company that will still serve to challenge traditional advertising agencies.
Mr.
Ovitz expanded the influence of Creative Artists, which was already the premier Hollywood talent agency, by advising giant consumer marketers like Coca-Cola.
But at Disney, which he joins Oct. 1, he will focus solely on his duties as president, said Tom Deegan, a spokesman in Burbank, Calif.


Ex-Player Pleads Not Guilty
A second former Idaho State University football player pleaded not guilty yesterday to two counts of statutory rape.
SAM CARTER, 21, faces a maximum penalty of life in prison on the felony charges involving two 14-year-old girls.


U.S. Warns Big Retailers About Sweatshop Goods
In a widening investigation of the apparel industry, the Labor Department has notified more than a dozen of the nation's largest retailers that goods made by immigrants working in virtual slavery may have ended up in the retailers' stores around the country, the Labor Secretary said today.
The department is reviewing accusations that the retailers, which include Sears, Macy's and Neiman Marcus, may have sold items made at a sweatshop in El Monte, Calif., where nearly 72 illegal immigrants from Thailand worked in prison-like conditions.
The workers were released in a predawn raid by state officials two weeks ago.


International Briefs; Lawyers Will Not Help India State Fight Enron
Lawyers for the government of the Indian state of Maharashtra said yesterday that they would not represent it in its dispute with the Enron Corporation because they would have to argue against a contract they had previously declared valid.
The move is the latest indication of the problems faced by the state government, which scrapped the $2.8 billion power project earlier this month but has yet to deliver a formal cancellation notice to Enron.


The Vendetta That Is Jolting the House of Hussein
Members of Iraq's ruling elite still talk about a spectacular fistfight in 1992 when President Saddam Hussein's son Uday lunged at his brother-in-law Lieut.
Gen.
Hussein Kamel during an official ceremony.
Onlookers had to pull them apart as the blows and vicious insults flew.
Uday and his younger brother, Qosai, were in constant competition with General Kamel, who married their sister Raghad.
Today, Uday Hussein is amassing power at home, as is his younger brother, while General Kamel, who fled to Jordan last week with his family, is threatening to overthrow the Iraqi Government.


Creepy, Sexual, Sadistic And a Joke
It was a joke, an art project, a rave, a sex club and a shallow gimmick all rolled into one leather-clad lump when two electronic dance-music bands, Lords of Acid and My Life With the Thrill Kill Kult, performed on Thursday night at Roseland.
Billed as the Sextasy Ball, the concert explored the dark side of Lollapalooza, with slide shows of art that Senator Jesse Helms doesn't like, topless dancers, S-and-M shows, videos of violent films, a body-piercing booth and stalls selling everything from industrial-music records to rubber brassieres.
Not surprisingly, the tour has been plagued by trouble since it began in June.
Slides of artwork by Andres Serrano and others have been confiscated as pornography and dancers have been arrested for indecent exposure.
On Thursday, however, the Sextasy Ball took place without a noticeable hitch.


Kotite Puts the Knock On the Jets' Blockers
After two preseason games, the Jets' revamped offensive line is out of sync, and Coach Rich Kotite is unhappy.
Kotite was distressed by the ineffective blocking, and also the lack of emotion and aggressiveness shown by the entire offensive unit during Saturday's 13-10 loss to the Philadelphia Eagles.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about a decision by President Clinton to impose a permanent ban on American nuclear testing misquoted officials' remarks about the size of tests the Pentagon had proposed to assure the reliability of the nation's nuclear arsenal.
The Pentagon wanted to continue test explosions as large as the equivalent of 500 tons of TNT, not 500 pounds.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Michael Ovitz Named President of Disney The Walt Disney Company stunned Hollywood by naming Michael Ovitz, the head of the Creative Artists Agency, as its president.


A Gift To Help Preserve Cultural Sites
The World Monuments Fund has received a $5 million grant from American Express to identify the 100 cultural sites most in need of preservation or restoration.
As part of an initiative called the World Monuments Watch, the fund will draw up the list next spring and update it annually, with $4.5 million of the grant money to be channeled to selected sites or works over a period of five years.
The "monuments" can be works of art, buildings, archeological sites, examples of vernacular architecture or man-made landscapes.
This cultural version of an endangered-species list is intended to raise awareness of artworks and structures in immediate peril, and to entice potential donors to support restoration projects.
It will also allow the fund to gather information more systematically, to move into new countries, particularly in Latin America and Asia, and to step up its role as an advocate for preservation.


A Miracle Worker Turned Fugitive
Few people were prepared for the finale to Gerardo de Prevoisin's ruinous attempt to build Aeromexico into Latin America's biggest airline: out of the blue, the former insurance executive quit as Aeromexico's chairman, emptied his office, purged his computer files and fled Mexico, apparently with his young secretary.
Nobody seems quite sure where Mr.
Prevoisin is today, and those who may know are not telling.


BMW Motorcycles Chooses Agencies
The BMW Motorcycles division of BMW of North America in Woodcliff Lake, N.J., has selected Fallon McElligott Berlin in New York to handle the creative portion of its account and DeWitt Media in New York to handle the media portion.
The billings were estimated at $1.5 million to $2.5 million.


If Jerry Garcia Had Carried Anti-Drug Message; No to Materialism
To the Editor:
The passing of Jerry Garcia (front page, Aug. 10) and his legacy is a hotly debated topic in the wake of his premature demise.
The Grateful Dead symbolize much more than a counterculture phenomenon that detractors link to promiscuity and drug abuse.
The personal foibles of Mr.
Garcia, or other band members, of this most famous vestige of the 1960's, should not subvert the true message and beauty of his music.


A Beethoven Who's Mostly Muscular
The pianist Andre Watts, like many another member of a now mature generation of instrumentalists that has raised technical facility to new heights, has yet to take the next step: consistently putting that facility to deeper uses.
Mr.
Watts's performance of Beethoven's "Emperor" Concerto in the Mostly Mozart Festival at Avery Fisher Hall on Friday evening was typically athletic in the outer movements and, as such, often impressive.
But athleticism merely begins to touch this work's possibilities, and Mr.
Watts seemed more intent on dispatching the immediate challenge than on finding a long line through the piece.
As if to show what he might have to offer in a more thoughtful vein, Mr.
Watts imparted a fine lyricism to the Adagio, with left-hand chords beautifully balanced and weighted.


Teachers May Face Layoffs in New York
New York City Board of Education officials said yesterday that more than 3,100 teachers, or 5 percent of the teaching corps, have accepted an offer for early retirement but that number did not appear high enough to avert the first teacher layoffs since the 1975 fiscal crisis, which could lead to conflict with the Mayor and the teachers union.


Abraham W. Geller, Architect, Is Dead at 83
Abraham W. Geller, an architect known as much for his steadfast commitment to the modernist gospel as for the buildings he designed, died yesterday at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 83.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, said his wife, Marion Geller.


Officer Slays Her Friend, Police Say
A Bronx police officer shot and killed a friend on Sunday night, five years after she was forced to give up her service revolver temporarily because of erratic behavior stemming from a previous domestic quarrel, the police said.
The officer, Cathleen Byrnes, 35, who is assigned to the 48th Precinct, has refused to talk to investigators about why she fired a single bullet from her service revolver into the neck of Joseph Saglimbeni, 51, in her City Island cottage, the police said.
A senior official in the Detective Bureau said police investigators believed that Mr.
Saglimbeni was Officer Byrnes's boyfriend, and that the shooting culminated a succession of violent incidents.


Disney Leads Blue Chips Up, With Dow Climbing by 41.56
Blue-chip stocks rebounded yesterday, lifted in large part by a jump in shares of Walt Disney after the company named Michael Ovitz president.
Technology stocks led the broader market higher.
And computer-generated "buy" orders and a Government report that showed that June inventories rose at a smaller-than-expected two-tenths of 1 percent helped the advance.


Simpson Team Reads of Officer's Slurs
The not-so-distant rumble of explosive audio tapes, in which a critical prosecution witness apparently utters a racial epithet with abandon, all but drowned out the dull hum of tedious scientific testimony today in the trial of O. J. Simpson.
As a forensic toxicologist completed his testimony, Mr.
Simpson sat at the defense table reading the transcribed conversations of Detective Mark Fuhrman and Laura Hart McKinny, a would-be screenwriter in North Carolina, in which Mr.
Fuhrman describes police work in Los Angeles.
A defense lawyer said Mr.
Simpson was "chilled" by the transcripts, though he also twice turned to his counsel excitedly while reading.


Ex-Florio Aide Is Spared Prison Term in a Bond Scheme
Joseph C. Salema, a former chief of staff and political confidant of former Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey, yesterday was spared a prison sentence for his role in a 1990 municipal bond kickback scheme.
Instead, Judge Sonia Sotomayor of Federal District Court in Manhattan sentenced the sobbing Mr.
Salema to six months of confinement in a halfway house and an additional six months of in-home electronic monitoring.
She also fined him $10,000.


Timber-Related Workers Suffer From Cutbacks
To the Editor:
Your reporter and I must not have been attending the same Senate Natural Resources Committee "workshop" on Aug. 9, headed by Senator Frank H. Murkowski of Alaska (news article, Aug. 10), held in response to the timber harvest restrictions in Alaska's Tongass National Forest.
You focus on Federal bureaucracy, instead of on the Tongass and the livelihoods of the timber-dependent workers who rely on it.


G.E. Selects Meta4 For Internet Work
The General Electric Company of Fairfield, Conn., has named Meta4 Digital Design in Jersey City as its Internet agency of record.
The billings were not disclosed.
Meta4 was awarded the account, which includes re-creating and maintaining G.E.'s presence on the World Wide Web, after a two-month review that was narrowed to that agency and three other finalists whose names were not disclosed.


The Winner and Still King of the Net
ROB KILBY'S day was going the way all his days have gone so far this season: perfectly.
His first serve landed quietly across the volleyball net, somehow eluding his 10 opponents.
Frozen in their swim trunks, they watched helplessly as the ball spiked the sand.
Point, Kilby.
Second serve, same thing.
Third, ditto.
It was getting silly.
Occasionally, someone managed to return a volley, even make him run.
But Rob Kilby won, of course.
Score: 11-1.


Jane Roe Recants -- or Does She?
That Norma McCorvey was the Jane Roe of Roe v.
Wade, the landmark 1973 Supreme Court decision that gave American women the constitutionally protected right to abortion, was a matter of chance.
Roe v.
Wade was a class action suit that had been a long time in the making, and Ms.
McCorvey was coincidentally desperate for an abortion just when the lawyers needed a case to litigate.
Had she not chosen to be "Jane Roe," another woman is certain to have taken the challenge.
Norma McCorvey said last week that her greatest sin, greater even than her sins of selling drugs, cheating people and being an abusive alcoholic, was to be "the plaintiff in Roe V. Wade." In repentance, she has been baptized by a fundamentalist minister and joined the militant anti-abortion group, Operation Rescue.


Mantle Was a Star Of Field and Screen
Without much artifice or design, Mickey Mantle was a great television star.
He was as potent a must-watch as Jackie Gleason in their concurrent halcyon days, and as poignant as Michael Landon in his final dying days.
Always, he conveyed an Andy Griffith-like style: a charming, country storyteller, with a killer grin.
"Country boy makes good in the city," the broadcaster Mel Allen said.
Mantle the television star fared well in New York City, far better than Tennessee Ernie Ford did in his comically inept trek from Bent Fork, Tenn., to "I Love Lucy."


An Early Dismissal for Wolf
The sportscaster WARNER WOLF, picked by WUSA-TV in Washington to replace the late Glenn Brenner three years ago, has been let go by the Gannett-owned station.
He appeared for the final time on Friday.
The 57-year-old Wolf signed a five-year contract on his return to Washington in June 1992 from New York, where he worked at WABC-TV and WCBS-TV. (AP)


A Show of Support for Israeli Settlers in Palestinian's Death


N.F.L. TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Browns Cruise
The rookie Eric Zeier, working with the first team, completed his last 13 passes and directed Cleveland to 35 first-half points last night as the Browns routed the visiting Chicago Bears, 55-13.
The third-round pick out of Georgia filled in brilliantly for the ailing Vinny Testaverde, completing 14 of 16 passes for 158 yards and a touchdown while also scrambling 7 yards for another score.


Observer; A Noel For Napoleon
"Oui, moi je suis Bonaparte," he said in his abominable Corsican accent.
"Pourquoi etes vous venu?"
("Yes, me I am Napoleon. For what are you come?")


Beaches on L.I. Closing As Hurricane Threatens
Two beaches at Robert Moses State Park will be closed today because of unusually high tides as weather forecasters follow a hurricane that has been pounding the Long Island shoreline from hundreds of miles away.
The beaches, Fields 4 and 5 at Robert Moses, will be closed because they are expected to be under water at high tide and "there will be no place for anybody to put down a blanket," George Gorman, a spokesman for the state parks on Long Island, said yesterday.


5 Phone Marketers Arrested in Credit Card Sting
Five people who marketed an array of goods and services over the telephone have been charged with violating a new Federal law that prohibits using another merchant's credit card terminal for transactions.
The five were arrested in a sting operation by undercover Secret Service agents who set up a dummy mail-order stationery company last fall, complete with a merchant's credit card account at a large New York bank, prosecutors and agents said.


Ice Age Evidence Suggests a Mercurial Tropical Climate
SCIENTISTS have long believed that when the ice ages froze northern and southern latitudes, the tropics remained warm and climatically stable.
This suggests that the equatorial regions are less sensitive to climate change generally, and that the tropics might therefore be spared the worst of any global warming caused by human activity.
Now evidence is accumulating that the tropical climate is just as vulnerable to wide, long-term swings in temperature as areas farther north and south and by one set of data may have been 10 degrees Fahrenheit cooler in the last ice age.
Such a large cooling suggests that the tropics could also get much warmer in a period of global warming.


Harold M. Koch; Carpet Designer, 74
Harold M. Koch, a designer and importer of carpets who was the brother of former Mayor Edward I. Koch, died on Sunday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 74 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was liver failure after open-heart surgery about three weeks ago, the former Mayor said.
Mr.
Koch, who was born in the Bronx, spent his career in the carpet business, and until he sold it recently was the president of International Carpets Imported, a Manhattan wholesale concern.
He was the winner of a number of industry accolades, among them the 1991 Harrogate Design Award.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Washington Triumphs
MaliVai Washington used powerful serves and pinpoint baseline play to beat Andrei Chesnokov, 6-3, 6-1, in an opening-round match yesterday in the Volvo International in New Haven.
The 12th-seeded Washington got his second straight victory over Chesnokov, one of the highest-ranked unseeded players in the tournament.
Washington prevailed on clay earlier this year in Germany.


Mountain Shows No Mercy for Even the Skilled as 2 Rangers Are Killed
Reaching the summit of 14,410-foot Mount Rainier is a badge of honor that has become as appealing as finishing the Boston Marathon.
But unpredictable shifts in weather and high winds on the mountain, one of the nation's most dangerous peaks, can complicate many efforts, sending climbers scrambling down.
That can be frustrating for climbers who have spent months in strenuous physical training and paid hundreds of dollars for technical equipment and classes to prepare for the climb.
They must decide whether to forge ahead, which can jeopardize the welfare of everyone -- the climbers as well as the rangers who make the rescue efforts.
Even well-prepared climbers who begin their ascent on a sunny day and make it to the summit cannot predict whether the weather will turn against them before they can make it down safely.


Tourist Buses Are Grounded In Safety Scam
The largest operator in Manhattan's young and flourishing double-decker tour bus industry was ordered to take its entire fleet off the streets yesterday after officials accused the company of illegally switching permits between buses to circumvent state inspections.
The crackdown on the company, New York Apple Tours, comes at the peak of the summer tourist season and it is taking place amid a surge in popularity of the double-decker buses.
In only a few years the buses have become a highly competitive business that has transformed the way thousands of tourists see Manhattan.


Upgrade or Not? Good Question
HOW hard can upgrading computer systems be?
The Microsoft Corporation lives and dies by electronic mail, but last week two traveling Microsoft executives idly remarked to me about difficulties in retrieving their E-mail while on the road.
A Microsoft stay-at-home also complained that lately the company's internal mail system had been slowed down and messed up, though "messed" was not the word he used.
Microsoft, it turns out, has been revamping the E-mail system it uses within its virtual walls.
Microsoft will surely resolve these problems, but they raise an interesting question: if teams of technologists at the world's largest independent software company have trouble upgrading a system, what is in store for lesser mortals?
The question is particularly resonant in the calm before the Windows 95 storm.


Paris Journal; A Comic-Strip Gaul Valiantly Battles Disney
Defying expectations, a homey little theme park based on a comic strip figure of an ancient Gaul named Asterix has managed to hold its own against foreign invaders settled east of Paris in the Disney Company's European theme park.
This is not a small thing in a nation sensitive about national dignity.
While French vacationers rushed to Parc Asterix when it opened six years ago, the arrival in 1992 of Disneyland Paris and the uncertainties of economic recession and high unemployment nearly spelled defeat for Asterix, the mustachioed figure in the horned helmet who is the central character in France's most popular comic strip.


2 Queens Churches Struck by Vandals
Two churches in Queens were smeared with excrement in the last five days, and though the acts of vandalism occurred at opposite ends of the borough, the police are investigating them as possibly related bias incidents.
The first case was discovered on Friday at St.
Adalbert's Church at 52-29 83d Street in Elmhurst, and the second on Sunday morning at Our Lady of Grace Church at 100-05 159th Avenue in Howard Beach, Doram Tamari, a police spokesman, said last night.


Wildwood Plans Casino Deal
The City of Wildwood plans to sign an agreement with the Delaware Nation of western Oklahoma to build a freestanding casino, Mayor Fred Wager said yesterday.
Under the plan, Wildwood would give a parcel of land to the Indian tribe, which in turn would have the land placed in trust by the Federal Government.
Ancestors of the Delaware Nation formerly lived on the Cape May County island of Five Mile Beach.


Accounts
*
Main Line Federal Savings Bank, Villanova, Pa., a subsidiary of MLF Bancorp Inc., to Gillespie, Princeton, N.J., to handle its account, previously at Holton Namiotka &amp; Jones, Lafayette Hill, Pa.
The billings were estimated at $1.5 million. *
Supercuts Inc., San Francisco, to the Ryan Partnership, Westport, Conn., a unit of D. L. Ryan Cos., to handle its promotion account, previously handled by Frankel &amp; Co., Chicago.
The billings were estimated at $1 million. *
William B. Reily &amp; Co., New Orleans, to Ryan Drossman &amp; Partners, New York, as the first agency to handle advertising for the Bean Cuisine line, recently acquired by Reily from W. J. Clark Co., Chicago.
Ryan Drossman handles five other Reily food assignments.
The billings have not been determined.


Therapist's Dismissal Is Upheld
The Shrewsbury Borough school board acted within its legal authority when it dismissed a part-time, tenured speech therapist and contracted with a county agency to provide similar services at less than half the cost, the State Supreme Court ruled yesterday.


Brown Says Giants Should Tear Out Turf
The latest assault on artificial turf came today from an unlikely source.
Giants quarterback Dave Brown spoke strongly against its use, taking a position directly opposed to the stance of his team.
The injuries to offensive guard Scott Davis and center Brian Williams during last Friday night's preseason game against the Saints would not have been so severe, Brown said, if the Giants played on a grass surface.
Davis tore ligaments in his left knee when his foot got stuck on the Giants Stadium turf, which did not give.
Davis is out for the season.
Williams severely sprained his right ankle after his foot also became stuck in the turf.
He's out until at least until Sept. 4 -- opening night against the Cowboys.


Another Music-Label Head Departs Warner Abruptly
In the latest in a series of executive departures from its beleaguered music division, Time Warner Inc. said yesterday that Danny Goldberg, the chairman of Warner Brothers Records, had left the company.
He was replaced by Russ Thyret, the vice chairman of Warner Brothers Records.
Time Warner said that a settlement had been reached with Mr.
Goldberg, who is in the first year of a five-year contract valued at $20 million.
But both the company and Mr.
Goldberg declined to discuss details.
Mr.
Goldberg's departure had been widely expected within the industry because he was known as an ally of Doug Morris, the former chief executive of Warner's three domestic record labels, which include Warner Brothers Records.
In June, a month after Michael J. Fuchs, the chairman of Time Warner's Home Box Office pay-cable network, was named to oversee the company's music operations as well, he dismissed Mr.
Morris.
Mr.
Morris strongly supported Time Warner's involvement in gangsta rap, the popular music now under attack by politicians and others who say that it celebrates violence and degrades women.
Mr.
Fuchs had accused Mr.
Morris of leading a campaign to destabilize Warner Music after its support of gangsta rap drew criticism from, among others, Senator Bob Dole and William J. Bennett, an Education Secretary in the Reagan Administration.
Time Warner is said to be involved in talks to sell its 50 percent stake in Interscope, a label that features gangsta rap groups, back to Inter scope executives.
After his dismissal, Mr.
Morris filed a lawsuit accusing Time Warner of breaching his employment contract.
He also joined with the Seagram Company's MCA unit to start a new record company.
Last week, Melvyn R. Lewinter, a key Morris aide at Warner Music, filed a breach-of-contact suit after he, too, was dismissed by Mr.
Fuchs.
Facing the prospect of yet another lawsuit, Mr.
Fuchs apparently took some care to reach a settlement with Mr.
Goldberg.
In an interview, Mr.
Goldberg said that he had several opportunities available but that he planned to wait until the year's end before deciding which to pursue.
With the departures of Mr.
Morris and Mr.
Lewinter, just a handful of executives are left at Warner Music U.S., the unit set up last fall to administer the music group's three domestic labels.
In an interview yesterday, Mr.
Fuchs declined to discuss Mr.
Goldberg's departure, instead focusing on the naming of Mr.
Thyret as Mr.
Goldberg's successor.
Asked if he planned to eliminate the Warner Music U.S. unit now that Mr.
Morris and Mr.
Lewinter had been sent packing, Mr.
Fuchs confirmed that: "There is no longer a Warner Music unit."
The choice of Mr.
Thyret was clearly aimed at restoring some stability to a music group hurt by infighting.
A 25-year employee at Warner Records, whose rock acts include Madonna and R.E.M., Mr.
Thyret, 50, has spent his entire career at the label.
For most of his career, Mr.
Thyret worked closely with Mo Ostin, the former head of the label who developed close ties with the label's artists and made Warner Records into an industry leader.
Mr.
Ostin began the yearlong run of executive departures and dismissals at Warner Music when he resigned last August after clashing with Mr.
Fuchs's predecessor, Robert Morgado.
Yesterday Time Warner released a statement from Mr.
Ostin endorsing Mr.
Thyret's appointment.
"This is a great choice and an excellent move toward bringing everyone together," Mr.
Ostin said.
"I wish him only the best. I love the guy."
Mr.
Goldberg also endorsed Mr.
Thyret yesterday.
"Russ is one in a million," he said.
"He is a brilliant motivator of people."
Mr.
Thyret was clearly thrilled.
"To say that this is a dream come true is an amazing understatement," he said.
Asked whether he supported gangsta rap, whose practitioners do not appear on the Warner Records label, Mr.
Thyret demurred.
"I'm not interested in getting into any side controversies that will distract me from moving this company forward," he said.
"My watch starts today. I'll stand up for the music that we produce under my watch."


Wal-Mart Stores Inc.(WMT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


CHRONICLE
TILDA SWINTON, the British actress who starred in the film "Orlando" and in several Derek Jarman movies, is taking on a role that will call for a different kind of depth: sleeping.
Appearing at the Serpentine Gallery in London as part of an installation by Cornelia Parker called "The Maybe," she will sleep in a cabinet for eight hours a day from Sept. 4 to 10.


Filipinos Face Peril
To the Editor:
The only recent mention of the Philippines has been a photo of the Presidential Palace fire (some editions, Aug. 10).
In the last week and a half volcanic ash and mudslides have plagued Pampanga in central Luzon.
Over the last five years this region, along with surrounding areas like Tarlac, have been devastated.


To Prevent Teen-Age Pregnancy, Think Jobs; Look at the Numbers
To the Editor:
Lisa Schiffren, in her Aug. 10 Op-Ed article on welfare reform, says that "the way to begin is to cut off the most obvious distorting incentives -- cash, housing and other subsidies -- given to unwed teens for self-destructive decisions."


Embracing Music Of Many Truths
Walking the wooded path between the homey new Seiji Ozawa Concert Hall, where a student ensemble was packing up after a rehearsal, and the Koussevitzky Music Shed, where the Boston Symphony Orchestra was about to play, a visitor was reminded of the magic that has lured musicians and their admirers to Tanglewood for nearly six decades.
Under a bright full moon, a passer-by could eavesdrop on a pianist navigating Stravinsky's Tango or, a few yards up the road, a quartet reading through Mendelssohn, while in the distance a trumpeter warmed up on figures from Strauss tone poems.
Every summer, nearly 200 young instrumentalists, singers, composers and conductors flock to the Tanglewood Music Center to spend eight weeks studying, performing and listening.
Both old and new music is covered, but certainly the most challenging part of the center's program is the weeklong Festival of Contemporary Music, which opened last Wednesday.
And in his second year as festival's director, Reinbert de Leeuw has given his charges the most varied survey of new music ever offered at Tanglewood.


Turner Deal for King World May Be Near
With negotiations advancing in recent days, Turner Broadcasting System Inc. could reach an agreement as early as next week to acquire King World Productions Inc., two people familiar with the talks said yesterday.
Ted Turner, chairman of Turner Broadcasting, is said to be seeking to acquire King World as part of a larger goal to acquire CBS Inc.


Foster Care Can't Guarantee a Safe Haven
To the Editor:
Re "Leaving Children With Their Abusers" (editorial, Aug. 10): I applaud your balanced response to the outcry against family preservation prompted by the deaths of three children in Connecticut and a grand jury investigation on Long Island.


S.E.C. Seeks to Keep Free Internet Service
The chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission said this week that he would "do everything I possibly can" to continue free public access to corporate disclosure documents over the Internet.
Arthur Levitt Jr. made the remarks in an interview on Monday after a daylong S.E.C. conference on providing public access to S.E.C. records.
The conference on the Electronic Data Gathering Analysis and Retrieval System, known as Edgar, drew about 150 participants, many of them from companies that sell Government records to the public.


Contractor Acquitted in School-Bribe Case
The owner of a construction company was acquitted of conspiracy and bribery charges in Federal District Court in Manhattan yesterday, dealing the Government its first defeat in a series of prosecutions aimed at corruption on school construction projects.
The jury deliberated an hour and fifteen minutes before finding the 51- year-old contractor, Wlodeck Jan Lech, not guilty, defense lawyers said.


Great American Management &amp; Investment Inc.(GAMI,NSC) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Woolworth Corp.(Z,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Home Depot (HD,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 30


Corrections
The headline of a front-page article yesterday about disciplinary action against five officers involved in the downing of two American helicopters over Iraq referred to them incorrectly.
The five were two F-15 pilots who mistakenly shot down the copters and three officers aboard a radar plane who failed to prevent the accident; not all five were pilots.


Kashmiris Extend Deadline for Killing Captives
The anti-India Kashmiri rebels who are holding four Western hostages today extended a deadline for their slaying by one day, officials here said.
The original deadline was today, India's Independence Day.


McNeeley Is as Subtle as, Well, a Punch
There is no secret about how Peter McNeeley will try to pull a monumental upset here on Saturday night.
The bell will ring and McNeeley will charge Mike Tyson.
That is when the leather will fly.
That is McNeeley's strategy, according to his manager, Vinny Vecchione.
But why would he broadcast the strategy?
And why adopt such a dangerous one?


Bozell, Jacobs Puts Two on Taco Bell
The Bozell Worldwide unit of Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardtappointed two executives yesterday who had previously led other agencies to manage its important Taco Bell account.
The executives are Harvey Hoffenberg, 45, former chairman and chief creative officer of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide in New York, a unit of Cordiant P.L.C., and Peter Stranger, 46, former president of Stranger &amp; Associates in Los Angeles, now part of the Los Angeles office of the Evans Group.
They were named to co-manage the Taco Bell business at Bozell/Salvati Montgomery Sakoda in Cosa Mesa, Calif., as executive vice presidents and heads of the creative and management teams, respectively.


Bisys Group Inc.(BSYS,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Consolidated Stores (CNS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Japanese Apology for War Is Welcomed and Criticized
Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama was praised and pilloried today by people at home and abroad for offering Japan's first frank apology for the damage and suffering inflicted by his country during World War II.
People throughout Asia welcomed Mr.
Murayama's apology, although reaction from certain countries like South Korea and China was cautious.
Even many Japanese said they felt a strong expression of regret was long overdue.


Schools, Not Rules, for Immigrant Kids
To control overcrowding and cut expenses, school districts often require proof that students actually reside in the community.
For many families, coming up with proof-of-residency requirements, like rental agreements and utility bills, is merely an inconvenience.
For immigrant families, though, it can be a burden.
Some of these families, doubled up with relatives, do not make payments in their own names.
Others may have fled their native countries for their lives, leaving documents behind.
Several Long Island school districts are now insisting on strict residency rules, which critics think discriminate against immigrant children.
Districts surely have the right to determine whether the children they educate live in the neighborhood.
But in their zeal, some districts may be skirting the edges of the law.


Gingrich, by the Book: Sign Fast and Faster
Like a king on a throne, Newt Gingrich sat here today in the rotunda of the country's biggest shopping mall, under an 80-foot American flag, and autographed copies of his book.
His elevated platform was bracketed by balloons of red, white and blue with flashing lights in them, as 3,000 people snaked through a line at his feet.
He signed a copy for Philip Bickhardt and his son Adam, who rose at dawn to drive the 120 miles from their home in southern Minnesota to catch the Speaker.
Mr.
Bickhardt, a 52-year-old mailman, said he wanted his 13-year-old son to read the book, "To Renew America," to "balance out" what he called the liberal gibberish that his son was taught in school.


Anacomp Inc.(AAC,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


2 Die in Truck-Van Collision


Sounds That Transcend a Bard's Torment
When Brian Wilson of the Beach Boys talks about being hit by his father's belt, what he describes is the violent sound ("Whip! Whip! Whip! Like very, very hard!") and not the cruelty.
That's one sign of how deeply immersed Mr.
Wilson is in his own aural imagination, which has yielded some of the most glorious pop music we know.
But he appears to have composed, arranged and recorded the Beach Boys songs much more easily than he can explain them.
"Ten li'l ole minutes," he shrugs, describing the genesis of the ethereally beautiful "Caroline No."


Nervously, East Coast Awaits a Hurricane
Thousands of people along the East Coast began evacuating today as Hurricane Felix moved closer to the United States after pounding Bermuda.
With hurricane warnings posted from the Little River inlet near the South Carolina-North Carolina border to Chincoteague, Va., residents and tourists were evacuated from the Outer Banks of North Carolina.
The storm steadily generated sustained winds of 80 miles per hour 140 miles from its center.
Winds are considered hurricane force at 74 m.p.h. and above.


Ross Stores Inc.(ROST,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Segui Returns and Has a Blast at Shea
Sometimes when a player is traded, there are hard feelings between him and his former team.
Not in David Segui's case.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Aug. 11
Aug. 4
Aug. 12
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
7.6
7.4
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.0
3.3
Gasoline stocks
203.2
203.0
207.9
Distillate stocks
124.6
123.7
131.5
Crude imports, daily
8.3
7.6
7.9
Product imports, daily
1.3
1.9
1.9
Crude stocks
309.8
308.1
328.5
Crude production, daily
6.1
6.5
6.6
Refinery utilization (%)
93.6
95.1
95.5
Source: American Petroleum Institute


John Cameron Swayze, 89, Journalist and Pitchman, Dies
John Cameron Swayze, one of television's first evening news anchors and the man who introduced the sentence "It takes a licking and keeps on ticking" into popular culture as the voice of Timex watches, died yesterday at his home in Sarasota, Fla.
He was 89.
Mr.
Swayze, whose crisp but folksy voice made him a household name during television's infancy, started his career as a newspaper reporter, then became a radio broadcaster and switched to television in 1949 to host the "Camel News Caravan," a 15-minute news program broadcast five times a week on NBC.


Morrison Knudsen Corp.(MRN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Citizens Utilities Co.(CZN.A,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sports of The Times; Tyson Plans To Tattoo A Glass Chin
TO commemorate our return to Mike Tyson's career, a ceremonial exhibition of boxing has been scheduled here for Saturday night.
First things first, namely a week's worth of photo opportunities and marketing pitches.
Finally, to show his appreciation for our comeback, the ex-con and former champ will go a couple of rounds with this Peter McNeeley fellow, who happens to have a chin the size of a catcher's mitt.
Unlike many underwhelming heavyweights, the first thing you notice when you meet McNeeley is not his stomach, but the inviting target beneath his mouth.
Rumor here has it that Tyson is planning his next tattoo -- of Don King from the neck up -- for McNeeley's chin.
There's room, actually, for King's entourage.


Bob Evans Farms Inc.(BOBE,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 28


Fireproofing Young Palates
FEARLESS, curious eaters aren't born. They're educated.
Depending on the culture in which they're raised, children will either learn to love garlic and jalapenos and curry and ginger without so much as a wail, or they will recoil at the same flavors.


Morceli Runs for Love and Money
If his brother cannot pull Noureddine Morceli along to a world record in the mile on Wednesday night, perhaps $50,000 and two pounds of gold waiting at the finish line will serve as sufficient motivation.
"I don't run for money," Morceli said in an interview today.


Sale of Public Hospitals A Long Shot, Experts Say
New York City might be able to sell all 11 of its public hospitals, but the experience in other cities and the rapidly changing health-care marketplace suggest that the odds would be extremely long, several medical-care experts said yesterday.
The National Association of Public Hospitals, an industry group, said none of its 100 members had ever been sold to a private corporation, though some municipal or county hospitals, like Boston City Hospital, have sought mergers with other nearby nonprofit hospitals.


Counsel to the Brokenhearted; For Lawyer, Bitter Divorces and Touch of Humor
It is a pitfall of being a divorce lawyer, in contrast to, say, a corporate litigator, that once a case is over, the client has no further need for your high moral dudgeon or your billable hours.
But Eleanor B. Alter, one of New York's premier divorce lawyers, whose firm charges the bitter and the brokenhearted $400 an hour for her counsel, has a number of dedicated repeat customers.


2 Plead Not Guilty In Oklahoma Case
Timothy J. McVeigh and Terry L. Nichols, the two suspects in the bombing of the Oklahoma City Federal Building, both entered pleas of not guilty today.


Jews Dwindle In the Capital Of Quebec
The first Jews settled here in 1759, the year Britain invaded New France, forming in this provincial capital one of the first Jewish communities in North America.
Jews opened stores here and started banks, railroads, telegraph companies and steamship lines.
In the 1870's, an engineer named Sigismund Mohr harnessed Montmorency Falls to light Quebec streets.
Bequests by Maurice Pollack, whose department store was a downtown landmark for half a century, led Laval University to name its medical school after him.


Edisto Resources (EDS,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


The F.B.I. and Ruby Ridge
F.B.I.
Director Louis Freeh has moved quickly to correct the egregious error he made earlier this year when, trusting his longtime friend Larry Potts, he declared that there had been no cover-up of the Bureau's activities in the 1992 standoff between agents and a white separatist family in Idaho.
The Government is already paying for that error in money and trust.
Yesterday it awarded $3.1 million to Randall Weaver, whose wife and son were killed at Ruby Ridge by Federal agents.
But the worst damage was to the Government's reputation.
The incident has fueled concerns that the nation's highest law enforcement agency has grievously abused its powers.


2 Political Parties Turn to Airwaves for Medicare Debate
Democrats and Republicans are taking their quarrels over Medicare to the airwaves, with the Democrats buying television advertisements in 13 states and the Republicans purchasing radio spots in 11 Congressional districts.
One Democratic advertisement will say, "Republicans are wrong to want to cut Medicare benefits" and preserving them is "what's moral, good and right by our elderly." The other will accuse Republicans of favoring "charging elderly $600 more a year for medical care, $1,700 more for home care."


A Director Re-emerges As Actor and Novelist
The paradox of the actor's life, the thrilling moments that share center stage with the terrifying anxieties, is at the heart of Michael Blakemore's "Next Season." In this novel, Mr.
Blakemore chronicles a season in the life of a provincial English repertory company, the kind of company in which he served his acting apprenticeship.
While searching for security, the author's fictional alter ego realizes that the theater is a world "where all were vulnerable because all were expendable."
When the novel was first published in 1968, it received favorable reviews, but, largely through a publisher's shortsightedness, sales were minimal.
Mr.
Blakemore, by then embarked on his career as a director, bought the remaindered copies and for years gave them away as opening-night presents.
Without earning any profit, the novel became an underground favorite, moving hand to hand among actors, not least of all because it was supposed to be a roman a clef.
In his introduction to the new paperback edition (Applause Books), Simon Callow compares it to a samizdat, as if it were a clandestine document about "the creative, anarchic excitement of acting."


Sports of The Times; Mantle's Teammates Say Goodbye
MICKEY MANTLE always said he wanted to be remembered as a good teammate, but loyalty works both ways.
Mickey Mantle might best be remembered -- and even judged in some earthly way -- by the awe and the respect of the teammates who stood with him yesterday.
Some of the teammates at his funeral service had never met Mickey Mantle.
They were fans who had gaped at his long blasts or chuckled at a story he told on television.
Others had met him once, and they all treasured that fleeting moment yesterday.


351 Apply for 15-Member Panel
Officials supervising the state takeover of the troubled Newark school system announced yesterday that 351 people have applied to serve on the public advisory board that will work with the new administration.
All candidates will be asked to describe how they envision the future of Newark schools, Dr.
Peter B. Contini, the Deputy Commissioner of Education, said.
Among other tasks, the 15-member panel will help organize the search for a permanent Superintendent to run the 82 schools.


Journal; The Other Perot
Ross Perot's extravaganza was the Jerry Lewis Telethon of politics: an interminable rally at which thousands of decent citizens trying to do good had to indulge the high-pitched ravings of an egomaniacal clown.
William Bennett was right, if unsuccessful, when he advised his party's would-be Presidents "not to pander to Mr. Perot" by showing up in Dallas, on the grounds that he is "nothing but trouble."
But however depressing the spectacle of Republicans and Democrats alike fawning over Mr.
Perot, his pander-thon was not the most disturbing flexing of political muscle by a would-be demagogue we will see this year.
Far more alarming -- and less likely to be exposed to scrutiny by continuous cable TV coverage -- is the convention to be held by the Christian Coalition in Washington the weekend after Labor Day.
Phil Gramm, Bob Dole, Newt Gingrich and Mr.
Bennett himself have all signed up to pay court to Pat Robertson, that rare politician who makes Mr.
Perot seem benign.


Casinos' Net Income Triples
The 12 casino hotels made $47.2 million in the second quarter of this year, more than three times their net income for the same period last year, the Casino Association of New Jersey said yesterday.
The addition of more slot machines, games like keno and poker and renovation and expansion efforts helped to increase revenue, Nicholas R. Amato, the association's president, said.
Ten casinos reported profits for the second quarter.
Trump's Castle had a loss of $3.6 million and Trump Taj Mahal lost $1.6 million, The Associated Press reported.
TERRY PRISTIN


Farewell to No. 7


ADT Ltd.(ADT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Hughes Supply Inc.(HUG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


Putting Guys Like That in a Room Together
The tough guys of "The Usual Suspects" radiate confidence in their own movie-mythic possibilities, secure in the knowledge that they are this year's Reservoir Dogs.
And it's not even a stretch, since Bryan Singer's immensely stylish film noir incorporates so many good masculine roles and such terse, literate conversational sparring.
With these advantages, "The Usual Suspects" goes straight to cult status without quite touching one important base: the audience's emotions.
This movie finally isn't anything more than an intricate feat of gamesmanship, but it's still quite something to see.
And it has been made to be seen twice, with a plot guaranteed to create minor bewilderment the first time around.
Mr.
Singer and the screenwriter, Christopher McQuarrie, whose collaboration on "Public Access" won the Grand Jury Prize at the Sundance Film Festival two years ago, include a great many hints and nuances that won't be noticeable until you know which Suspect bears the most watching.
Suffice it to say that this film's trickiest role is handled with supreme slyness.
And that acting of that caliber, plus a whopper of an ending, compensates for some inevitable head-scratching on the way home.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FMC CORP., Chicago, a chemicals and machinery manufacturer, said it would invest $65 million to expand production of hydrogen peroxide at its plant in Bayport, Tex.


International Family Entertainment Inc.(FAM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Niche Brewing: A Beer for Each Season
BEER sales are strongest in summer, when baseball, the beach and the backyard barbecue call for six-packs of something light (if not "lite"), refreshing and cold.
And increasingly, microbreweries and brew pubs that make specialty beers are trying to capitalize on summer's thirst.
This year there are more domestic and imported wheat beers, fruit beers, India pale ales and golden lagers on the market than ever before.
They are flavorful yet quenching brews, often with a pleasing bitterness or a hint of lemon or other tart fruit, that represent a longstanding hot-weather tradition in Europe.
Most are made on a limited basis for summer.


Houston Journal; Fight for Oil Baron's Fortune Pits Wife, 27, Against Her Stepson, 54
How to honor the deceased? That fight was resolved by holding two separate funerals.
How to lay the body properly to rest?
That was settled by cremation, with half the ashes to go to the widow and half to the son.


Rouse Co.(ROUS,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Yanks Slow Red Sox' Mad Rush To Pennant
If the Red Sox played like this every night, the Yankees would hustle past them in two weeks.
And if the Red Sox were routinely this dismal, the American League East would be a competitive division.
After 12 games, the Red Sox finally rested and the Yankees seized a chance for redemption.
The Yankees delayed Boston's blinding dash toward October with a 9-2 victory tonight at Fenway Park.
They had a relaxing evening after scoring five unearned runs in the second inning and sent the Red Sox fans streaming onto Yawkey Way without a triumph for the first time since Aug. 1.


Teachers Seek Shift of Power In the Schools
With its contract expiring in two months, New York City's teachers' union opened negotiations with the city and Board of Education yesterday by proposing a sweeping transfer of decision-making power from school districts, superintendents and the board itself to teachers working in collaboration with principals and parents.
Because the teachers would take on added responsibility in helping to prepare budgets and hire staff, the proposal also calls for their salaries to increase, although it does not specify by how much.


Analysts International Corp.(ANLY,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Seles Is Back With a Vengeance and Graf Wilts in the Heat
She's done Atlantic City, she's done Letterman, and tonight in scorching Toronto, Monica Seles finally abandoned the glitz for the grunts and got back to doing what she did better than anyone else in the world before she was stabbed in midmatch 28 months ago.
She returned to the women's tennis circuit and left a defeated opponent in her wake.
The second coming of Seles was, from the terrifying vantage point of her opponent across the net, very much reminiscent of the first one.
She took an unorthodox two-handed grip on her shiny racquet and proceeded to whale away without restraint, with each shot a punishment.


Sbarro Inc.(SBA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 16


Pushing 'Pasta'


The Gift of a Lifetime
Multimillion-dollar gifts to colleges and universities have become almost routine.
Bill and Camille Cosby gave $20 million to Spelman College.
Henry Rowan, who runs a manufacturing business, and his wife, Betty, gave $100 million to Glassboro State College, which was then renamed Rowan College of New Jersey.
The billionaire Walter Annenberg gave $25 million to Harvard and $120 million to the University of Pennsylvania.
So why is it even noteworthy when Oseola McCarty, an elderly black woman, donates $150,000 to the University of Southern Mississippi?
In the case of Ms.
McCarty, it is the heart behind the gift, and the lifetime of effort that went into it.


Physician Management Merger Deal
Medpartners Inc., a fast-growing company that manages the practices of doctors' groups in the Southeast and Midwest, said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire Mullikin Medical Enterprises L.P., which has a similar business in the West.
The deal, in which Medpartners agreed to pay $360 million in stock for Mullikin, would create, in terms of revenue, the nation's largest physician-management company.
Revenue in 1996 is projected to reach about $1 billion.
A merged company would also be in a position to build a national network of doctors' group practices.


Wild Card Could Be The Ticket for Yanks
Today's therapy session in Yankeeland will begin with accepting and embracing the pursuit of a wild-card berth.
Stop rolling your eyes, Buck.
Do not try changing the subject, Wade.
And, Don, cringing at this growing possibility will not make you feel any better.
But accepting and embracing this new wrinkle in pennant races could make them feel better.
Maybe this mythical session should take place in the Yankee clubhouse because Manager Buck Showalter is too stubborn and too proud to put the chase for first place on hiatus.
Maybe Showalter is concerned that conceding even a smidge will be the improper signal to his players, especially since they have been weaned from Little League to fight for first.


Berkshire Hathaway Inc.(BRK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Japan's Imports Grew in July, Cutting Surplus
Japan's trade surplus shrank by an unexpectedly large 23 percent last month as growth in imports far outstripped the increase in exports, the Finance Ministry said yesterday in Tokyo.
The politically sensitive surplus with the United States declined by 31 percent, as Japanese exports to this country fell for the first time in 32 months.
The trade data, coupled with intervention in the currency market by the central banks of Japan, the United States and Germany, helped the dollar rise strongly against the yen.


'Tired' Clinton in Tetons For a 17-Day Vacation
Two years after he nearly came here on his first Presidential vacation, Bill Clinton arrived today in this cool, clean, cloudless valley where moose are moose, mountains are mountains and the word that goes naturally with white water is rafting, not hearing.
With Congress gone and Washington still and steamy, Mr.
Clinton and his wife, Hillary, decamped for what the White House knows may be their last real moment of rest before the Presidential campaign heats up this fall.
Their daughter, Chelsea, is at camp in Alaska, and will join them on Friday.
Virtually all their senior aides stayed home.


Not Your Usual Sausage Pizza
THERE are so many low-fat or reduced-fat chicken and turkey sausages on the market today, but the selection is not always large at the ordinary supermarket.
The best of the sausages are those that are highly seasoned.
If you have access to a butcher, try his selection.
Well-seasoned sausages, even in small amounts, add so much to a dish.
Try them on this pizza, along with corn, tomatoes, peppers and basil.
Serve with a simple salad.


U.S. Doesn't Bow to Beijing on Taiwan
To the Editor:
Re "China: Kind Words, Little Effect" (editorial, Aug. 7): I applaud you for urging the Administration to "resist China's demands" and conduct its own foreign policy, free from Beijing's intimidation.
However, you state: "As for Taiwan, Washington has long accepted Beijing's view that it is part of China, a view that Taipei officially shares."


SEPARATIST FAMILY GIVEN $3.1 MILLION FROM GOVERNMENT
The Government agreed today to pay $3.1 million to the family of a white separatist whose wife and teen-age son were killed three years ago by Federal agents in a standoff on a remote Idaho mountainside.
The payment settles claims by the separatist, Randall C. Weaver, and his three surviving daughters.
They accused Federal agents of violating the family's constitutional rights by shooting at members of the family by their home on a bluff known as Ruby Ridge, causing the wrongful death of Mr.
Weaver's wife, Vicki, and 14-year-old son, Samuel.


Manufacturers Fined in Sweatshop Inquiry
Many of the manufacturers who did business with a Los Angeles sweatshop where Thai immigrants worked for years in slave-like conditions were themselves operating illegally, California State labor officials said today.
Virginia Bradshaw, California's Labor Commissioner, announced that her agency had fined seven manufacturers $35,000 each for failing to register their operations with the state.
She said that at least six more manufacturers who did business with the El Monte, Calif., sweatshop, SK Fashions, were expected to be similarly sanctioned.


Executive Stays in Jail Over Child Support
A man imprisoned after failing to make $500,000 in child support payments was sent back yesterday to spend three more nights in jail.
The man, Jeffrey A. Nichols, a prominent investment adviser, appeared in a gray suit in New York State Civil Court yesterday to face state contempt charges for failing to make support payments for his three children.


Two Men Plead Not Guilty In Oklahoma City Bombing
Appearing in public for the first time since he was hustled grim-faced in an orange jumpsuit from a small-town courthouse, Timothy J. McVeigh assumed a soldier's at-ease position today as a prosecutor read 11 charges in the Oklahoma City bombing, each carrying a possible penalty of death.
"Sir, I plead not guilty," Mr.
McVeigh said in a strong, clear voice when the Federal Magistrate, Ronald Howland, asked for his response.


Rescue Crew Plucks Three From Island In Rockaways
It was not quite John Atehortua's idea of a pleasure boat ride and an overnight camping trip: After two hours of bobbing in the waters of Jamaica Bay and a long night stranded on a marshy island, John, an 11-year-old from Ozone Park, Queens, is not sure he wants to go out on his jet ski again.
"I don't think so," John said, back in his home yesterday morning, 17 hours after the jet ski he was riding with his 11-year-old friend Christian Romero and Christian's father, Julio Romero, flipped over.


Wheatley Runs Through Thick and Thin
Tyrone Wheatley has developed an outer shell that is thick and crusty.
At first, it is tough to crack.
His answers are short.
He sounds almost cocky.
But as the conversation continues, he lowers his shield and the shell, which was as hard as a diamond, begins to turn paper thin.
It is easy to understand why Wheatley might be defensive.
The Giants' No. 1 draft pick held out for 16 days.
He wasn't in the best of shape when he reported to camp last week.
He pulled his gluteal muscle and dropped kickoffs on his first day of practice and was the subject of jokes -- both from the news media and some of his teammates.


To Prevent Teen-Age Pregnancy, Think Jobs; What of Birth Control?
To the Editor:
Lisa Schiffren (Op-Ed, Aug. 10) did not disappoint in her tirade about the so-called threat of "illegitimacy" among poor and adolescent women.
Sure enough, she devoted exactly 17 words to contraception and abortion.
You would never know from her article that the real cause of pregnancy and the resultant out-of-wedlock births among poor and young women is sexual activity.


Spelling Entertainment Group Inc.(SP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Mariners Making Room For the Speedy Coleman
The Seattle Mariners said yesterday that they have acquired Kansas City Royals outfielder VINCE COLEMAN for a player to be named.
Coleman will join the Mariners today in Minnesota.


Harvard Industries reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


ON THE SET WITH: Forest Whitaker; The Camera Has 2 Sides
IF a movie maker were casting the part of a film director, Forest Whitaker wouldn't seem the obvious choice.
He is not loud.
He is not manic.
During the filming of Terry McMillan's novel "Waiting to Exhale," which he is in fact directing, the cast and crew were enamored of him almost to the point of obnoxiousness; you couldn't help thinking that if one more person called Mr.
Whitaker a gentle giant . . .
And perhaps it was because of Mr.
Whitaker's linebacker size that he made such an effort to keep a calm atmosphere on the set.
Unlike some directors who change their minds on whims and experiment while the crew's time ticks away, Mr.
Whitaker, 35, carefully plotted every aspect well in advance.
"Months ago, my director of photography and I figured out how we wanted to shoot each scene," Mr.
Whitaker said.
"Then in rehearsals we went over it all again. By the time we get on set, I feel pretty confident that the performances will work and I know what the shots will look like."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-19  U.S. MUSLIMS AND HAMAS
American Muslims in major cities insist that the money they donate to Hamas, the Palestinian group linked to suicide bombing attacks against Israel, goes for charity and does not pay for terrorism.
A1  RESPONSE TO JAPANESE APOLOGY
Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama was praised and pilloried for offering Japan's first apology for the damage and suffering it inflicted during World War II.
A3  TENSION IN BOSNIAN TOWN
Bosnian Serb authorities in Banja Luka, Bosnia have been using Serbian refugees fleeing from Croatia to step up their "ethnic cleansing" of Croats and Muslims.
A1  RIFT IN BOSNIAN LEADERSHIP
A political struggle in Bosnia is uncovering deep divisions within the Muslim-led governing party and the Bosnian Army, and is hurting the country's reputation.
A8  U.S. officials assure Bosnians about Gorazde in new peace plan.
A8  Chechen rebels have agreed to turn in some of their arms.
A9  Nelson Mandela visits a whites-only South African town.
A12  Colombian ex-Defense Minister is arrested in a drug scandal.
A17  A longtime Jewish community dwindles in Quebec.
A17  Deadline by kidnappers in Kashmir is extended.
A18  Hong Kong Journal: Chinese are coming and red carpet is out.
A4  National A20-22, B9-10  U.S.
SETTLES IN IDAHO SIEGE
The Federal Government agreed to pay $3.1 million to the family of a white separatist whose wife and teen-age son were killed by Federal agents in a standoff in Idaho.
A1  SIMPSON JUDGE STEPS BACK
The judge in the O. J. Simpson trial, Lance Ito, yielded to another judge a crucial decision in the case.
But because his own wife may still have to testify, he could well have to leave the case altogether.
A1  WORKERS GIVEN MILLIONS
About 800 people in West Virginia will be splitting $11.5 million from the Maytag Corporation, which closed a vending-machine plant there and opened a new, lower-wage factory in South Carolina.
A20  BOMB SUSPECTS ENTER PLEAS
Timothy J. McVeigh and Terry L. Nichols pleaded not guilty in the bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City.
A20  GINGRICH PULLS THEM IN
Newt Gingrich's book tour went to Minnesota to the country's biggest shopping mall, where the Speaker drew a record crowd.
B9  CLINTON STARTS VACATION
The President and his wife began their summer vacation in Wyoming, and virtually all their senior aides stayed home.
B10  MEDICARE DEBATE ON THE AIR
Democrats and Republicans are taking their Medicare fight to the airwaves, with Democrats buying television advertisements and Republicans buying radio time.
B10  Houston Journal: The death of an oil tycoon rivets a city.
A20  Hurricane Felix headed for the East Coast.
B7  Metro Digest B1  REPORT ON HOSPITAL CORPORATION
The Mayor's handpicked advisory panel has recommended dissolving New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation, the nation's largest public hospital system.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  A director re-emerges.
C11  Film: "Brian Wilson: I Just Wasn't Made for These Times." C11  "The Usual Suspects." C15  Music: Tanglewood embraces new styles.
C11  Shane MacGowan at Tramps.
C12  Books:"Enigma Variations." C16  Book Notes C16  The Living Section C1-7
At day's end, what a deal!
C1  Fireproofing young palates.
C1  On the set with Forest Whitaker: The camera has two sides.
C1  Niche brewing: A beer for each season.
C1  Metropolitan Diary C2  Food Notes C2
Off the Menu C2  Unlikely ingredients yield flashes of flavor.
C3  Wine Talk C4  At the Nation's Table C6  Plain and Simple C6  Peanut butter, humble yet complex.
C7  Health Page C8  Personal Health: Protecting the eyes from blinding injuries.
C8  When a chest blow stops the heart, timing may be the culprit.
C8  High "good" cholesterol tied to lower heart risks in the elderly.
C8  Sports B12-17  Baseball: Yankees' expert criticizes plan for Stadium.
B15  Yanks beat Red Sox.
B13  Mets lose to Expos.
B16  Columns: Araton on Tyson.
B13  Tennis: Sele wins.
B13  Obituaries D20-21  John Cameron Swayze, Journalist and Pitchman.
Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials  Japan apologizes.
The F.B.I. and Ruby Ridge.
Schools for immigrant kids.
The gift of a lifetime.
Letters  Frank Rich: The other Perot.
Patricia Nelson Limerick: On the amenity frontier.
Alain Enthoven and Sara J. Singer: Danger ahead on Medicare.
E.
Virgil Conway: What you'll get for that extra quarter.
Chronicle B8  Crossword C15


Hollywood Casino Corp.(HWCC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Jacobson Stores Inc.(JCBS,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to July 29


Sterling Software Inc.(SSW,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


A MAYORAL PANEL URGES DISMANTLING OF CITY HOSPITALS
A hand-picked mayoral advisory panel recommended yesterday that New York City abolish its municipal hospital system, a proposal that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani praised.
In a blunt analytical report, the seven-member panel accused the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation of delivering inefficient, low-quality health services and asserted that its 11 hospitals and its assortment of clinics, nursing homes and home-health agencies were poorly prepared to compete in a marketplace dominated by managed care.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Cuban economy misstated President Fidel Castro's birthday in some editions.
It is Aug. 13, not Aug. 12.


Hurricane Fears Put Damper on Shore Fun
Ginger Maher sat beside a water slide attraction called Water Works here today, keeping track of her two sons as they rocketed down chutes and slides and at the same time keeping track of an ominous stranger named Felix far out at sea.
Like others at summer resorts in the region, Ms.
Maher hoped the hurricane was not going to roar up the coast and spoil her vacation.


How Japan Keeps Outcasts Ostracized
To the Editor:
"Through Survivors' Tales, Nagasaki Joins Japan's Timeless Folklore" (news article, Aug. 9) mentions the atomic bomb hitting homes "of outcasts called burakumin."


Chest Injury Could Turn Fatal In a Fraction of a Heartbeat
THE 4-year-old girl was pitching a softball that was hit by her 9-year-old sister.
The 6-year-old boy was fielding a baseball thrown by his mother.
The 16-year-old boy collided with an opponent during a hockey game.
Each of these children was dealt a relatively insignificant blow to the chest and soon collapsed and died.
They were among a few dozen or so healthy children who died unexpectedly from such blows while playing sports in the last 20 years.
In a new study, heart researchers suggest that it may be the timing of the blow that determines whether a child walks away unscathed, as most do, or suffers cardiac arrest.


International Briefs;
Johnson Matthey P. L. C., a British metals and engineering company, said yesterday that it had offered $170.2 million to acquire Advance Circuits Inc. of Minnetonka, Minn.
In conjunction with the offer, Johnson Matthey has started a sale of securities that it hopes will raise up to $:117.4 million ($182 million).
The company will sell rights for up to 24.1 million shares as part of the offering.
News of the buyout offer sent the shares of Advance Circuits soaring.
The stock closed at $22.125, up $6, on Nasdaq.


Fresh Del Monte Produce N.V. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Heading for Solid Ground


Leslie Fay Cos. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Sunstates Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Furr's/Bishop's Inc.(CHI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 4


Groups Warn of Chemical Risk
About 1.5 million New Jerseyans live within a vulnerable distance of plants where extremely hazardous chemicals are stored, two advocacy groups said yesterday in warning about the dangers of potential disasters.
New Jersey Public Interest Research Group Citizen Lobby and the New Jersey Environmental Federation released a report showing that the state, despite its small size, ranks 12th in the nation in numbers of people who could be harmed by an explosion at one of these plants.


As Suffolk Backs Lilco Takeover, New Pataki Appointee Says He Is Not Committed to Plan
In a bid to cut electric rates and avoid paying a tax refund that could exceed $100 million, Suffolk County decided today to take part in a $9 billion plan for a public takeover of the Long Island Lighting Company.
But Gov.
George E. Pataki immediately upstaged county officials by naming a new chairman to the Long Island Power Authority -- the state agency that would be the county's partner in the venture -- who said he was not committed to the takeover plan.


Lawrence Reddick, 85, Historian and Writer
Lawrence Dunbar Reddick, a historian, biographer of Martin Luther King Jr. and former curator of the New York Public Library's Schomburg Collection, died on Aug. 2 at Pendleton Memorial Methodist Hospital in New Orleans.
He was 85 and had lived in New Orleans in recent years.
In 1939, Dr.
Reddick was named curator of what was then the Schomburg Collection of Negro Literature at the West 135th Street branch of the library.


Discovery Zone Inc.(ZONE,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Union Leaders Accused of Bilking Local
The seven top officials of New Jersey's largest teamsters' union local were ousted yesterday by a special trustee after court-appointed investigators accused them of raiding the union's treasury and of arranging a business deal with a suspected Mafia figure.
A report by the investigators asserted that the officials of Local 97 in Union, N.J., improperly awarded themselves pay increases and expense accounts and that they handed out union jobs to relatives.
In February, the report said, the officials hired a company said to be linked to the Genovese crime family to administer radiology tests for members.


Lonnie Williams, 60, Director of Youth Agency
Richard L. Williams, the executive director of Boys Harbor Inc., a community service agency serving some 4,000 boys and girls in Harlem and the Bronx, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 60 and lived in Jersey City.
The cause was cancer, the agency said.


Fabri-Centers of America Inc.(FCA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Miller Faces Fight For National Title
Shannon Miller has conquered the world. Now she must conquer her own country.
And that will not be easy.
Miller, the defending world all-around champion, is far from a shoo-in to win this week's United States National Gymnastics Championships at the Superdome.
In addition to Dominique Dawes, who defeated her in the all-around and four event finals at last year's nationals, Miller must face the rejuvenated 1992 Olympian Kerri Strug, as well as a horde of upstarts.


Huge Waves Churn Fears of Homeowners
Long Island's South Shore was pummeled again yesterday by silver-green waves churned up by a faraway storm, and while most onlookers could gaze at the Atlantic as delighted sightseers, a few were worried homeowners.
At the three oceanfront state parks -- Robert Moses, Jones Beach and Hither Hills -- no real swimming was permitted.
People were allowed into the water up to their knees only, and lifeguards' whistles filled the sultry air.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
A performance of "Love! Valour! Compassion!" At intermission, I am stretching and browsing and, yes, eavesdropping.
Good spot: As I edge past a 29-ish couple I hear him say to her, "I'm kind of enjoying it, but I still haven't figured out what the velour part is all about."
Maybe I'm reaching a bit, but as he spoke, I'm certain I saw him touch the red velvet drapery in the doorway.
MARY LOU SMITH
. . .
Dear Diary:
Shiny chrome boxes were recently installed over the emergency-brake cords that dangle at opposite ends of the subway cars, tempting pranksters.
As an added deterrent, the boxes emit a high-pitched noise if tampered with.
The trouble is that the temperamental devices often start wailing at the slightest lurch or bump of the train, and there are quite a few between downtown Brooklyn and midtown Manhattan.
My fellow passengers usually sit in weary resignation.
So I always enjoy their expressions when I lean over and give the metal box a brisk whack, silencing the tinny screech.
How did I learn this trick?
By watching someone else, of course.
Now that the secret has been passed on to the morning rush-hour crowd, I'm looking forward to the moment when the next New Yorker whacks that box while I sit in my seat and snicker.
EMILY A. WHITFIELD
. . .
Dear Diary:
At the Lincoln Plaza Cinema, I try to find the perfect seat way before the film begins.
The other day a woman tapped me on the shoulder as I was about to sit.
"Excuse me," she said, "but I want to let you know I cough a lot." I said thank you and moved back several rows.
The woman who coughs proceeded to do so, also making a series of other infectious sounds.
Patrons began moving away from the poor woman, but eventually an elderly couple entered and unwittingly sat just one seat away from her.
"Excuse me, but I want you to know that I cough a lot," the woman told them.
The elderly woman stared straight into her eyes.
"Well maybe you'll stop," she said.
And she did. RENEE W. CHAIFETZ
. . .
Dear Diary:
On an unplanned mapless detour from the Belt Parkway to find a cash machine for tolls, my car collides with another and I find myself waiting for the police, staring warily through a rain-soaked wind shield at a tiny block of two- and three-story houses.
Old men wearing suspenders gather on the corner.
Women in house dresses come out onto their porches.
Where is the insurance card?
Where are the police?
For that matter, where am I?
A tanned young man knocks on my window and pushes a card through the crack.
Anthony.
From an auto body shop.
It turns out I'm in Sheepshead Bay.
It's O.K. -- he'll take care of everything.
He touts the superiority of his place of work, then gives the clincher: "You'll love my boss, Angelo. He's a 53-year-old guy but he has the heart of a 23-year-old girl!"
"What a charming thought," I think.
What volumes it speaks about the Italian soul.
But why 24 and not, say, 29?" Who cares? I am clearly in the hands of poets and angels. I relax. Then, back at the garage, I meet a well-tanned and cheerful Angelo who, when pressed by Anthony, gives me the details of his recent stay at Mount Sinai during which he was successfully transplanted with -- yes -- the heart of a 23-year-woman.
I resume my travels in a rented car, my confidence in my ability to recognize a poetic image unshaken.
But this time I have a map.
SALLY N. BROOKE


Penney (J.C.) Co.(JCP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


3-Nation Effort Propels Dollar Sharply Higher
Moving with rare unity, the United States, Germany and Japan today sent the dollar soaring to its highest levels in nearly six months by buying more than a billion dollars in currency markets around the globe.
The Bank of Japan bought dollars for yen in Tokyo, the Bundesbank purchased dollars with marks in Frankfurt and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York spent yen and marks alike to buy dollars in New York.
When it was all over, the dollar had risen 2.9 percent against the mark, to 1.4778 marks, and 3.5 percent against the yen, to 96.99 yen.


MidAmerican Energy Co. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Market Place; A European maker of computer chips may be underappreciated.
AS investors continue to bid up technology stocks, pausing only for a two-day selloff last month, it becomes harder to find issues that are still clearly worth their share price, let alone have upside potential.
Yet several analysts say that SGS-Thomson Microelectronics N.V., a French-Italian designer and maker of electronic components, is worth a look -- and maybe more.


Amerco reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Paying Tribute To Mantle
More than 1,000 mourners -- old teammates and simply fans -- filled the Lovers Lane United Methodist Church in Dallas yesterday at a funeral service for Mickey Mantle, who died Sunday at 63.


International Briefs; De Beers Earnings Rise
The South African diamond giant De Beers reported an unexpectedly sharp rise in earnings yesterday, but it warned that sales of rough diamonds in the second half of the year would not match those of the first half.
De Beers Consolidated Mines and De Beers Centenary A. G. announced combined net earnings in the first six months of $398 million, up from $341 million in the corresponding period a year earlier. (Reuters)


Staples Inc.(SPLS,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Huntco Inc.(HCO,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 31


Southampton Picks Green
SIDNEY GREEN, a former New York City schoolboy star and a 10-year National Basketball Association veteran who played for the Knicks in the late 1980's, was named the men's basketball coach at Southampton College yesterday.


CHRONICLE
MAGGIE McGUANE, a photographer and occasional model, and WALTER KIRN, a book critic on leave from New York magazine, are getting married this month in tiny Melville, Mont.
Their guests are in for a geographical surprise.
"People have been calling from New York and Los Angeles and saying, 'My travel agent can't book a flight to Melville,' " said Ms.
McGuane, the daughter of Margot Kidder, the actress, and Thomas McGuane, the novelist.
"Many guests are coming from places where there are no mountains and they will probably have to drive farther than they have ever driven to get from the nearest airport, in Bozeman, to the church, about 80 miles away." Even the hotel where guests will stay, in Livingston, is about 50 miles from the church.


Future Now Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


City's Plan To Improve Stadium Criticized
An expert hired by the Yankees to assess the latest proposal by New York City to keep the team playing in the Bronx has said the improvements are inadequate and will not speed traffic flow to and from Yankee Stadium.
George Steinbrenner, the Yankees' principal owner, has regularly cited heavy traffic, poor access to garages and inadequate parking as some of the reasons for his dissatisfaction with Yankee Stadium.


Fay Honey Knopp, Dies at 76; Founded Quaker Prison Ministry
Fay Honey Knopp, an advocate of peace and civil rights who founded a Quaker ministry for men and women in prisons around the country, died on Thursday at her home in Shoreham, Vt.
A former resident of Westport, Conn., she was 76.
The cause was complications from ovarian cancer, her family said in reporting her death this week.


Owners Fire Nicolau, Impartial Arbitrator
At a time when labor peace is their stated goal, club owners have dismissed baseball's impartial arbitrator, George Nicolau, who held the position twice as long as any of his predecessors and ruled in landmark collusion and drug cases.
John Westhoff, a lawyer with the Player Relations Committee, notified Nicolau in a letter dated last Wednesday that the clubs were exercising their rights under the collective bargaining agreement and unilaterally firing him after nine years on the job.


Reviving Hoboken's Waterfront
Officials will gather in Hoboken today to make final a $75 million deal to develop Hoboken's blighted southern waterfront, an area now largely occupied by sunken piers and the remains of what once were factories.
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey has agreed to spend part of the money on sewers, roadways and repairs.
The plan also calls for $600 million in private investment to develop 2.3 million square feet of stores, offices, housing units and a hotel.
The Port Authority estimates that 5,300 jobs would be created during construction and 7,000 jobs would be added when the project is completed.


Label Tied To Time Warner Sues a Critic of Rap Lyrics
In an odd twist to the simmering dispute over Time Warner Inc. and rap lyrics, Interscope Records yesterday sued C. DeLores Tucker, one of the most vocal critics of Time Warner's involvement in gangsta rap, accusing her of trying to persuade Interscope's leading rap producer to leave the record label.
According to the lawsuit, which Interscope filed in United States District Court in Los Angeles, Ms.
Tucker told the producer, Marion (Suge) Knight, that if he cleaned up his albums and severed ties with Interscope, she would broker a new distribution deal for him with Time Warner.
Time Warner owns a 50 percent stake in Interscope but has been negotiating to sell back its interest.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Kafelnikov Advances Easily
Fourth-seeded Yevgeny Kafelnikov, in the hunt for his fourth title of the year, rolled past Marc Goellner, 6-1, 6-3, in the second round of the Volvo International, the tour's classic tuneup for the United States Open, last night in New Haven.


Split Divides President And Premier In Bosnia
A power struggle in Bosnia is uncovering deep divisions within the governing party and the Bosnian Army, and is hurting the country's reputation of ethnic tolerance, diplomats say.
The Bosnian Prime Minister, Haris Silajdzic, is fighting leaders of his own party to prevent Bosnia from becoming a one-party state ruled by a Muslim political elite, according to politicians and government officials.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Sent Russ Springer, pitcher, to Philadelphia to complete an earlier trade involving Dave Gallagher, outfielder.


Primark Corp.(PMK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


No Headline
"I represented one man through three different wives and did two prenuptials with him. When his psychiatrist said he couldn't sustain a relationship with a woman, he said, 'That's not true -- I've had a relationship with Eleanor for 20 years."' -- ELEANOR B. ALTER, divorce lawyer.  [ B1:2 ]


With an eye on old business as well as possible new clients, Deutsch is opening a West Coast office.
FOR Donny Deutsch and his deputies, it's at long last Westward, ho!
Mr.
Deutsch, chief executive of Deutsch Inc., and a cadre of a dozen other top executives are preparing the agency to open the first office outside its New York headquarters.
The office, in Santa Monica, Calif., is to begin operations sometime next week.


Judge in Simpson Case Steps Aside Temporarily
Reluctantly, almost tearfully, Judge Lance A. Ito today yielded to one of his colleagues a major ruling in the O. J. Simpson case.
But because Judge Ito's wife might have to testify, he could be forced to leave the case altogether, as prosecutors evidently want him to do.
Fighting to keep the case from falling apart, Judge Ito temporarily sidestepped an extraordinary prosecution demand that he withdraw from at least part of the case because Capt.
Margaret York, his wife and the highest-ranking woman in the Los Angeles Police Department, might be called to help rebut the racist, tape-recorded comments of a crucial prosecution witness, Detective Mark Fuhrman.


Mercer Intl.(MERCS,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


INSIDE
Dismay Over Giuliani Speech
Teachers and parents said they were dismayed by the Mayor's comments on the school system.
Page B1.
Splits in Bosnian Leadership
A power struggle in Bosnia has uncovering deep divisions in the governing party and the Army.
Page A8.


Economic Development Head Has New Job, but Same Boss
As president of the city's Economic Development Corporation, Clay B. Lifflander has spent the last 20 months reporting to Deputy Mayor John S. Dyson.
Yesterday, Mr.
Lifflander announced that he was leaving city government for the private sector -- to work for Mr.
Dyson.
Mr.
Lifflander, 33, will become president of Millbrook Management, Mr.
Dyson's multimillion-dollar investment company, which has holdings in wineries, manufacturing plants and broadcast stations.
His wife is pregnant with the couple's first child, and Mr.
Lifflander said he had been seeking an opportunity to make more money than his $110,000 city salary.


TELE-COMMUNICATIONS INC. (TCOMA,NNM)
Tele-Communications Inc., the nation's largest operator of cable television systems, reported a second-quarter loss yesterday that exceeded analyst expectations, partly as a result of increased interest costs and expenses.
The company, which is based in Englewood, Colo., also reported a 12 percent increase in its operating cash flow, a key measure of a cable company's finances.


Kitchen Counterculture
Along with recordings, neckties, T-shirts, Cherry Garcia ice cream and such, Deadheads can also remember Jerry Garcia, the leader of the Grateful Dead who died last week, with a new cookbook.
"Cooking With the Dead" by Elizabeth Zipern (St. Martin's Press, $7.99) honors not only the group but its fans who for years have gathered in parking lots before concerts preparing food and often selling it to support their habit of following the group around the country.
The mostly vegetarian recipes -- Psychedelic Veggie Sandwich is typical -- include some made with soy protein.
There's even a recipe for vegetarian dog food, along with oddities like Shaka Shaved Ice, which calls for fresh snow.
A Deadhead cook is profiled with each recipe.


Phillips-Van Heusen Corp.(PVH,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 30


Plan for Florida Resort to Cost $2 Billion
Nearly two years after expansion plans were first announced, the Rank Organization P.L.C. of Britain said today that it had reached an agreement with MCA Inc. to spend at least $2 billion to turn the companies' Universal Studios Florida theme park in Orlando, Fla., into "a major resort destination."
As part of the expansion, which will quadruple the size of the park from about 200 acres to more than 800, there will be another theme park, a 5,000-seat movie complex, a new golf course and more shops and restaurants.
The expanded resort will enable Universal to compete with the much-larger Walt Disney World, which is also in Orlando.





Carol F. Sulzberger Is Recalled By Family and Friends at Service
Carol Fox Sulzberger was eulogized yesterday as a quintessential New Yorker and a steadfastly loyal friend, mother and wife.
Mrs.
Sulzberger, the wife of Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, chairman of The New York Times Company, died last Thursday at their home in Southampton, L.I.
She was 68.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.13
5.76
4.35
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.43
5.42
4.61
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.44
5.42
4.94
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.54
6.57
7.14
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.89
6.95
7.37
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.80
7.85
8.23
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.32
6.31
6.37
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Reds' Sanders Hits Homers In His First Three At-Bats
Reds 11, Rockies 3
Reggie Sanders homered in his first three at-bats last night, leading a four-homer attack that swept the Cincinnati Reds to an 11-3 victory over the Colorado Rockies at Riverfront Stadium.


Baby Superstore Inc.(BSST,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 26


Minister Says New U.S. Plan Lets Bosnia Keep Enclave
The Bosnian Foreign Minister said early today that an American envoy has assured him that, contrary to reports, a new American peace plan would not require Bosnia to give up its eastern enclave of Gorazde.
Assistant Secretary of State Richard Holbrooke is presenting the updated peace proposal to Balkan leaders this week.
According to reports, the terms of the plan included trading Gorazde, which is surrounded by Bosnian Serb forces, for more defensible territory around Sarajevo.
But Muhammed Sacirbey, the Foreign Minister, said that was not the case.


Harnisch Out for the Season
Pete Harnisch, the Long Island-born right-hander the Mets signed to a three-year, $9 million contract in the off season, will undergo arthroscopic surgery Friday to repair a torn labrum in his pitching shoulder and will be lost for the remainder of the year.
"I don't really like the idea of the whole thing," the 28-year-old Harnisch said last night.
"But I'm pretty much resigned to the fact that it has to be done. I don't want to put next year in jeopardy at all."


The Irish Find Profit In Russia
In the early decades of Soviet Communism, overwhelmingly Roman Catholic Ireland was one of the countries where prayers were said at the end of Sunday Mass for the conversion, or reconversion, of officially atheist Soviet Russia to Christianity.
Today, the conversion the Irish are interested in is from rubles into hard currencies like the dollar and the Irish pound.


Dayton Hudson Corp.(DH,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


News From Front Grips Bosnian Serbs' Big City
At the outdoor cafes on the tree-lined boulevard here in the biggest city held by the Bosnian Serbs, men in battle fatigues lounge around drinking stiff black coffee and exchanging gloomy scenarios from the battlefield.
At first glance it would seem that they are fighters.
But some of these men wear bedroom slippers or scruffy loafers, and their uniforms are too smartly pressed to have seen any recent action.
They are actually businessmen and traders dressed in uniform to avoid arrest by the police force run by the widely disdained leader of the Bosnian Serbs, Radovan Karadzic.


Sequa Corp. (SQA.A,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Corrections
A review in Weekend on Friday about "New York Now: Contemporary Cityscape Paintings," at the Museum of the City of New York in Manhattan, misspelled the name of the painter of the work "Pussycat Theater." He is Philip Sherrod.


As Season Unfolds, So Will Jets' Identity
Travel around the National Football League and ask players and coaches about the state of football in New York.
Most think the Giants have a solid team -- good young quarterback, nice running backs, decent receivers, questionable secondary -- and with a few breaks could challenge Dallas in the National Football Conference East division.


Appliance Maker to Pay For Fleeing West Virginia
About 800 people in West Virginia, a state so ravished by waning factories and dying mines that it always leads the nation in unemployment, will be splitting $11.5 million from the Maytag Corporation of Newton, Iowa, which left them in the lurch when it closed a vending-machine plant and opened a new, lower-wage factory in South Carolina.
In one of the lushest settlements of a plant-closing dispute ever, some longtime employees at the plant, where Maytag built Coca-Cola vending machines, stand to get more than $100,000.
In West Virginia, that buys a car and a good-sized house with a pool.
Some newer, young workers will receive less than $10,000.


Networks Part Ways
The partners in the Baseball Network filed for divorce yesterday, which means that the two-year marriage of ABC, NBC and Major League Baseball will end after the World Series.
Letters were sent by ABC to baseball, and by baseball to ABC and NBC.
Under the terms of the three-party contract, only one partner was required to file a termination notice.
NBC sent no letters.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Hillary Rodham Clinton's address to a Presidential commission formed to investigate the cause of undiagnosed ailments suffered by veterans of the Persian Gulf war misstated the date by which the commission is to report to President Clinton.
It is Dec. 31, 1996, not this year.


World Bank Cancels Nepal Project Loan
The World Bank's new president, signaling that the institution is taking a more cautious approach to lending, has withdrawn $175 million in credits promised to a hydroelectric project in Nepal, canceling the $1 billion development.
James D. Wolfensohn, who has been the international lending agency's president for about two months, said Nepal was too poor for the power project to succeed.
The decision was announced last Friday.


Hong Kong Journal; Chinese Are Coming, and the Red Carpet Is Out
It began with a dare.
"Two years ago I was doing this live radio talk show, and I was saying I had great confidence in the future of Hong Kong," David Chu said.
"Then one listener called in and started giving me hell, saying, 'You have a U.S. passport, you're safe.' He challenged me to give up my U.S. passport. I accepted that challenge. And for me, that was the turning point."


Jansport, in Review, Seeking Participants
Jansport, the division of the VF Corporation that markets backpacks, outdoor equipment and apparel, has placed its account in review after eight years at Elgin Syferd/DDB Needham in Seattle, a unit of the Omnicom Group.
The billings were estimated at $3 million.


Gravelly Musings Of an Irish Survivor
Shortly after midnight on Friday night, Shane MacGowan arrived onstage at Tramps to a roar from the sold-out club.
He was wearing sunglasses and weaving slightly, holding a bottle of white wine and a cigarette.
Slack-jawed and blurry-voiced, diddling with the microphone stand that he was leaning on, he said, "Let's do " 'Streams of Whisky,' " and his band, the Popes, took up a brisk reel, topped with pennywhistle. The dance floor, already puddled with beer, erupted in motion, with some people doing traditional Irish steps, others slam-dancing.
The reaction was familiar for Mr.
MacGowan, who founded the Pogues in 1982 as a blend of the Clash and the Chieftains.
The Pogues combined traditional Irish instruments, a punk-rock rhythm section and Mr.
MacGowan's own slurred, gravelly singing.
He wrote smart, rowdy songs about drinking and gambling, about Irish history and current political prisoners, about lost love and about the toll of war.
His voice was just right for his lyrics; it was rough and bedraggled, thoroughly lived in.


They Went for a Bash On the Fields of Eton
To the Editor:
Re your Aug. 10 news article on rugby: According to the Eton Guide (sixth edition), there is no contemporary evidence the Duke of Wellington ever said "the battle of Waterloo was won on the playing fields of Eton." But if he did say it, he was not referring to rugby, which, as you note, wasn't invented until 1823.


Hanson PLC (HAN,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Jets Playing Swan Song
The Winnipeg Jets will almost certainly be sold after they play one more season in the city where the franchise got its start, the team president, BARRY SHENKAROW, said yesterday.
Shenkarow appeared to be the last hope to keep the team in Winnipeg, now that Spirit of Manitoba -- a group composed mostly of businessmen -- has admitted that it couldn't raise the money needed to make the deal work.


Tiffany &amp; Co. (TIF,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


Face-Off at Small Colleges on Arming of Security
Ted Mackey, a campus security officer, locked the dormitory door behind him and stepped, a little breathlessly, into the night.
As he stood under a lamppost, only a few passing summer students disturbed the steamy stillness of this rural campus off Lake Erie.
Officer Mackey knew that the State University at Fredonia, a campus of 5,000 about 50 miles southwest of Buffalo, had recorded no serious crime in more than a decade, and that the surrounding area was essentially peaceful.
Still, he said, he felt unsafe with nothing more than a club and a can of pepper spray dangling from from his hip.
He and other officers want to carry guns -- but the college has decided against letting them.


Bristol-Myers and Biogen To Invest in Gene Therapy
Both Bristol-Myers Squibb Inc. and Biogen Inc. announced planned investments yesterday in gene-therapy companies.
Bristol-Myers said it would invest up to $20 million in Somatix Therapy Inc., a gene-therapy company in Alameda, Calif., and Biogen planned to invest as much as $35 million over the next five years in Genovo Inc., a newly formed company based in Philadelphia.
Somatix shares rose $1 to close at $7.375 in Nasdaq trading; Genovo is privately held.


Food Notes
Sweetness in a Strawberry
This year at the Union Square Greenmarket, sweet ruby red Tristar strawberries, a recently developed variety that bears fruit throughout the summer, are on sale for around $3 a pint.
They are available from Mountain Sweet Farms on Wednesdays and Saturdays, Dick McGivney on Wednesdays and Fridays, Fantasy Fruit Farms on Mondays and Samscott Orchards on Fridays.
Samscott also sells them at the Greenmarket at the World Trade Center on Tuesdays and Thursdays.
Avoiding Cooking Mishaps
Cook's Illustrated, a magazine that features articles about cooking techniques and equipment, has just published a pamphlet listing 25 common cooking mistakes and how to avoid them.
For example, it advises consumers to never trust pop-up timers on poultry because they are calibrated to 180 degrees, a temperature that overcooks the bird and makes it too dry.
Poultry needs to be roasted to only 160 degrees to be safe.
Copies of the pamphlet are available free with a trial issue of Cook's Illustrated, which is published every two months and accepts no advertising.
Subscriptions are $24.95 a year.
Information: (800) 888-6778.
Organic Food for Toddlers
Earth's Best, a company in Boulder, Colo., that makes baby food from organic ingredients, has introduced a line of junior foods for toddlers.
The varieties include spring vegetables and pasta, mixed-vegetable souffle, apple-cinnamon oatmeal and peach-apricot muesli.
They are very low in sodium and have no sweeteners other than the fruit included in the mixtures.
The junior foods cost about 85 cents for a six-ounce jar at Grand Union, Shoprite and Kings supermarkets in New York and New Jersey and on Long Island.
Information: (800) 442-4221.
Off the Menu Brewery Wars: The Winner Is . . .
The race is on to be the first brewery-restaurant in Westchester County.
Kirby Shyer, who owns the Zip City Brewing Company at 3 East 18th Street in Manhattan, is building a 12,000-square-foot space at 27 Division Street in Peekskill, N.Y.
He expects to open in November and says it will be the county's first brewery pub.
But the Westchester Brewing Company plans to open a brewery, pub and steakhouse at 179 Mamaroneck Avenue in White Plains.
The owners, Ben Feder, Benn Lewis and Jeff Reed, say theirs will be the first. (Mr. Feder, who practiced law until recently, is not the Ben Feder who owns Clinton Vineyards in Clinton Corners, N.Y.) Construction has yet to begin on the brewery, scheduled to open by the end of the year.
A Touch of Provence
Nearly 14 years ago, when Antoine Bouterin came to New York from Paris to work at Le Perigord on East 52d Street, he was among the vanguard of young French chefs crossing the Atlantic in the early 1980's.
Most have gone on to open their own restaurants.
Finally, it's Mr.
Bouterin's turn.
He is leaving Le Perigord after Labor Day to work on Bouterin, which is to open in October at 420 East 59th Street.
Mr.
Bouterin, who is from St.
Remy in Provence, said the restaurant is going to be like "a little Provencal farmhouse." Limited Run: A Prix-Fixe Special
Dava, at 340 Lexington Avenue (39th Street), opens for previews today.
The restaurant is offering its $25 prix-fixe three-course lunch for $20 Monday through Friday until it officially opens on Sept. 5.
The contemporary American menu features such cutting-edge items as white truffle oil, wild striped bass, fava beans, Yukon gold potatoes and yuzu (a Japanese citrus).
The chef is Rocco DiSpirito, who had worked at Lespinasse and was briefly the chef at Annabelle.


Out of Banishment and Back in Race
For four years Danny Harris, the 1984 Olympic silver medalist in the 400-meter hurdles and the runner who ended Edwin Moses's 10-year unbeaten streak, led a double life.
Competing on the Grand Prix circuit in Europe, Harris won most of his races, set records and, in 1990, was ranked No. 1 in the world.
At home in Los Angeles during the off season, Harris was a cocaine addict.


University Admits Depriving Workers Paid as Contractors
The Texas A &amp; M University System admitted yesterday that it had illegally paid 400 farm laborers as independent contractors rather than as employees, cheating the Government out of about $86,000 in payroll taxes and depriving the workers of unemployment, disability and Social Security benefits.
The university decision was remarkable not only because a large institution publicly acknowledged its error and accepted responsibility, but also because it illustrated how organized labor and advocates for the poor can use existing laws to protect workers who are denied legally required benefits.


Lowe's Cos. (LOW,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


Storeowner Guilty of Arson Where Fireman Died
The owner of a Queens clothing store was convicted of arson by a Federal court jury in Brooklyn yesterday in a fire that killed a highly decorated firefighter.
The storeowner, Jack Ferranti, 42, of Manhattan, could receive life in prison.


Cato Corp.(CACOA,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Once, Mayor's School Had Pick of the Parish
When Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said that New York's public schools should model themselves on Catholic schools, he singled out Bishop Loughlin High School in Fort Greene, Brooklyn.
But Bishop Loughlin, from which he graduated in 1961, was an elite school drawing the best and the brightest, on the level of Stuyvesant High School, the public system's crown jewel.
Article, page B3.


A Car, a $477,000 Cache and a Mystery
A simple traffic violation took on the trappings of mystery in Sunnyside, Queens, when the driver of a car told police officers he did not know who owned almost a half-million dollars found inside it, officials said.
The driver, John Edison Giraldo of 130-44 122d Place in Ozone Park, was pulled over at about 5:15 P.M. on Monday when police officers of the 108th Precinct saw him drive through a red light at the intersection of Queens Boulevard and Roosevelt Avenue, Officer Debra Kearns, a police spokeswoman, said.


Fire Near Tracks Delays L.I.R.R. Trains
A trash fire near a set of train tracks in Queens forced the Long Island Rail Road to shut down service from Pennsylvania Station in Manhattan to Jamaica Station in Queens for two hours last night, delaying thousands of passengers, officials said.
The fire started at about 7 P.M. in a field near the corner of Skillman Avenue and Queens Boulevard, near an Amtrak right-of-way that is shared by the L.I.R.R., Firefigher Jack Thompson, a spokesman for the Fire Department, said.


Envirodyne Industries reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 29


Red Lion Hotels Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Union Takes Case To N.B.A. Players
The National Basketball Players Association will begin a series of regional meetings tomorrow aimed at explaining to its members the tentative agreement it has reached with the league, and at generating support for it.
On the other side of the intramural labor dispute, the leaders of the movement to decertify the players union have scheduled a news conference for today in Chicago to offer their views -- negative ones -- of the agreement.


From Mercer to Boston by Air
It has been a year since commercial airplanes flew into or out of Mercer County Airport, but Eastwind Airlines is beginning daily jet service today to Logan Airport in Boston and Triad Piedmont International Airport in Greensboro, N.C.
Eastwind, a new company owned by UM Holdings of Haddonfield, hopes to draw customers from Mercer County and the Delaware Valley.
The company expects to add service to Florida in the fall, Eastwind's president, James McNally Jr., said.


American Financial Group (AFG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Strip-Search Account Rejected
Union County prosecutors have concluded that a 17-year-old Linden High School student who claimed she was strip-searched on June 3 by school officials looking for stolen money made up the story to cover up her own responsibility for the theft.
The girl and two schoolmates have been charged with stealing $180 from another student's pocketbook, Robert O'Leary, an assistant prosecutor, said yesterday.
Mr.
O'Leary said the county's child abuse unit found that the students were asked merely to remove their shoes and that the girl who made the accusation against school officials voluntarily unbuttoned her blouse to show that she did not have the money.


Protests at Groundbreaking for Ashe Statue
A dozen Confederate flags billowed today on the South's most famous avenue as protesters put an unreconstructed face on the groundbreaking for a statue of Arthur Ashe.
The bronze statue of Ashe, the quiet champion of Wimbledon and human rights, will be the first addition in 66 years to shady Monument Avenue, where Richmond residents stroll in the shadows of bronze shrines to Gen.
Robert E. Lee and four other Confederate leaders.


Law on Bias Crimes Expanded
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman signed a bill yesterday to expand the state's bias crimes law to people who are harassed or intimidated because of their sex or disability.
Current laws allow prosecutors to seek stiffer penalties for assault or harassment if the crime was committed to intimidate a person because of his or her race, religion, sexual orientation or ethnic background.
The Governor also signed a law establishing penalties for the illegal use of an electronic system to obtain food stamps.
The system is now used only in Camden County.


Kestner's 66 Leads Met Open Golf
Darrell Kestner, who missed the cut in last week's P.G.A.
Championship by one stroke, shot a six-under-par 66 yesterday for the first-round lead in the Met Golf Association/Met Life Open at the Atlantic Golf Club in Bridgehampton, L.I.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Joint Intervention Sends Dollar Soaring  The United States, Germany and Japan sent the dollar soaring to its highest levels in nearly six months, buying more than a billion dollars in world currency markets.
The Bank of Japan bought dollars for yen in Tokyo, the Bundesbank purchased dollars with marks in Frankfurt and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York spent yen and marks to buy dollars.
But Wal-Mart said its earnings rose 12 percent, and Woolworth reported that its losses narrowed.  [ D2. ] Industrial Reports Mixed  Total production by the nation's factories, mines and utilities rose a slight one-tenth of 1 percent in July, the first rise in five months.
Analysts said American industry was slowly pulling out of a slump caused by big stockpiles of unsold goods.
The office, in Santa Monica, Calif., is to begin operations sometime next week.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D5. ]


Personal Health; Protecting the eyes from blinding injuries.
THE eyes may be the most precious sense organs, but few do anything to prevent them from being maimed and losing some or all of their vision.
Each year, more than 2.4 million Americans suffer eye injuries and one million become visually impaired as a result.
And summertime activities tend to be especially hazardous to eyes.
Children's eyes are injured less often than those of adults, but the young are more likely to suffer severe eye injuries that can result in permanent partial or complete loss of vision.
And while it is true that less than 4 percent of blindness is caused by accidents, it is also true that more than 90 percent of those accidents are preventable.


Judge Lifts a Ban on Tour Buses
Less than a day after its entire fleet was ordered off the streets, New York City's largest operator of double-decker tour buses was granted a court order yesterday enabling it to resume operations, at least temporarily.
The company, New York Apple Tours, had been been shut down late Monday by the city's Department of Consumer Affairs.
It charged the company with illegally switching license plates to circumvent state safety inspections.


AT&amp;T Says It Will Offer Internet Access Service
AT&amp;T announced plans yesterday to offer access to the Internet, saying that it wanted to make on-line services as common and as easy to use as the telephone.
The company, which has 80 million telephone customers worldwide, said it intended to offer Internet services ranging from secure business transactions to electronic mail, voice and video conferencing, and wireless access.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  Allied Signal Inc., Morristown, N.J., is selling $100 million of notes due in 2000 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The notes are priced at 99.953 to yield 6.761 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated A2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc., A by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and A+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.


International Briefs; Hanson Posts Profit
Hanson P. L. C., the British industrial conglomerate, said yesterday that its profit from continuing operations rose sharply in the fiscal third quarter.
Operating profit increased 22 percent for the three months ended June 30, to $:372 million ($567 million).
Lord Hanson, the company's chairman, said the results were spearheaded by the Quantum Chemical Corporation, Hanson's chemicals business in the United States, which "produced profit well ahead of last year." Hanson had an overall pretax profit of $:264 million in the fiscal third quarter, down from $:297 million in the corresponding period a year earlier.
Sales were $:2.71 billion, down 8.4 percent from a year earlier. (Dow Jones)


Anthropological Rights and Riddles
Enigma Variations  By Richard Price and Sally Price  165 pages.
Harvard University Press. $18.95
A tropical city on the coast of South America, a mysterious French smuggler of rare animals, a precious collection of primitive wood carvings, and a pair of anthropologist-sleuths who suspect forgery: those ingredients would seem to be the stuff of a steamy, atmospheric thriller of the Somerset Maugham type.
But that is not what Richard Price and Sally Price, who teach American studies and anthropology at the College of William and Mary in Virginia, set out to create in their new novel, which is no fault in itself.
The problem is that "Enigma Variations," despite its exoticism, does not involve enough of an enigma to make it very satisfying from the literary point of view.


Woods a Walker Cup Pick
TIGER WOODS and JOHN HARRIS, the last two United States Amateur champions, were among the first five golfers picked for the 35th Walker Cup team for the competition against the British amateur team next month in Porthcawl, Wales.


Wine Talk
WELCOME to the city of the $10 cup of coffee.
And the $500 dinner for two, the postage-stamp-sized $400 hotel room and -- but why go on?
Paris is always expensive, but when a dollar isn't even worth 5 francs -- less than 4 1/2 in some hotels -- having fun here can be a challenge.
Which makes Francois Clerc a remarkable fellow indeed.


For Lesbian Victims, Justice Isn't Equal
To the Editor:
The murder of a lesbian woman in the Boerum Hill section of Brooklyn may not have been related to her sexual orientation, but police mishandling of the case certainly was.
It follows a distinct pattern of mistreatment of lesbians by our police officers, courts and city government.
Just how safe and fair is this city for lesbians?


Worldwide Accounts Go to 4 Agencies
Four agencies have been awarded international accounts.
The Walt Disney Attractions unit of the Walt Disney Company in Lake Buena Vista, Fla., named Nazca S &amp; S in San Juan, P.R., to handle its advertising throughout Latin America.
The billings were not disclosed.
Nazca S &amp; S is the Latin American network of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide, owned by Cordiant P.L.C.


Early Recording by Monroe
A recently rediscovered recording by Marilyn Monroe is to be auctioned by Sotheby's in London on Sept. 13.
The song, a plaintive ballad titled "How Wrong Can I Be," was apparently recorded in late 1948 or early 1949, when the actress was just 22 and struggling to gain a foothold in Hollywood.
Accompanied by a piano and muted trumpet, Monroe delivers the song in a torchy, seductive style with an occasional jazzy inflection and barely a hint of her breathy, whispery renditions of "Diamonds Are a Girl's Best Friend," "My Heart Belongs to Daddy" or "I Just Want to Be Loved by You." The voice is sultry, a little off-key from time to time, and instantly recognizable.


Treasury Issues Advance Despite Loss Earlier in Day
The bond market yesterday showed the resiliency that it has displayed many times this year, recovering from early losses to end with modest gains.
Bond prices fell early in the day following comments by Alan S. Blinder, the vice chairman of the Federal Reserve, which indicated that the Fed was unlikely to cut interest rates anytime soon without evidence that the economy is slowing.


To Prevent Teen-Age Pregnancy, Think Jobs
To the Editor:
Re "Penalize the Unwed Dad? Fat Chance" (Op-Ed, Aug. 10): Lisa Schiffren argues that the best preventative for teen-age pregnancy is to end state support for single mothers and make clear to young women "what their lives will be like if they choose unwed motherhood."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the death of two National Park Service rangers trying to rescue an injured hiker on Mount Rainier misstated the history of fatalities on the mountain.
Sixty-seven climbers have died since 1887, not since 1987.


Hadco Corp.(HDCO,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 29


The Mayor's High School Still Shines
When Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said this week that the city's public schools should model themselves on Catholic schools, he singled out his alma mater, Bishop Loughlin High School in Fort Greene, Brooklyn.
But the high school from which the Mayor graduated in 1961 was an elite school that drew the best and the brightest, on the level of Stuyvesant High School, the public system's crown jewel.
For years, Bishop Loughlin had culled the top-scoring male student from each Catholic parish in the diocese and offered him an academic scholarship.


Corrections
An entry in the front-page "Inside" listing in some copies yesterday about Federated Department Stores Inc.'s planned acquisition of Broadway Stores Inc. misstated the value of the deal.
Federated put the total value of the transaction at about $1.6 billion, consisting of about $575 million in its stock and the assumption of about $1 billion in Broadway debt.


METRO DIGEST
PANEL ADVISES CITY TO SELL ITS HOSPITALS
A hand-picked mayoral advisory panel recommended that New York City abolish its municipal hospital system, a proposal that won praise from Mayor Giuliani.  [ Page A1. ] New York City might be able to sell all 11 of its public hospitals, but experts suggest that the odds would be extremely long.  [ B4. ] NEW YORK CITY  TEACHERS SEEK SHIFT OF POWER
With its contract expiring in two months, New York City's teachers union opened negotiations with the city and Board of Education by proposing a sweeping transfer of decision-making power.  [ B3. ] STOREOWNER GUILTY IN A DEADLY ARSON
The owner of a Queens clothing store was convicted of arson by a Federal court jury in Brooklyn in a fire that killed a highly decorated firefighter.
The storeowner, Jack Ferranti, 42, of Manhattan, could receive life in prison.  [ B3. ] 3 RESCUED FROM ISLAND IN JAMAICA BAY
It was not quite John Atehortua's idea of a pleasure boat ride and an overnight camping trip: After two hours of bobbing in the waters of Jamaica Bay and a long night stranded on a marshy island, the 11-year-old boy from Ozone Park, Queens, is not sure he wants to go out on his jet ski again.  [ B5. ] CITY OFFICIAL HEADS FOR PRIVATE SECTOR
As president of the city's Economic Development Corporation, Clay B. Lifflander has spent the last 20 months reporting to Deputy Mayor John S. Dyson.
Mr.
Lifflander said he is leaving city government for the private sector -- to work for Mr.
Dyson.  [ B5. ] A CAR, A $477,000 CACHE AND A MYSTERY
A simple traffic violation took on the trappings of mystery in Sunnyside, Queens, when the driver of a car told police officers he did not know who owned almost a half-million dollars found inside it, officials said.  [ B2. ] Less than a day after its entire fleet was ordered off the streets, New York City's largest operator of double-decker tour buses was given a reprieve, at least temporarily.  [ B2. ] REGION  HUGE WAVES CHURN FEARS
Long Island's South Shore was pummeled again by silver-green waves churned up by a faraway storm, and while most onlookers could gaze at the Atlantic as delighted sightseers, a few were worried homeowners.  [ B7. ] SUFFOLK BACKS A TAKEOVER OF LILCO
In a bid to cut electric rates and avoid paying a tax refund that could exceed $100 million, the Suffolk County Executive said that he supported a county partnership in a $9 billion plan for a public takeover of the Long Island Lighting Company.  [ B7. ] UNION OFFICIALS OUSTED IN NEW JERSEY
The seven top officials of New Jersey's largest teamsters' union local were ousted by a special trustee after court-appointed investigators accused them of raiding the union's treasury and of arranging a business deal with a suspected Mafia figure.  [ B6. ] WHITMANS REPORT SHARP DROP IN INCOME
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman and her husband, John, made $746,637 in 1994, a significant drop from the millions they made in the years before she became Governor.  [ B6. ] Chronicle B8  About New York by David Gonzalez B3


Arden Group Inc.(ARDNA,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Bread or Bullets: Money for Hamas - A special report.; U.S. Muslims Say Their Aid Pays for Charity, Not Terror
At the Holy Land Bakery and Grocery on North Side of Chicago, Mohammed Joma Hilmi Jarad scoffed at the notion that the militant Islamic movement Hamas depends on American fund-raising for its terror campaign to sabotage peace between Palestianians and Israelis.
"To blow up a house, you only need a bomb this size," said the Palestinian-American grocer, hefting a grenade-sized can of chick peas.
"But to build a house, you need a lot of money."


N.F.L. Training Camp Report
Cleveland Browns
Quarterback Vinny Testaverde, who missed more than a week of training camp with a leg infection, was released from the hospital yesterday, the Browns said.
Testaverde, the Browns' No. 1 quarterback, was admitted to the Cleveland Clinic Aug. 8 complaining of inflammation and pain after being spiked in the shin early in camp.
Compounding the situation, medication the eight-year veteran took for the infection had triggered an allergic reaction.


Close Aide of Colombia's President Is Jailed in Drug Inquiry
The drug scandal that has shaken the Colombian Government reached closer to President Ernesto Samper today with the arrest of Fernando Botero, who directed his 1994 election campaign.
Mr.
Botero, who resigned as Defense Minister two weeks ago after he was implicated in dealings with the Cali drug cartel, was arrested on suspicion of "illicit enrichment for the benefit of others." He was notified of the arrest while testifying before prosecutors about his role as President Samper's campaign manager.


Sea Containers (SCRA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Japan Apologizes
Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama of Japan has finally offered the apology for his nation's World War II conduct that generations of Asians have waited so long to hear.
To understand the significance of his words, uttered yesterday on the 50th anniversary of Japan's surrender, it is necessary to recall the enormity of Tokyo's war crimes.
Millions of Chinese civilians were gratuitously slaughtered, 300,000 in a single massacre at Nanjing.
Millions of Koreans were enslaved, including tens of thousands of women forced to provide sexual services to Japanese troops.
Gruesome chemical and biological warfare experiments were carried out on Chinese civilians and European prisoners of war.
In a vast arc of land and sea sweeping from the borders of India to those of Siberia, 20 million died.


Bronx Residents Feel Betrayed by Smut Plan
LIKE the slender sapling that grew into a thick-limbed tower in her back yard, Cybeale Ross put down roots and thrived in the Bronx's Hunts Point peninsula, determined to weather the arson, drugs and prostitution that would have withered less hardy souls.
Defying the odds, since 1958 she has lived on Manida Street, a block of row houses that she calls "little palaces" where civil servants, retirees and entrepreneurs reign in modest splendor.
That they pledged their souls and savings to their urban homeowner's dream is an accomplishment that would shame those who wrote off the borough long ago.
But now they are indignant about being written off by city officials who have proposed shunting strip clubs and porn shops to industrial areas like Hunts Point.
The City Planning Commission will vote on the proposal next month.


Stocks Fall on Reaction to Stronger Dollar as Dow Slips 19.02
The stock market retreated yesterday, at least partly because of the dollar's rebound to its highest levels in six months against the Japanese yen and the German mark.
Traders were concerned about the impact of a stronger dollar on American corporations doing business overseas.
Until recently, these companies have been competitive in world markets because the weak dollar has made their products less expensive than locally made goods.


Mayor's View Upsets Staffs At Schools
Principals, teachers and parents in New York City schools said yesterday that they were dismayed and demoralized by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's declaration that the public school system was teetering on collapse and that it could be saved if it was more like the Catholic school system.
While many of them agreed with the Mayor that the central bureaucracy was too large and cumbersome, they said Mr.
Giuliani has shown nothing but disdain for a school system that has had many successes even as it works to make some needed changes.


Tossing the Old Ways Aside
Six years ago, John F. O'Brien left his job as a top marketing executive at Fidelity Investments, the nation's largest mutual fund company, to take charge of a run-of-the-mill life insurer whose strong points he described as "a solid reputation and good financials."
But now, Mr.
O'Brien says, mere competence is no longer enough in the fast-changing life insurance industry.
He has decided that the nearly 150-year-old State Mutual Life Assurance Company of America in Worcester, Mass., needs another ingredient -- shareholders.


Applied Materials Inc.(AMAT,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 30


Isles' Assistant to Kings
The Los Angeles Kings hired the former defenseman RICK GREEN as an assistant coach yesterday and said they would retain assistant coach JOHN PERPICH.
Green, 39, comes to the Kings from the Islanders, where he spent the past three seasons as an assistant under AL ARBOUR and his successor, LORNE HENNING. (AP)


Book Notes
Missing Finale
In 1958, Doubleday published a collection of short stories by Vladimir Nabokov that included "The Assistant Producer," the story of a Russian general, General Golubkov, and his singer wife who plot the abduction of his rival and are caught when the man disappears.
Mr.
Nabokov checked the page proofs for the book, but when it was finally published, the last paragraphs were missing.
In the Doubleday version, the story ended with the disappearance of General Golubkov and the death of his wife, who was put in prison.


Riviana Foods (RVFD,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 2


Derlan Industries reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Pratt Hotel Corp.(PHC,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Oveta Culp Hobby, Founder of the WACs And First Secretary of Health, Dies at 90
Oveta Culp Hobby, the creator of the Women's Auxiliary Army Corps in World War II, the first Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare and a longtime executive at the recently closed Houston Post, died yesterday at her home in Houston.
She was 90.
Mrs.
Hobby, whose media holdings made her one of the nation's richest women, suffered a stroke in April, her family said.


Erly Industries reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Sports of The Times; Tyson Is Oddly Compelling
BEFORE the first Floyd Patterson-Sonny Liston heavyweight championship fight in 1962, which like many celebrated fights carried sociological, political and moral implications -- in this case, the gentlemanly Patterson versus the ex-con Liston -- Red Smith of The New York Herald Tribune made the sports columnist's obligatory prediction.
"I'm picking Liston," said Smith, "because he's fighting for the shut-ins of America."


Freedom, for Some Indonesians
This is a great day in many respects for Indonesia, the world's most populous Muslim country.
A flotilla of 119 yachts and 21 tall ships is due to arrive in Javanese waters, Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands is in Jakarta for a state visit and prominent political prisoners are being freed to celebrate the half-century since Indonesia proclaimed itself independent amid the tumult of Japan's World War II surrender.
Celebrants can point to real achievements.
Nearly 200 million people spread through 13,500 islands have impressively striven for national unity and have generally prospered.
The archipelago boasts one of the strongest economies in Asia.


Key to Take Turn in the Booth
Yankee pitcher JIMMY KEY, sidelined for the season because of arm trouble, will work for ABC Sports as an analyst during the network's coverage of the Little League World Series on Aug. 26 from Williamsport, Pa.


Giuliani Is Half Right on Schools
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani certainly has a way with words.
On Monday, he managed in a short speech about the public schools to alienate virtually the entire educational establishment.
What did he say?
That the public school system is near collapse and that a remake should be modeled on the city's Roman Catholic schools.
Mayor Giuliani is wrong about much of this.
But he is also right.
I share his high regard for parochial schools, having been educated at St.
Augustine's in Brooklyn, once the rival to Bishop Loughlin High School, the Mayor's alma mater.
Like him, I shared the sense of high expectations, strong community values and strict academic standards of the LaSalle Christian brothers.
I wish every child here could have as good an experience.


Goody's Family Clothing Inc.(GDYS,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Hard Choice for White House On Hillary Clinton and China
Of all the powerful people in the White House, there is probably no one -- not even the President -- to whom aides less like to say no.
So Hillary Rodham Clinton's strong wish to lead the American delegation to the United Nations Conference on Women in Beijing next month has prompted much hand-wringing among senior diplomatic officials who are not sure she should go.
The geopolitics are plain enough: should the most prominent woman in the United States lend her presence to a conference on women's rights that happens to be held in a country with an abysmal record on human rights -- especially when China is holding the American human rights advocate Harry Wu on espionage charges and Chinese-American relations are rubbed raw.


Weston (George) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Number 24 Hangs It Up
On the night of April 18, 1984, they hung Bill Bradley's jersey, number 24, in the rafters of Madison Square Garden.
Then the best basketball player in the United States Senate stepped forward and told the story of a successful lawyer he knew who enjoyed playing the trumpet more than lawyering.
"For 10 years," Mr.
Bradley said, "I played my trumpet here before all of you." His message was clear.
Being in the Senate was good stuff, but passing off to Walt Frazier and Dave DeBusschere was a whole lot better.
Obviously, Mr.
Bradley still feels that way.
The Senator from New Jersey announced yesterday that he would not seek re-election next year when his third term in the Senate expires.
This is clearly a loss to the Democratic Party, which has already seen enough resignations and defections to the Republicans.
It is also a loss to the Senate in terms of principle and values and political moderation.


Amplicon Inc.(AMPI,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


International Briefs; In Brief
*
General Motors of Canada Ltd. said yesterday that it had received a $588 million order from the Canadian Government for 240 armored personnel carriers and options to buy an additional 411 vehicles later. (Dow Jones)


PROSECUTORS DROP DEMAND THAT ITO STEP DOWN IN CASE
Prosecutors backed off today from a decision that could have crippled the trial of O. J. Simpson, announcing that they would no longer insist that Judge Lance A. Ito was ethically bound to withdraw from the case.
After an evening of frantic activity and second thoughts, Deputy District Attorney Marcia Clark told Judge Ito this morning that even though a crucial prosecution witness, Detective Mark Fuhrman, can be heard ridiculing the judge's wife in audiotapes that the jury may soon hear, prosecutors believed the judge could still render justice in the case.


Affirmative-Action Debate Stalls Brooklyn Sports Complex
He is the only elected Republican official from Brooklyn.
But Robert J. DiCarlo, a State Senator from Bay Ridge, was more than willing to carry the legislative ball for a plan to build a $70 million sports complex in his Democrat-dominated borough -- until he saw the affirmative-action language in the bill.
Although virtually identical bills passed the Republican-controlled Senate and the Democrat-controlled Assembly in the final days of the last legislative session, the project that everyone professed to support remains mired in a debate that has reverberated from the United States Supreme Court all the way down to the old Steeplechase Park in Coney Island.


Tejas Power Corp.(TPC,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A Blow to Democrats
Though not entirely unexpected, Bill Bradley's rather sour farewell to the Senate today came as a stunning blow to his demoralized party.
It was bad news for the Democrats in a whole series of ways, not least because it reinforced the picture of a party that has lost its way, a party whose central assumptions are losing their grip on the electorate.
That picture has been emerging slowly over the last decade and more rapidly during the last year or so.


Despite Fenway Flop, Yanks Have Yet to Concede
There was drama: Randy Velarde's pinpoint throw to Mike Stanley barely nabbed Tim Naehring in a crushing collision at the plate to prevent the Boston Red Sox from securing the lead in the sixth inning.
There was delirium: The Yankees deftly dismissed a 4-0 deficit in refusing to wilt and twice threatened to saunter in front.
Finally, there was disappointment: Bob Wickman and friends faltered again and the Red Sox discovered their magic with three runs in the eighth inning in whisking to a 7-4 victory today at Fenway Park.
Two memorable fly balls in the eighth inning helped decide the best-played game of the series and also helped doom the Yankees.
Willie McGee leaped at the center-field wall to snare Bernie Williams's blast, prevent the go-ahead run from scoring and halt a threat.
But Paul O'Neill did not retreat to the Green Monster rapidly enough to even touch Mo Vaughn's rocket off the side of the scoreboard.
Jose Canseco followed Vaughn's double by cracking a double inside the third-base line to break the 4-4 tie and catapult the Red Sox ahead to stay.


International Briefs; Belgian Bank to Buy Credit Lyonnais Unit
Generale de Banque S.A., Belgium's biggest bank, signed an agreement to pay 1.2 billion guilders ($726 million) for Credit Lyonnais Bank Nederland, the Dutch unit of the troubled French bank Credit Lyonnais.
The Belgian bank said the price, which was at the upper end of analysts' expectations, reflected that it would not take over bad loans made to the film industry or loans made by British branches of the Dutch unit.
Analysts said the purchase would give Generale de Banque a long-sought foothold in the Dutch market.


Analog Devices Inc.(ADI,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 29


Teekay Shipping Corp. reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


North of a Hurricane, Watchful Eyes
Hurricane Felix's sluggish movement yesterday kept the anxiety level high along the New York and New Jersey coasts as residents and vacationers closely followed weather reports for some indication of whether the storm would head this way.
The Suffolk County Executive's office last night advised residents on Fire Island, especially those living on the waterfront, to move to the mainland because heavy surf conditions are expected to continue or worsen, said Warren Horst, assistant chief marshal for the county's fire, rescue and emergency services.


Urban Gardeners Claim Victory
NEIGHBORS on Staten Island whisper that Diana Young sometimes tends her garden by flashlight at night.
"Sometimes darkness just creeps up on me," Mrs.
Young said.
That's how much her garden means to her.
"This is the only time of year I can be creative," she explained.
"After all, I can't draw a picture." But what she could draw was a plan for the butterfly-shaped garden she planted this summer outside her apartment in the Gen.
Charles W. Berry Houses in the Dongan Hills area.


Table Tennis, Anyone?; Immigrants Raised With Paddles in Hand Bring Respect, and Wicked Spin, to U.S.
At the back of a darkened pool hall on 11th Avenue, Min Shili, a former Chinese national Ping-Pong coach, is suffering through another lesson with a 54-year-old Wall Street banker who can beat most anyone at the New York Athletic Club.
Mr.
Min, who has coached some of the top players in the world, has seen better Ping-Pong from children in China.
He does not hold back his disgust despite his friendship with the banker and the $20 he receives for a one-hour lesson.


Livent Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Vans of the People Shifting Into Legality
The van packed with weary rush-hour passengers bounced at each pothole as it rode down Flatbush Avenue, the backbone of Brooklyn.
But no one inside seemed to mind.
They sat in air-conditioned bliss, tapping their feet to Caribbean music pulsating from a tape player.
"These vans are convenient," Cass Brown, a 23-year-old barber, said of the vehicles that are a ubiquitous -- and, to some, annoying -- presence on Flatbush Avenue.
"With vans, you're not standing on the corner waiting forever for a bus. You can get to any subway line easily. And they only cost a dollar."


Schult Homes Corp.(SHC,A) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 1


Community Treatment for the Retarded
The Clinton Justice Department has joined the effort to move mentally retarded patients out of large institutions and into community facilities.
It is a potentially worthy undertaking, putting the Federal Government, once again, behind a policy carried out in many states and supported by experts and advocates for 20 years.
But the department should be wary about closing down institutions unless it gets firm assurances that alternative treatment will be available.
The practice of closing down large mental hospitals, known as deinstitutionalization, gained momentum in the late 1960's and 1970's.
It was inspired partly by horror stories of overcrowded, inhumane institutions and partly by new forms of treatment that allowed many patients to function in smaller community facilities or even at home.
Since 1967, the population of mentally retarded people housed in institutions has dropped from about 200,000 to less than 70,000.


Lawrence Houston, 82, Dies; Helped to Establish the C.I.A.
Lawrence R. Houston, an architect of the Central Intelligence Agency who built the legal foundation on which it rests and the facades behind which it hid, died on Tuesday.
He was 82.
He died of a heart attack while vacationing in Westport, Mass., said his friend Walter Pforzheimer, a retired C.I.A. official who served with Mr.
Houston.


War Legacies From Fathers To Children
MY father said he couldn't see a thing that day 50 years ago.
He was too far away but knew that right across Tokyo Bay on the U.S.S.
Missouri, World War II was coming to an end, and with it, the most exciting adventure of his life.
He still talks about it.
He also talks about the kamikaze at Okinawa that slammed into his battleship, the U.S.S.
West Virginia, and also about the one that missed.
As the pilot pulled out of his dive, obviously with a change of heart, he smiled at my father and his gun crew as he flew by.
Then they shot him down.


Dubrovnik Finds Hint of Deja Vu in Serbian Artillery
Four years ago, one of the plays at the Dubrovnik Summer Festival was a Greek tragedy in which the citizens of a city under siege debated whether to surrender in order to save the city's treasures.
Within two months, the war between the Croats and Serbs had begun and this tranquil, medieval city was under siege, its own treasures being shelled.


New Fossils Reveal the First Of Man's Walking Ancestors
Fossil discoveries in Kenya have revealed a new species of human ancestors that lived four million years ago, were hardly any bigger than chimpanzees, bore striking resemblances to both apes and evolving man and, perhaps most significantly, were already standing erect and walking on two legs much like modern humans.
Leg and arm bones found near Lake Turkana, paleontologists said, provide the earliest direct and unambiguous evidence for upright walking, or bipedalism, by any members of the human family tree.
Until now, the oldest evidence has been the 3.6-million-year-old footprints at Laetoli in Tanzania, together with tiny foot bones from South Africa first reported last month that are about the same age.


Death Row Writer Deserves New and Fair Trial; Execution Unjustified
To the Editor:
Lynne Abraham (Op-Ed, Aug. 13) contributes needed balance to the record on the Mumia Abu-Jamal case but omits the middle ground.
While a new trial might not be warranted, neither is a death sentence.


Sports &amp; Recreation Inc.(WON,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


A Double Blow to Salomon: Offering Ended, Rating Cut
Salomon Brothers Inc. suffered a one-two punch yesterday.
First, Normandy America Inc., a fledgling reinsurance company that Salomon had taken public on Monday, withdrew its $180 million offering, citing "market conditions."


Immediately, a Long Line Forms of Replacement Possibilities for Bradley
Sen.
Bill Bradley's decision not to seek a fourth term next year set the political pot boiling across New Jersey today with the list of strong candidates and wannabes for his seat beginning to form even before his announcement.
The consensus in political circles -- although for the most part Republicans were the ones saying it out loud -- was that Mr.
Bradley was not eager to face a well-financed challenge next year on a ticket headed by President Clinton, who has his own political problems.
There was also speculation that what he had lost heart for, specifically, was two-party politics and that he was positioning himself for a future run for President as as independent.


World News Briefs; Israeli Settler Held In Killing of Palestinian
A Israeli judge ruled today that a Jewish settler considered by the police as the prime suspect in the killing of a Palestinian during a clash near the West Bank settlement of Beit El on Sunday would remain in jail while the police continued their investigation into the slaying.
At a court hearing in Jerusalem, police officials said that a bullet removed from the body of the Palestinian matched the settler's M-16 rifle.
News photographs of the incident showed the settler, Zeev Liebskind, aiming the rifle.


The Bucks Stop Here
To The Home Section:
In The Times of Aug. 10 are articles with these headlines: "America's Crumbling 'Parkitecture' " and "More in U.S. Are in Prisons, Report Says." Am I the only one who sees something wrong with this picture?
Five million people in prisons supported by us taxpayers, and our national treasures are crumbling!
Hello!
MILDRED BRADSHAW LEIGH  New York


Medtronic Inc.(MDT,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 28


Ad Spending Rises In Gay Publications
Advertising spending in publications aimed at gay and lesbian consumers has outpaced gains for many other types of publications, an annual survey shows.
The survey, by the Mulryan/Nash agency in New York, found that spending from April 1, 1994, through March 31, 1995, rose 16.2 percent from the year-earlier period, to $61.6 million from $53 million.
The study surveyed 128 local and national magazines and newspapers.
The two largest ad categories were the same as last year, bars/ clubs and telephone services.


Mercer Declines in Reader Poll
Mercer County, already battered by plant closings and layoffs, got more bad news yesterday.
Since last year, the county has dropped from No. 40 to No. 282 in Money magazine's annual reader survey of the best places to live.
The poll ranks the nation's 300 largest metropolitan areas.


Croatia Had to Restore the Rule of Law
To the Editor:
Re "Croatia Takes Its Brutal Turn in a Brutal War" (letter, Aug. 11): Croatia's decision to end four years of hostile occupation and to restore the rule of law and order was based on the principles and purposes enshrined in the United Nations Charter.


Death Toll In Bombing In Oklahoma Is Increased
After two and a half months of sophisticated scientific testing on a severed leg found deep in the rubble of the Federal Building here, investigators are preparing to officially add one more body to the toll of 167 dead in the bombing.
"We have no idea who it is," Dr.
Fred B. Jordan, the state Medical Examiner, said today.


Seles Express Rolls Without Touching Brakes
Although Monica Seles keeps insisting this isn't just like riding a bike, that the knack of riding roughshod over the rest of the tennis community doesn't come back in a snap, her first 24 hours in the Canadian Open tell a different tale.
Two matches, two straight-set victories, no signs of a two-year layoff.


Unison In Friction Of Stars On the Rise
The Caramoor International Music Festival, which celebrated its illustrious past in a variety of ways during its 50th-anniversary season here, ended in the best possible fashion on Sunday evening, by looking promisingly toward the future.
Elaborating on the "Rising Stars" series established four years ago by its music director, Andre Previn, the festival presented eight gifted young string players in the Venetian Theater as the Rising Stars Ensemble.
In design if not in execution, the program was simplicity itself, consisting of two of the grandest works in 19th-century chamber literature, Schubert's String Quintet and Mendelssohn's Octet.
But these are not easy pieces for groups to form themselves around, particularly in a large-scale outdoor setting; in each, an interpretation is usually anchored by a standing string quartet if not, in the octet, two of them.


Jenny Craig Inc.(JC,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


A Giddy Prance, a Pregnant Pause
At the Academy on Tuesday night, Bjork was a child of nature at play in a world of technology.
Wearing a white dress, she skipped and pranced around a stage that held both stylized trees and radio towers.
Her first song was "Headphones," about listening to a tape while falling asleep.
"I like this resonance," she mused, over humming keyboards and quiet, distorted guitar.
"I don't recognize myself. This is very interesting."
Bjork's songs bend pop away from recognizable shapes.
In a voice that can be girlish and airy or implacably penetrating, she sings clear, unhurried melodies with unexpected turns and jumps.
Those vocal lines are cantilevered above riffs and drones that can shift into dance rhythms.
But more often, they veer off toward uncharted domains.


U.S. Bond Prices Recover After Losses Early in Day
Prices of Treasury securities rose slightly yesterday as traders continued debating the prospects of an interest rate cut at next week's meeting of the policy-making panel of the Federal Reserve.
Supply concerns lessened when the Treasury left unchanged the size of its auctions of two-year and five-year notes.
Bonds rebounded from early losses as the Fed tried to do some damage control regarding a Dow Jones news service report Tuesday that suggested that the Fed's vice chairman, Alan S. Blinder, would oppose cutting interest rates until the economy showed further signs of weakness.


Vitran Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Calendar: Garden Walk, Architecture and Art
East Coast Natives  New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, the Bronx; (718) 817-8700.
On Saturday and Sunday, from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M., the garden staff will highlight the Native Plant Garden, which features wildflowers, shrubs, grass, ferns and trees that are native to the eastern United States.
Tours will be offered at 1 and 3 P.M.


Converse Inc.(CVE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Floyd's Knee Injury Is a Painful Development for 49ers
For a few precious moments, it was as if the sky had fallen at the San Francisco 49ers' practice here today: William Floyd went down while blocking on a running play and he did not easily get up.
The hush that fell over the 49ers was eerie.
Floyd was writhing on the field in pain.
Later, he was on crutches with his right knee bandaged and in a huge, black brace.
Still later, Floyd underwent a magnetic resonance imaging test and the early prognosis was not good: sprained ligaments that will force Floyd to miss at least three weeks, according to Coach George Seifert, including the season opener against New Orleans on Sept. 3.


ATHENA NEUROSCIENCES SHARES JUMP ON ALZHEIMER'S TEST
Shares of Athena Neurosciences Inc. surged 50 percent yesterday after the company said it had developed a test to look for a protein that indicates if a person has a greater risk of developing Alzheimer's disease.
The stock closed at $13.50, up $4.50, in Nasdaq trading.
Athena, based in South San Francisco, Calif., said the test was recommended only for individuals who are already showing possible symptoms of the disease.
The test looks for ApoE4, a protein in the blood, whose presence increases the probability that a patient will develop the disease.


China Industrial Group Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CHRONICLE
Performers are used to having the costumes they wear on stage scrutinized by theatergoers, but the people who sell tickets do not normally command much attention for what they are wearing.
On Monday, the first day of sales at the Marquis Theater for the musical "Victor/Victoria," ticket buyers will behold employees in black tie behind the glass window.
Selling the tickets will be CISSY CASPARE, the treasurer of the theater; LINDSAY CASPARE, her sister; KAY MORGAN; ANNE WILSON, and EDWARD WAXMAN, who have all been asked to wear dinner jackets, just as Julie Andrews will in the musical when she plays a woman playing a man playing a woman.


No Headline
"The political debate has settled into two familiar ruts. The Republicans are infatuated by the 'magic' of the market and reflexively criticize government as the enemy of freedom, and the Democrats distrust the market, preach government as the answer to our problems and prefer the bureaucrat they know to the consumer they can't control." SENATOR BILL BRADLEY of New Jersey.  [ B10:1. ]


Surf Riders of the Storm Are Drawn to Rockaway Beach
Rockaway Beach was closed yesterday as Hurricane Felix bore down on the East Coast.
But the sea's dangerous fury did not deter Robert Partano, a city firefighter who skipped work, zipped himself into a wet suit and grabbed his biggest surfboard, a seven-footer, for the rare chance at catching a "double overhead" off the coast of Queens.
"This morning, the cops were arguing with us, threatening us with summonses if we went out there," said Mr.
Partano, 39, who added that he has been hopelessly addicted to surfing "since I'm 12."


International Briefs; Adidas May Sell Some Shares to Public
Adidas A.G., the German shoe and sportswear manufacturer, said yesterday that it was considering selling some of its shares to the public, and denied that it had decided the timing or size of the issue.
The company also denied that any financial advisers had been chosen.
Earlier, Dresdner Bank A.G. said it and Union Bank of Switzerland would manage the share sale.


APS Holding (APSI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 25


After Silence, Packwood Strikes Back
Taking the offensive after months of silence about accusations of sexual misconduct, Senator Bob Packwood said today that it was "time to fight fire with fire."
"I will not deal with the personal attacks as I have in the past," Mr.
Packwood, an Oregon Republican, said, demonstrating his new strategy by appearing on two national television programs.


International Briefs; British Jobless Rate Rises
Britain's unemployment rate hit 8.3 percent last month in the first increase for nearly two years, the Government said yesterday.
In a separate report, the Government said July's retail sales rose four-tenths of 1 percent from June and were 1.4 percent higher than a year ago.
The Treasury said the new data offered mixed signals about the economy.
The number of people out of work and claiming benefits increased by 1,700 in July, bringing the seasonally adjusted total to 2.3 million.
It was the first increase since August 1993. (Reuters)


Absolut acts on the premise that Hollywood and vodka mix.
ABSOLUT is going Hollywood -- but, characteristically, with a twist.
In an innovative advertising and media partnership program, the Seagram Company, which markets Absolut, the nation's best-selling imported vodka, is becoming the lead sponsor of a quarterly publication created by a unit of Entertainment Weekly magazine, which will be devoted to independent film.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  NEW EVIDENCE ON EARLY HUMANS  Fossil discoveries in Kenya have revealed a new species of human ancestors that lived four million years ago and were already standing erect and walking much like modern humans.
A1  MRS.
CLINTON AND CHINA POLICY  Hillary Rodham Clinton's wish to lead the American delegation to the United Nations Conference on Women in Beijing next month has prompted much handwringing among diplomatic officials.
A1  CROATIAN ARMY PUSHES ON  Emboldened by recent victories, the Croatian Army advanced on two fronts as fear grew that an American peace plan could be jeopardized and the war might spread.
A10  CROATS BAR AID TO MUSLIMS  The Croatian Government barred the United Nations and relief agencies from reaching 30,000 Bosnian Muslim refugees who have been trapped in Croatia for more than week, relief officials said.
A10  Serbian artillery attacks remind Dubrovnik of earlier fighting.
A10  Bosnia's Government is said to hinder the rapid-reaction force.
A11  RUSSIAN ADOPTIONS HIT RED TAPE  Hundreds of Russian orphans who have found foreign adoptive parents are now caught in the red tape of a new Russian law on adoption.
A3  ISRAEL BROADENS USE OF FORCE  The Israeli Government extended the authority of the secret services to use physical force on Palestinian suspects during interrogation.
A5  China set off its second nuclear test in three months.
A9  Indonesia freed three prisoners held since a 1965 coup attempt.
A9  President Samper of Colombia declared a state of emergency.
A9  Cairo Journal: Luxury housing is the talk of an overcrowded city.
A4  National A14-20, B11-12  NO CHALLENGE TO SIMPSON JUDGE  Prosecutors in the trial of O. J. Simpson said they would not challenge Judge Lance A. Ito's right to remain on the case.
A1  New troubles for the Los Angeles Police Department.
B11  HURRICANE STALLS OFF COAST  Hurricane Felix hovered off North Carolina, churning a vast sweep of the ocean like an eggbeater.
A1  THE MYSTERY LEG IN OKLAHOMA  Investigators have been unable to identify a severed leg found deep in the rubble of the Oklahoma City Federal Building and are preparing to officially declare a new, unidentified victim of the bombing.
A14  RIVALS IN WHITE HOUSE  The White House chief of staff, Leon Panetta is staying on top despite the influence of a new rival, the political consultant Dick Morris.
A14  ESTIMATE OF RAPES IS DOUBLED  The Federal Government more than doubled its estimate of annual rapes or attempted rapes -- to 310,000.
A18  STUDY FINDS LIMITS IN AZT  A study of people with the AIDS virus has found that early treatment with AZT before the development of full-blown AIDS does not help fight off the disease.
A15  PACKWOOD TAKES THE OFFENSIVE  Senator Bob Packwood said it was "time to fight fire with fire" and took the offensive after months of silence about accusations of sexual misconduct against him.
A20  HEART VALVE TEST  An X-ray test that can detect fatal hairline cracks in certain heart valves is not being made available to patients.
B12  Nashville Journal: A city re-enacts its strike for women's rights.
A14  Lawmaker in misconduct case likened his foes to the Gestapo.
B11  Metro Digest B1  BRADLEY WON'T SEEK RE-ELECTION  Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey, one of the Democratic Party's most respected thinkers, announced that he would not seek re-election to a fourth term.
A1  A DEPARTURE'S DEEP EFFECT  News Analysis: Bill Bradley's rather sour farewell to the Senate came as a stunning blow to the demoralized Democratic party.
A1  MUSLIMS IN A JEWISH COMMUNITY  Over the past five years, a Muslim immigrant community has been steadily growing in Brooklyn in the midst of one of the city's largest populations of Orthodox Jews.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C13-18  New York Film Festival.
C13  A mother and daughter writing about family.
C13  Theater: Stratford Festival.
C13  Music: Bjork.
C13  Young stars at Caramoor.
C14  Books: "Opposite Attraction," by Julie Gilbert.
C16  Television: A "Biography" of Joseph McCarthy.
C18  The Home Section C1-11  Design Notebook: For Frank Israel, history is there to be created.
C1  Sports B14-19, B24  Baseball: Yankees lose two out of three games in Boston.
B15  Pulsipher sparks Mets, 1-0.
B17  Boxing: Tyson in control.
B14  Columns: Berkow on boxing B15  Football: Giants on the lookout for free-agent offensive linemen.
B19  Horse Racing: Thunder Gulch eyes Travers prize at Saratoga.
B15  Tennis: Seles appears strong.
B15  Track and Field: World records fall in Zurich meet.
B18  Obituaries B12-13  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials  Number 24 hangs it up.
The case of Mumia Abu-Jamal.
Freedom, for some Indonesians.
Treatment for the retarded.
Letters  Maureen Dowd: A capitalist fantasy.
Frank Luntz: The Perot voters -- still mad.
Frank J. Macchiarola: Giuliani is half right on schools.
Chronicle D18  Bridge C11  Crossword C14


X-ray Test Can Find Faulty Heart Valves
A specially designed computer-enhanced X-ray test can detect hairline cracks in a group of suspect heart valves, finding defective valves before they fracture completely and risk killing patients, researchers say.
But the researchers say the test is not available to patients.


WorldCom Inc.(WCOM,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Longview Fibre Co.(LFB,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


China Sets Off Second Underground Nuclear Test in 3 Months
China announced early today that it had exploded a nuclear bomb in an underground test, its second in three months, a move that can hardly improve its already strained relations with the United States.
A spokesman for the Foreign Ministry, Chen Jian, insisted that the test did not alter China's stance supporting a nuclear test ban, the official New China News Agency reported.


Big Deals in Formula One
Three of auto racing's top drivers confirmed multimillion-dollar deals yesterday that have been in the works for weeks.
Ferrari signed MICHAEL SCHUMACHER -- the defending Formula One champion and this year's points leader with the Benetton-Renault team -- to a two-year package for 1996-1997.


Thunder Gulch Puts Banner Year on Line in Travers
They are stabled as far apart as two horses can get at Saratoga Race Course and yet, when they finally meet on a race track sometime this fall, one of them will almost certainly stride into the winner's circle as the Horse of the Year.
There is Cigar, undefeated in 1995 and with nine straight victories, reigning over Bill Mott's private barns on the elegant old Greentree spread to the south of the track.
He is 5 years old, hasn't lost since Mott switched him from grass to dirt and has the inside track on the title.


Hancock Fabrics (HKF,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 30


Alchemist's Dream Come True
When the Great Lakes Chemical Corporation bought control of the world's biggest maker of lead additives for gasoline six years ago, the product itself was almost an afterthought.
After all, leaded gasoline was banned in Japan, it was in the last stages of being phased out in the United States and it was scheduled for elimination from Western Europe.
The lead content of gasoline was under attack all over the world not only because it fouls the catalytic converters that reduce pollutants in car exhaust, but also because it is suspected of contributing to brain damage in children and other ailments.


Oxford Resources Corp.(OXFD,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Market Place; Where Is a Shift Not a Change? At Fidelity
Fidelity Investments, the country's largest mutual fund company, has apparently found a way to have its cake and eat it, too.
Investors in Fidelity mutual funds, though, were not even told anything was cooking.
Fidelity's parent company, the FMR Corporation of Boston, disclosed last week in a Federal filing that 51 percent of its voting stock was now in the hands of a group of 50 executives and mutual fund managers.
The change in ownership structure left 49 percent of the company's voting stock in the hands of the family of Edward C. (Ned) Johnson 3d, FMR's chairman.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.62
5.90
4.72
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.41
5.43
4.56
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.43
5.44
4.91
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.53
6.54
7.17
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.88
6.89
7.39
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.78
7.80
8.26
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.30
6.32
6.33
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Detective's Tapes Create New Woe for the Los Angeles Police
The troubled Los Angeles Police Department came under fire again today, this time over taped interviews with former Detective Mark Fuhrman, a witness at O. J. Simpson's trial, in which the detective is said to have made racist and sexist comments and to have spoken of officers lying and covering up for colleagues and fabricating evidence.
At a news conference today, Chief Willie L. Williams promised a thorough effort to investigate the accusations.
But Chief Williams also said a formal inquiry was stymied, at least for the moment, because District Attorney Gil Garcetti had said the tapes would not be made public until after the conclusion of Mr.
Simpson's trial.


Puritan-Bennett (PBEN,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


Harman International (HAR,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Caesarean Risks
To The Home Section:
After reading Lucy Danziger's essay on why she is choosing a repeat Caesarean for the birth of her second child (Parent &amp; Child: "Natural Birth vs. On-Time Delivery," Aug. 3), I must wonder why someone whose only concern is a "bad outcome" would choose to give birth by the more dangerous route.


'Shanghai Triad' To Open Festival
Movies that explore the process, art and influence of film making will dominate the 33d annual New York Film Festival.
Many of the films look inward, investigating the art they are exemplifying.
In the festival at Lincoln Center (from Sept. 23 to Oct. 6), "Citizen Langlois," a toast to Henri Langlois, the founder of the Cinematheque Francaise, could be matched with "Son of Gascogne," a tribute to the New Wave.
Among the other 26 programs in the festival are Carlos Saura's "Flamenco" (an encounter between flamenco dancing and films); Mark Rappaport's fictional consideration of the career of Jean Seberg; "The Celluloid Closet," a history of gay cinema, and a documentary about movies in New Zealand (made by the actor Sam Neill).
This year's festival draws the majority of its selections from the United States and France, while also showing works from 15 other countries including China, Japan, Taiwan, Spain and Senegal.


Mastercard Joins Banks to Plan Card That Works Like Cash
In the largest effort so far to create an electronic alternative to cash, Mastercard International Inc. and 11 big banks formed a company yesterday to issue cards with computer chips that will store cash.
The venture, called Smartcash, plans to issue what are called "stored value" or "electronic purse" cards.
Customers would be able to load money onto these cards, say $20 or $50, at automated teller machines or by calling their banks with specially equipped telephones.
That money then could be deducted, even at stores and at locations that typically do not take credit or debit cards, like vending machines, pay phones and mass transit carriers, which would be equipped with Smartcash devices.


Utility Rate Cuts Are Urged
Contending that the four companies that provide electricity to New Jersey residents charge higher rates than any other utilities in the Northeast, a consumer group called on the state Board of Public Utilities yesterday to reduce electrical rates by 25 percent.
Stacey Peterson, a spokeswoman for the consumer group, New Jersey Citizen Action, said that a rate decrease of that size would still enable the utilities to show a profit.


MFP Technology reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Key Tronic Corp. reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 1


Mariners Get First Dividend From Trade for Coleman
Mariners 6, Twins 4
Vince Coleman, playing his first game for Seattle, singled to start a five-run rally in the eighth inning that sent the visiting Mariners to a 6-4 victory over Minnesota.
Coleman, acquired Tuesday in a trade with Kansas City, went 2 for 5, scored 2 runs and stole a base.


Preservation and Education
To The Home Section::
For almost as long as historic buildings have been deteriorating ("America's Crumbling 'Parkitecture,' " Aug. 10), my group, Building Conservation International, a nonprofit organization that researches and teaches how to preserve pre-1940's buildings, has been recommending the establishment of an Academy of Building Conservation in every public high school wherever there are structures erected prior to 1940.


METROPOLITAN GOLF REPORT
Met Open
Darrell Kestner shot a three-under-par 69 to take a two-shot lead over Bruce Zabriski heading into today's final round of the Met Open at the Atlantic Golf Club at Bridgehampton, L.I.
Kestner, the 42-year-old head pro at Deepdale Golf Club in Manhasset, L.I., has a two-day total of nine-under 135.
Zabriski, the assistant at Winged Foot Golf Club in Mamaroneck, N.Y., shot a 67.
Kestner, the winner of the Met Open in 1982 and 1983, had a rather routine round until he birdied three of the last four holes.
He tied the course record with a first-round 66 on Tuesday.


Campaigns Heat Up In N.B.A. Labor Battle
The campaigns for and against the tentative agreement between the National Basketball Association and its union began in earnest yesterday, with the decertification group and Commissioner David Stern offering conflicting views of the deal.
"I don't want people to say Kessler says this, the league says that," Stern said, referring to Jeffrey Kessler, the lawyer for the dissident players who are trying to have the union decertified.
"Look at the documents."


Compaq Cuts Its PC Prices In Effort to Widen Its Lead
In the opening gambit of what is expected to be a fierce competition among personal-computer manufacturers, the Compaq Computer Corporation reduced prices yesterday on its line of office and home computers by as much as 25 percent.
Compaq also introduced several new models featuring the Intel Corporation's most powerful Pentium microprocessor and said that it would offer more storage capacity on its commercial machines to make room for the new Windows 95 operating system and the heftier new application programs that run on it.
Price cuts are not unusual this time of year in the personal computer industry, as manufacturers try to reduce inventory to make room for their new fall lines.
Apple Computer recently lowered its prices, and most other Compaq rivals are expected to announce their own price cuts within days.


Longs Drug Stores (LDG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 27


Valspar Corp.(VAL,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 28


A Rockefeller Center Infusion Of $250 Million
Sam Zell, the Chicago real estate magnate, and a group of investors that includes the Walt Disney Company agreed yesterday to invest $250 million in Rockefeller Center Properties Inc., the troubled real estate investment trust that holds the $1.3 billion mortgage on Rockefeller Center.
In exchange, Mr.
Zell and his investor group would get a 50 percent stake in a new company that would jointly own the mortgage along with the trust's current shareholders -- and a shot at owning the trophy property itself.


Two Different Changs, Two Different Results
Except for the surname, Michael and Albert Chang have little in common, either in physical stature or on the tennis court.
Albert, a 24-year-old Harvard graduate from Calgary, is a little-known serve-and-volley player who stands 6 feet 1 inch and is ranked 204th in the world.
That puts him 199 notches below the 5-9 Michael Chang, a tenacious 23-year-old baseliner who has won 19 tournaments, including the French Open.
But today it was Albert, not Michael, who advanced to the round of 16 in the Volvo International.
Albert was the beneficiary of a pulled abdominal muscle that forced the fifth-seeded Michael Stich to retire after they had split the first two sets, 4-6, 6-3, at the Connecticut Tennis Center.


Death Row Writer Deserves New and Fair Trial
To the Editor:
Re "Mumia Abu-Jamal, Celebrity Cop Killer" (Op-Ed, Aug. 13): Philadelphia's District Attorney, Lynne Abraham, who seeks the death penalty in virtually every murder case in that city, is just as grotesque when it comes to telling the whole truth.


Events: Historical Tours And Sensory Journeys
Walks in New York Big Onion Walking Tours; (212) 439-1090.
A trip to Ellis Island, with a focus on the experience of Irish immigrants, will start at noon on Saturday (fee, $15; students and those 62 and older, $13).
On Sunday at 1 P.M., colonial African New York history will be the topic of a tour of lower Manhattan, with stops at the African burial ground, the original Abyssinian Baptist Church and sites associated with the slave uprising of 1712 (fee, $9; $7 students and the elderly).


New Rules to Require More Disclosure by Telemarketers
Jean Lollar, a 68-year-old nurse, vividly remembers the telephone call that cost her $2,000: A polite, eager salesman from an Atlanta company called GEM Merchandising persuaded her to buy a medical alert device that would let her call for help if she had an accident or became ill.
The salesman, she said, assured her that she could try the device at no charge by writing a check for it that would not be cashed for two weeks.
But when she asked for a refund a week later, she was told that the check had been cashed and that she could not get a refund.


Ex-Convict Charged With Sexual Assault
An ex-convict from Brooklyn who was arrested on robbery charges has also been charged with a sexual assault on a 12-year-old girl in a Coney Island apartment building, a police spokeswoman said yesterday.
Roland Alfred, 30, of 4725 Beach 47th Street in Sea Gate, Brooklyn, is also a suspect in a second sexual assault, of a 13-year-old girl on June 20 in the Marlboro Houses at Second Avenue and West 11th Street in nearby Gravesend, said Lieut.
Laurie Unich, the commanding officer of the Brooklyn Special Victims Squad.


Sodisco-Howden reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Baldwin Technology Co.(BLD,A) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Stars of Rock, Pop, R &amp; B and Country Woo Tiny Listeners
IN August, I often recall an image from a half-dozen summers ago, before I had children.
A family -- father, mother and small daughter -- at a picnic in the dunes held hands, a parent on each side of the child, swaying gently as they sang an old Beach Boys song that had become a family lullaby.
Baby boomers have had legendary passion for the music they grew up with, the anthems of their independence, their love affairs, their disappointments.
As they and the musicians they embrace have had their own babies, they -- we -- have had to figure out how this music of rebellion, with its exuberance and abandon, fits into life with children.


Economic Scene; A mystery bankers love: How do credit cards stay so profitable?
HAD any "pre-approved" offers for credit cards in the mail recently?
If not, you must be a hermit or a notorious deadbeat: The average household received two solicitations a month in 1994.
The reason all those nice banks are lining up to lend you money is no mystery.
The profit on credit card operations, according to research by Lawrence Ausubel, an economist at the University of Maryland, is almost five times the overall profit rate in banking.
Last year, eight of the top nine commercial banks ranked by return on assets specialized in credit card loans.


National Computer Systems Inc.(NLCS,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


Jones's Tender Ankle Knocks Him Out Again
For much of his young pro football career, Marvin Jones, the Jets' middle linebacker, has been hobbled by a right ankle he keeps spraining.
Today in training camp he hurt the ankle again, and there was no immediate word on how much time he would lose.
The first-team defense was playing against a scout-team offense when Adrian Murrell carried the ball.
Gary Jones, the Jets' new safety, hammered Murrell, and Marvin Jones got caught up in the tangle.
He was stretched out on the ground for five minutes before a trainer helped him to his feet and drove him off on a golf cart.


Bridge
If you are an honest reader of this column, you should cover the South and West cards shown in the diagram.
Imagine that you are East, defending four hearts after a transfer auction that indicates that South has a balanced hand with 17 points and four-card heart support.
A club is led and dummy's jack wins.
South leads a club to his ace and a heart to the eight.
What do you do after winning with the jack?
This excellent presentation of real-life bridge problems in books was introduced in 1967 by Hugh Kelsey of Scotland, who died in March.
He was a prolific writer, and followed the same pattern in many other successful books.


Hechinger Co.(HECHA,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


The Dangers of Demagogy
BIOGRAPHY Senator Joseph McCarthy:  An American Inquisitor A&amp;E, tonight at 8.
Richard O'Regan and Rebecca Haggerty, producers, directors and writers.
A production of Claypoint Productions in association with the A&amp;E Network.
Karen Burnes, narrator.
Peter Graves, host.
"Biography," a five-night-a-week prime-time offering on the Arts &amp; Entertainment Network, may not offer much in the way of startling information, but its professionally packaged hourlong accounts of the careers of political and military figures, show business and sports celebrities, and random personages have become a welcome staple of cable television.


Stanley Asimov, 66, Newsday Executive
Stanley Asimov, a journalist and newspaper executive whose career spanned 40 years at Newsday on Long Island, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 66 and lived in Roslyn Heights, L.I.
The cause was leukemia, his family said.


CHRONICLE
Oh, those Hamptons connections.
Where else could a rabbi leapfrog right into the movies with nary a screen test?
Rabbi MARC SCHNEIER, the founding rabbi of the Hampton Synagogue in Westhampton Beach, L.I., who has crossed paths with more than one celebrity, got a call recently from DANIEL SULLIVAN, the director of "Substance of Fire," the film adapted from the Jon Robin Baitz play.
Mr.
Sullivan had also directed "The Sisters Rosensweig," the play by Wendy Wasserstein, and Ms.
Wasserstein had consulted Rabbi Schneier on the religious and ceremonial content of the play.


McWhorter Technologies Inc.(MWT,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


Time for Kindergarten?
To The Home Section:
The Parent &amp; Child column on redshirting children from kindergarten ("Deciding if It's Time for Kindergarten or Time to Wait a Year," July 20) omitted a vital part of this seemingly parent-generated phenomenon.
Many, if not the majority, of private schools in New York City have cutoff dates of Sept. 1 or Oct. 1, by which time a child must be 5.
Some of the more competitive schools even admit that they don't like to take children (particularly boys) with summer birthdays if they can help it.


JP Foodservice Inc.(JPFS,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 1


Medical Community Too Opposes Use of Live Cats for Training
To the Editor:
An Aug. 9 news article characterizes the debate surrounding Gov.
George E. Pataki's signing of legislation that allows the use of live cats in New York for endotracheal intubation training as one between physicians and medical personnel, and animal rights activists.
Widespread opposition exists in the medical community.


No More Campaign Poles
Whether you are running for office, holding a garage sale or looking for a lost kitten, don't expect to place your announcement on a city telephone pole.
The City Council approved a measure yesterday that prohibits anyone from using poles to advertise.
The ban was proposed by Mayor Bret Schundler after residents complained that the fliers were eyesores that sometimes remained up for years.


Bradley Says He Won't Seek 4th Term
Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey announced today that he would not seek re-election next year to a fourth term, depriving the Democratic Party of one of its most respected thinkers at a time when the party's loss of Congress is forcing it to re-examine just what it stands for.
In a speech here, Mr.
Bradley gave no reason for his decision, but he left the impression that he had grown weary of working in a political system that he called "broken." He castigated both major parties, accusing them of being more interested in feuding than in addressing the needs of the nation.


Giants Looking Over the List of Free-Agent Linemen
The Giants packed their bags today and headed for Giants Stadium as training camp came to a close.
It closed on a good note over all but a solemn one for the short term, since the team lost two offensive linemen.
And that is why the Giants are doing some serious checking of free-agent prospects, among them the former Houston Oilers center-guard John Flannery.
Flannery, who attended Syracuse, was cut by the Oilers on Aug. 8, mainly because of salary-cap considerations.
Even though Flannery, a second-round pick in 1991, could be a solid backup, he is asking for about $900,000 for one season, which is way too much to pay for a backup player and the main reason any potential deal with the Giants is on hold.


Croatia Barring Help to Bosnian Muslim Refugees
The Croatian Government today barred the United Nations and relief agencies from reaching 30,000 Bosnian Muslim refugees who have been trapped in Croatia for more than a week, relief officials said.
An agreement for the voluntary repatriation of the refugees, who are linked to a defeated faction that was fighting against the Bosnian Government, was reportedly reached last week.
But the deal has broken down because the refugees are afraid of returning to their homes, which are in territory now controlled by their Bosnian Army enemies.
Relief officials said today that they suspected the Croatian Government of planning to force the Muslims to return against their will.


Bradley Declines to Run Again
Senator Bill Bradley announced yesterday that he would not seek re-election to a fourth term.
He gave no reason for his decision, but he left the impression that he had grown weary of working in a political system he described as "broken."


Carbide/Graphite Group Inc. reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 3


Gebrselassie Shatters World Mark in 5,000
He ran 5,000 meters nearly 11 seconds faster than anyone in history, and Haile Gebrselassie of Ethiopia kept going, setting another world record tonight by taking not one victory lap but two.
No one begrudged him the superfluous celebration.
What Gebrselassie had done was staggering.
He reeled off the equivalent of three 4:05 miles in this 12 1/2-lap race on his way to reclaiming the world record in 12 minutes 44.39 seconds, shattering by 10.91 seconds the old mark of 12:55.30 set on June 8 by Moses Kiptanui of Kenya.


John Cameron Swayze, 89, Journalist and TV Pitchman
John Cameron Swayze, one of television's first evening news anchors and the man who introduced the line, "It takes a licking and keeps on ticking," into popular culture as the voice of Timex watches, died on Tuesday at his home in Sarasota, Fla.
He was 89.
Mr.
Swayze, whose dark good looks and crisp but folksy voice made him a household name in the early years of television, started his career as a newspaper reporter, then became a radio broadcaster and switched permanently to television in 1949 as host of the "Camel News Caravan," a 15-minute news program broadcast five times a week on NBC.


Corrections
Because of a production error, a page that included an obituary of Lawrence Dunbar Reddick, a historian, and an article about the memorial service for Carol Fox Sulzberger, the wife of the chairman of The New York Times Company, was omitted from some copies yesterday, and another obituary page was printed twice.
Readers wishing copies of the correct page may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or telephone (212) 556-1992.


Barr Laboratories (BRL,A) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Shiloh Industries reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


Ailing Poor Will Get Care, Panel Asserts
In a report issued yesterday urging the Mayor to dismantle the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation, an advisory panel stated that New York would "continue to assure access" to health care for all, including the poorest and sickest New Yorkers, by relying on private hospitals to take up the slack.
Yet the report offers few specifics on how this will happen, and yesterday health experts were unsure about whether private hospitals would take responsibility for the city's estimated 1.5 million uninsured patients -- and give them a high quality of health care -- without a carefully thought-out plan, governmental pressure and close monitoring.


Cairo Journal; The 'Tower of Power': Something to Babble About
Taxi drivers call it the Citadel. Newspapers have dubbed it the Tower of Power.
The waiter at the Dolce Vita cafe nearby said he had heard that cars would be carried by elevator up to the spacious apartments, all of which would have swimming pools.


Reservists Cleared of Sex Charge
Two United States Army reservists yesterday were acquitted of sexually assaulting a female soldier, who testified she was too drunk to remember what happened.
The officers, Patrick Fry of Moorestown and Theodore Wynder of Randallstown, Md., were charged with violating a Federal law against having sex with someone who is too impaired to give consent.


METRO DIGEST
BRADLEY SAYS HE WILL NOT SEEK 4TH TERM Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey announced that he would not seek re-election, depriving the Democratic Party of one of its most respected thinkers at a time when the party's loss of Congress is forcing it to re-examine what it stands for.
In a speech, Mr.
Bradley gave no reason for his decision, but he left the impression that he had grown weary of working in a political system that he called "broken."  [ Page A1. ] Senator Bradley's rather sour farewell to the Senate came as a stunning blow to his demoralized party.
News Analysis.  [ A1. ] The political pot was boiling across New Jersey with the list of likely candidates for Senator Bradley's seat beginning to form even before his announcement.  [ B10. ] JEWS AND MUSLIMS FIND COMMON GROUND Over the last five years, a Muslim immigrant community has been steadily growing in Borough Park, Brooklyn, in the midst of one of New York City's largest populations of Orthodox Jews.
They had traveled from a modest stone house in Jordan to New York City to support Eyad Ismail, who until a two weeks ago -- in their eyes -- was a promising college student.  [ B4. ] MAYOR MAY FACE BIGGEST FIGHT YET The struggle over the municipal hospital system could become the most important test of Mayor Giuliani's attempt to radically restructure city government.
Edward I. Koch said that the Mayor was in for the fight of his career and that it would be even more difficult than Giuliani's attempt to take control of the school system.


Au Bon Pain (ABPCA,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 15


Where to Find It
IT'S hard to imagine the first half of the 20th century without linoleum, the flooring of countless kitchens, bathrooms and recreation rooms.
And it's almost equally hard to imagine linoleum as a hot floor covering in the 90's.
"It came in 15 shades of brown," said Scott Hyman, an owner of Town and Country Flooring in New York, recalling the classic linoleum of the Lucy and Ricky era.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, who was signing copies of his new book in Manhattan, misspelled the given name of Howard Stern's radio talk-show partner in some editions.
The partner, who accompanied Mr.
Stern to get copies of the book, is Robin Quivers.


2 Sides Nearing Agreement on Water Pollution, Pataki Says
Four months into an effort by Gov.
George E. Pataki's office to broker peace talks between New York City and the upstate communities whose streets, waste-water plants and cow pastures drain into the city's 19 reservoirs, the Governor said yesterday that "conceptual agreement" had been reached on many aspects of a plan to cut pollution of the city's drinking-water supply.
Drafting of a detailed written agreement could begin by Sept. 1, Mr.
Pataki said in a written statement.
Such an agreement would help the city avert a Federal order to build a $6 billion filtration plant.


TBWA Branch Gets Shoe Account
C &amp; J Clark International in Somerset, England, which markets Clark shoes, said yesterday that it had selected the London office of TBWA Advertising to handle its worldwide account, with billings estimated at $12 million.
The account was previously divided among three agencies in Britain: McCann-Erickson in Manchester, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies; BMP DDB Needham London, a unit of the Omnicom Group, and TS Alliance International in Bristol.
TBWA, also owned by Omnicom, was awarded the account after a review that also included the three incumbents and Bartle Bogle Hegarty in London.


Central Tractor Farm &amp; Country Inc.(CTFC,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 29


ASM International N.V. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sunrise Medical Inc.(SMD,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Dr. Robert Hoppock, 93, Pioneer In Field of Vocational Guidance
Dr.
Robert Hoppock, who had such a tough time finding his niche in life that he devoted his career to making it easier for others to find theirs, died on Aug. 5 at a nursing home in Vista, Calif.
As the first professor of counselor education at New York University, he is widely regarded as a pioneer in the field.
Dr. Hoppock was 93. His daughter announced his death this week.


Unilever Names New Chief of Its Elizabeth Arden Cosmetics Unit
Unilever United States replaced Kimberly A. Delsing as president and chief executive of its Elizabeth Arden cosmetics unit yesterday.
Ms.
Delsing, who headed the company's Elizabeth Arden, Elizabeth Taylor Fragrances and Calvin Klein Cosmetics businesses, with an estimated $1.2 billion in annual revenues, will be succeeded tomorrow by Peter W. England, the chairman of Elida Gibbs-Faberge, the company's European mass-market cosmetic and toiletry business.


Ames Department Stores reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


International Briefs; Daimler-Benz Unit
Daimler-Benz Aerospace A.G. of Germany appealed to the Government yesterday for aid in weathering a financial crisis brought on by the strong mark.
The company has said it will lose "hundreds of millions of marks" this year because most of its business is calculated in dollars while its production is in Germany, which means a weak dollar effectively raises the costs of production.
The company had a loss of 438 million marks ($303 million) last year after losses of nearly 700 million ($484 million) at current rates the year before. (Reuters)


Liberties; A Capitalist Fantasy
I step out of a silver Rolls-Royce, dripping in Harry Winston, teetering on Manolo Blahniks, sipping a 1988 Roederer Cristal from a Tiffany flute.
I have come to Istanbul on the Orient Express in search of the perfect kilim.
At the bazaar I inform Hasan, the tall, mustachioed carpet dealer, "Price is no object" . . .
The ringing phone snaps me back to reality.
I am in my New York office, surrounded by a clutter of Maalox, Advil, Seldane, fat-free pretzels and three-month-old American Express bills.
In my lap is a copy of Forbes FYI, the sleek supplement to Forbes magazine that tells the well heeled where to play and shop, where to find the best salmon-fishing camp in British Columbia ($3,462 a week), the best sterling silver shaving brush ($300) and the best library globe ($40,000).


A Dark Horse Wins Tropicana Work
A review for the Seagram Beverage Group's Tropicana juices account ended unexpectedly yesterday when FCB/Leber Katz Partners in New York -- a surprise contender that had worked for the group's president at a previous company -- emerged victorious.
In joining the agency roster of the parent Seagram Company, FCB/Leber gained an account whose billings were estimated at $25 million.
The review began in June when Seagram Beverage ended its decade-long relationship with the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago, soon after Burnett became the worldwide agency for the Fruitopia juice and tea products sold by the Coca-Cola Company.
The Tropicana review initially began with five Seagram roster agencies, then was narrowed to three: Grey Advertising in New York; Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners in New York, a joint venture of Dentsu Inc. and Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., and the agency soon to be formed by the merger of TBWA Advertising in New York, owned by the Omnicom Group, and Chiat/Day.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Monday explaining Web browser software, which helps users navigate the World Wide Web of the Internet, misstated a source for the data.
It was Icon International Inc., not Icons Inc.


Harnisch's Season of Expectation Closes With Surgery
The numbers stand in stark contrast: on one side, a three-year, $9 million contract; on the other, a 2-8 record and a 3.68 earned run average.
But in baseball, sometimes numbers don't tell the whole story.
"Quite honestly, when I look back on this year, it's been a frustrating season," said the Mets' Pete Harnisch, whose 1995 is now officially over.
"But I didn't pitch as bad as it may seem. I can look myself in the face and say I did the best I can. I did what I could do. I wish I could be out there the rest of the year. But this is the smartest thing to do."


Jews and Muslims Share a Piece of Brooklyn
Douglas Jablon first realized that change was afoot in Borough Park, Brooklyn, about five months ago, on the day that a vanload of Yemenis arrived at Maimonides Medical Center with prayer rugs tucked under their arms.
"Eight or nine of them came into the waiting room because one of their family members was sick," recalled Mr.
Jablon, a patient representative.
"So we opened a room for them, and they got down on their knees and faced east and they prayed for two hours."


Israel Renews Permission for the Use of Force in Interrogations
The Israeli Government today extended the authority of the secret services to use physical force on Palestinian suspects during interrogation, and specifically the authority to violently shake the detainees -- a technique that the Israeli Attorney General has banned.
The decision by a ministerial commission followed an appeal to the Government from Amnesty International, the human rights organization, to ban torture or ill-treatment of prisoners.


Tennessee Journal; One Small Vote for a Man Brought One Giant Leap for Women
There will be invective against the destruction of the family and paeans to equal rights for women in the vaulted chambers of Tennessee's House of Representatives on Friday.
But it will not be a debate on family values.
Instead, a Tennessee theater company is planning to re-enact the spirited events of Aug. 18, 1920, when Tennessee became the 36th state to ratify the 19th Amendment, providing the required two-thirds of states needed to grant women the right to vote.
On that day, a young, ambitious legislator from eastern Tennessee, who had previously voted staunchly with the anti-suffragists, cast the deciding vote for the amendment.
The reason for his change of heart has some poetic justice: He received an admonition from his mother and concluded "that a mother's advice is safest for her boy to follow."


Joyce Steins, 52; Restaurant Owner Supported the Arts
Joyce Steins, a supporter of the arts and social causes who owned and operated several trendy Manhattan restaurants before retiring three years ago, died on Sunday in Riverhead Hospital on Long Island.
A West Side resident, she was 52.
The cause was breast cancer, O. Aldon James Jr., a close friend, said.


Holyfield-Bowe to Stay Put
TVKO, Time Warner Sports' pay-per-view service, said yesterday it will not shift its EVANDER HOLYFIELD-RIDDICK BOWE fight from Nov. 4, the same day Showtime Event Television will have a MIKE TYSON fight on pay-per-view.


Mother, Daughter And Books Of Family
In "Dreaming," published by Random House last spring, a man and woman meet, fall in bed and marry in seven pages.
The marriage, spurred by a suspected pregnancy, ends in divorce.
The two are simply mismatched.
"It was in the cards that we couldn't get along," the author writes in jazzy vernacular.
In "On Gold Mountain," published by St.
Martin's Press this month, a man and woman meet, fall in bed and marry.
But their courtship winds through 15 pages, several letters, dates and talks about children and family.
The marriage also ends in divorce, as a result of drinking, cultural differences and family pressures.
But mainly, the husband "never once told her he loved her," the author writes in staid prose.


Tetons Tee-Off


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Acquired Jimmy Williams, pitcher, from the New York Mets to complete the Bobby Bonilla trade.
Assigned Williams to Rochester of the International League.
Optioned Mike Oquist, pitcher, to Rochester.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Placed Hipolito Pichardo, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Melvin Bunch, pitcher, from Omaha of the American Association.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Acquired Craig Worthington, third baseman, from the Cincinnati Reds, for Stephen Larkin, first baseman-outfielder, and an undisclosed amount of cash.
Placed Mike Pagliarulo, third baseman, on the 15-day disabled list.
Activated Juan Gonzalez, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Assigned Danny Cox, pitcher, to Syracuse of the International League for a rehabilitation assignment.
National League
NEW YORK METS -- Designated Brandon Copeland, outfielder, for assignment.
Football National Football League
CAROLINA PANTHERS -- Waived Harry Boatswain, Baron Rollins and Darryl Moore, offensive guards; Cary Brabham, Billy Mitchell and Steve Hawkins, defensive backs; and Larry Ryans and Richard Buchanan, wide receivers.
Placed Tony Smith, running back on injured reserve.
Reached an injury settlement with Randy Cuthbert, running back.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Waived Chuck Bullough, linebacker.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Waived Cole Ford, kicker; LaMonte Coleman, fullback; Germaine Holden, defensive end; Joey Ellis, defensive back; and Tirrel Greene, guard.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Released Rudy Harris, fullback.
WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Released Frank Wycheck, tight end. Hockey National Hockey League
LOS ANGELES KINGS -- Goalie Byron Dafoe and defenseman Chris Snell signed one-year contracts.
College
ATLANTIC 10 CONFERENCE -- Named Mitchell Kendall business manager.
PATRIOT LEAGUE -- Named Timothy Parker assistant executive director for championships and compliance.


Waban Inc.(WBN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Devry Inc.(DVRY,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Presley Cos.(PDC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


The Case of Mumia Abu-Jamal
The argument against the death penalty -- that state-sanctioned killing is barbarous, arbitrary and morally repugnant -- applies with equal weight to both the innocent and the guilty.
The imperative against taking a life is just as compelling with a cold-blooded killer as with someone unscrupulous prosecutors have railroaded onto death row.
The case of Mumia Abu-Jamal places that point in sharp relief.
His supporters are right to fight his execution for the 1981 killing of a Philadelphia policeman.
They should be careful, however, in portraying him as the hapless victim of vindictive prosecutors and shoddy defense attorneys.
The case for his innocence is not unimpeachable.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Technology Stocks Help Lift Nasdaq Index to High Again
Stocks were mixed yesterday, as surging technology issues pushed the Nasdaq composite index to still another high, while some of the bluest of the blue chips slid.
"The strong dollar became the overriding factor," said John H. Shaughnessy, senior vice president of Advest Inc.
"While the bias of the market is still positive, there is a lot of rotation going on."


National Sea Products reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Croatian Army Advances on 2 Fronts, Raising 2 Concerns
Emboldened by recent military victories, the Croatian Army made steady advances today on two fronts, raising concerns that that a new American peace proposal could be jeopardized and that the Yugoslav Army could be drawn into the fighting.
It was unclear whether the latest, apparently successful, advance on Serbian areas of western Bosnia was an attempt to shore up defenses near the Croatian border or to begin a broader sweep toward the Bosnian Serb stronghold of Banja Luka.


Hurricane Stalls in the Atlantic, Pounding 1,000 Miles of Beaches
Hurricane Felix hovered more than 150 miles off the Atlantic coast this evening, its ponderous progress toward the shore nearly stalled as it churned a vast sweep of the ocean like a giant eggbeater.
But in seaside communities from Florida to New England, mountainous surf from the distant storm was already wracking up a growing toll of damage.
In Sandbridge, an affluent seafront community here, clawing surf since Sunday has shredded sections of the metal sea wall built seven years ago to hold back the tide, leaving steel ribbing twisted like a kite that had been battered by the wind.
In several places, the surging seas have already breached coastal defenses, tearing wooden decks from ocean-view homes and flooding roads.


New Fines for Unsafe Digging
The State Board of Public Utilities said yesterday that it had cited 90 excavating companies for violating a law that requires them to give notice before digging near pipelines or utility lines, The Associated Press reported.


Adelphia Communications Corp. reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Adoption of Russian Children Tied Up in Red Tape
Marina Snakina, 7, does not know that adoptive parents are anxiously waiting for her in Boulder, Colo.
Kenneth Schwartz and his wife Elizabeth Relin, who adopted Marina's 5-year-old sister, are desperate to take Marina home, too, and arrange for her to have cataract surgery.
But for now they can't.


Smedvig A/S reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 15


New England And Met Life Agree to Merge Operations
The boards of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company and the New England Mutual Life Insurance Company agreed yesterday to merge, combining the financial strength of Met Life with New England Mutual's affluent customer base.
With the merger, the assets of Met Life, the nation's second-largest insurance company, would grow to $146.9 billion -- not enough to dislodge the Prudential Insurance Company of America, which has $167.3 billion in assets, from first place.
New England, which is based in Boston, is ranked No. 27.


AT HOME WITH: Julia Phillips; Looking at Windows, Darkly
The swimming pool is empty and crumbling.
A thick tree has toppled in the backyard.
The deck is torn up, a victim of mudslides.
A "For Sale" sign stands near the entrance to the house.
"I mean, every once in a while someone comes over to see it, but have you seen all the 'For Sale' signs in all the canyons?" Julia Phillips asked with a plaintive laugh.


C-Cor Electronics Inc.(CCBL,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Indonesia Frees 3 Held Since '65 Coup Against Sukarno
Three of the most prominent political prisoners in Indonesia were freed from prison today, nearly 30 years after they were jailed for their purported role in a coup attempt that led to the deaths of hundreds of thousands of people and dramatically altered the country's history.
The freed prisoners are former Foreign Minister Subandrio, 81; Omar Dhani, 71, a former air force commander, and Raden Sugent Sutarto, 77, a former intelligence chief.
They were pardoned last month by President Suharto, who came to power in the midst of the bloodshed in the 1960's and has ruled the country ever since.


Hewlett Profit Rises 66%, Above Analysts' Forecasts
Buoyed by strong demand across all its product lines, the Hewlett-Packard Company reported today that third-quarter earnings rose 66 percent, exceeding Wall Street analysts' estimates.
Shares in Hewlett-Packard rose $4.625, to close at $82.50, in heavy trading of more than 5 million shares on the New York Stock Exchange.
And investors interpreted Hewlett-Packard's strong performance as a positive indicator for competitors, as well.
Sun Microsystems Inc. rose $3.375, to $57.25, in Nasdaq trading, and Silicon Graphics Inc. jumped $1.25, to close at $42.75, on the New York Stock Exchange.


World News Briefs; Protest in Kashmir Over Tourist's Killing
Striking Muslim militants closed businesses, markets, government offices and educational institutions in the Vale of Kashmir today to protest the killing of a Norwegian hostage by a shadowy separatist faction.
The general strike is the first of its kind by Kashmiri separatists since the armed movement for independence from India began in 1989.


Detective Rescinds Charges She Made That Chief Hit Her
A Manhattan detective asserted that she was struck by Chief of Patrol Wilbur L. Chapman, the second-highest-ranking uniformed officer in the force, during a dispute in his home, but then withdrew her charge under questioning by police investigators, law enforcement officials said yesterday.
The detective, who has not been identified, called 911 early on the morning of Aug. 6 to report the quarrel.
Responding to the call, police officers went to Chief Chapman's home in Flushing around 2 A.M.


Treasury Chief Says Strong Dollar Isn't a Threat to Trade
As the dollar continued its climb today, Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin said that the Government was committed to maintaining a strong dollar and did not see it as a threat to the ability of American business to compete abroad.
In an interview, Mr.
Rubin gave no hint of what level he wanted to see the dollar maintain in the future.
But the overall tone of his remarks -- one of the clearest reviews of American currency policy since he took office in January -- suggested satisfaction with the dollar's recovery this summer from its plunge in the spring.


We Can Speak Up for Better Use of Land
To the Editor:
Re "The Condos Are Eating Our History" (Op-Ed, Aug. 9): Geraldine Brooks writes movingly about the sweep of suburbia into her historic and pastoral backyard.
She thinks the state should help hard-pressed farmers resist developer enticements.


Welfare Eligibility
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 8 news article on New York City's efforts to cut down on welfare fraud and abuse through our Eligibility Verification Review program asserts that welfare advocates say that the city is "looking for the smallest of reasons" to deny benefits to applicants or recipients.


An Honor for Common Sense
Last summer, Frank Balun of Hillside drew national attention when he killed a rat that ate his tomato plants and was charged with violating a criminal statute written to prevent people from needlessly killing animals.
The charges were eventually dismissed, and today, the New Jersey Pest Control is to honor Angelo Bonanno, health director of Hillside, for coming to Mr.
Balun's defense.


Status Baffles Kamieniecki
Scott Kamieniecki is baffled about whether he will make his next start against Oakland Tuesday since Manager Buck Showalter has strongly intimated that the Class AAA pitcher Mariano Rivera will replace him.
So far, Kamieniecki has not been informed of a switch.
Since Kamieniecki is 0-2 with a 10.38 earned run average in his last two games, has had control problems for two weeks and angered the Yankees by being ejected in a 9-3 loss to the Red Sox Monday, Showalter might shift his No. 3 starter to the bullpen.


Royal Plastics Group Ltd. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Tyson Appears to Take Control As He Takes Over Center Stage
Alternately bored and seething, Mike Tyson today held his first pre-fight mass interview with the news media since his release from prison.
He looked formidable. And in control.


Viking Office Products Inc.(VKNG,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
Compaq Cuts Prices; Industry War Is Likely Compaq Computer reduced prices on its complete line of office and home computers by as much as 25 percent and introduced several new models, in the opening move of what is expected to be a fierce competition among personal computer manufacturers.


Roanoke Electric Steel Corp.(RESC,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


Harrowston Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


The Last Tree
To the Editor:
"A Modest Step to Save the Fish" (editorial, Aug. 8) brings to mind a prophecy of the Cree Indians:


Chaos Below, Panetta Does High-Wire Act
The civil rights leaders and Cabinet members who gathered at the National Archives for President Clinton's speech on affirmative action last month had been waiting 38 minutes when the White House chief of staff, Leon E. Panetta, entered the marbled rotunda and slipped into his front row seat.
His arrival seemed a sure sign that the President's entrance was imminent.
But then the crowd waited some more.


Made for Each Other, and Unfortunately So
OPPOSITE ATTRACTION The Lives of Erich Maria Remarque and Paulette Goddard By Julie Gilbert Illustrated. 540 pages.
Pantheon. $32.50.
In the history of mismatched lovers, Erich Maria Remarque and Paulette Goddard belong to a well-known subset that runs from Caesar and Cleopatra to Arthur Miller and Marilyn Monroe: the brainy man and the glamour girl.
And as with many such pairs, Remarque, the author of "All Quiet on the Western Front," and Goddard, a now hazily remembered movie star of the 1930's and 40's, were fond of slipping outside those neat labels.


Even at Age 13, a Storybook Career Is Emerging
If Dominique Moceanu were to win the 1996 Olympic all-around title, it would only be fitting -- the perfect conclusion to a best seller.
The rest of the ingredients are already there -- the Romanian immigrant parents, themselves former gymnasts; their determination that their daughter should follow in their footsteps; the family's move to Houston, when Dominique was 9, just so she could train under the legendary coach Bela Karolyi, and, of course, Dominique herself, whose personality and charm make one believe she was born to be a star.
This year, Moceanu, the 1994 United States junior national champion, stepped up to the big leagues.
Now a senior, the 13-year-old has competed successfully against the likes of Shannon Miller and Dominique Dawes, who were favored as competition got under way tonight at the United States National Championships in the Superdome.


Finally, All the First-Round Picks Are in the Fold
Defensive end Derrick Alexander, the last unsigned first-round pick from this year's National Football League draft, agreed to a four-year, $4.8 million contract with the Minnesota Vikings yesterday.
The deal includes a $2.6 million signing bonus, some of which will be deferred over the next two seasons.
"It was just time for us to get the deal done," said Alexander, who was drafted 11th out of Florida State.
"We knew Minnesota needed Derrick, and Derrick needed Minnesota. So it was just time to get it done."


Masland Corp. reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Emcor Group Ltd. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Amtrak Faces Cuts It May Not Survive
To the Editor:
Thank you for including in your Aug. 11 article on the Senate-passed 1996 transportation appropriations bill that Amtrak -- as well as mass transit -- was cut significantly.


Designs Inc.(DESI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Pace and Precision The Stratford Way
The outsize cuckoo clock that presides over the Stratford Festival's production of "The Merry Wives of Windsor" is, like much of what passes on the stages here, remarkably efficient.
Not that it's of much use for marking off the hours in any conventional way.
No, its function is to keep comic time, which it does like a canny clown with a maestro's baton.
When the possessive Frank Ford broods over the possibility of his wife's infidelity, out pops a chirping cuckoo, the Elizabethan symbol of betrayed husbands, to turn dark suspicions into the unmistakable stuff of farce.
And the proper male and female figurines directly below the bird periodically strike poses signaling the progressive phases of Shakespeare's giddy skirmishes between the sexes.


Pride Cos.(PRF,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Kohl's Corp.(KSS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Mayor May Be in for Biggest Test
Fifteen years ago, when Mayor Edward I. Koch closed the tiny Sydenham Hospital in Harlem, the decision led to sit-ins, clashes with the police and the beginning of a swelling rancor between many of the city's black residents and City Hall that ended only with the election of David N. Dinkins in 1989.
Yesterday Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani praised the recommendations of an advisory panel, whose members he had handpicked, to begin selling, spinning off or, as a last resort, closing all 11 city hospitals.
If he decides to follow the panel's advice -- yesterday he deferred judgment -- the task is likely to be far more challenging and the opposition far more widespread than in the single hospital closing in 1980.


Wallace Computer Services Inc.(WCS,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 31


Life Partners Group Inc.(LPG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Magnetek Inc.(MAG,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Rose to Throw Out First Pitch
PETE ROSE, banned from baseball in 1989 for gambling, will throw out the first pitch at the Richmond Roosters' final game of the season next week.
Rose will also sign autographs at the Aug. 26 game in Richmond, Ind., against Zanesville in the Class A Frontier League.


Corrections
An article last Thursday about the discovery of a gene associated with diabetes misspelled the name of the director of the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, who commented on the findings.
He is Dr.
Phillip Gorden.


Liuski International (LSKI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


International Briefs; Swiss Bank Has 23% Profit Gain
First-half net profit at the Swiss Bank Corporation gained a better-than-expected 23.3 percent in the first half, as earnings from trading more than doubled.
Net profit reached 540 million Swiss francs ($436.5 million), and the bank said it was "positive" about future earnings.


COMPANY BRIEFS
EARTH TECH CORP., Long Beach, Calif., which analyzes environmental and engineering problems, said it had won a $200 million, 10-year contract from the Navy to provide services in the Pacific Rim.
PACIFIC TELECOM INC., Vancouver, Wash., a unit of Pacificorp, Portland, Ore., said the Federal Communications Commission had approved its purchase of some local telephone exchanges from U S West Inc. for about $180 million.


Stewart &amp; Stevenson Services Inc.(SSSS,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


INSIDE
Health Care for the Poor
A panel urging Mayor Giuliani to dismantle the city's public hospitals agency said New York would still provide access to health care for the poor, but offered few specifics on how that would happen.
Page B1.
Possible New Bomb Victim
Investigators have been unable to identify a leg found in the rubble of the Oklahoma City Federal Building and are preparing to declare a new, unidentified victim.
Page A14.
Packwood Speaks Out
The Senator from Oregon has taken the offensive after months of silence about accusations of sexual misconduct against him.
Page A20.
Rockefeller Center Lifeline
A Chicago real estate magnate is leading a $250 million investment in the troubled trust holding the Rockefeller Center mortgage.
Page D1.


D&amp;K Whosale Drug Inc. reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Voting on Vans
About 5,000 "dollar vans" operate illegally in New York City, shuttling passengers through each borough and between boroughs.
But the City Council -- responding to the enthusiasm of hundreds of thousands of riders -- is set to vote today to legitimize some of them.
Article, page B3.


Bosnian Government Said to Hamper New, Stronger U.N. Force
More than two months after it was unveiled as the answer to more fully enforce United Nations resolutions in Bosnia, the rapid-reaction force remains substantially crippled by restrictions imposed by the Bosnian Government, United Nations officials say.
The 4,000 soldiers of a key unit, about one-third of the total force, remain confined to their base at Ploce on the Adriatic coast of Croatia because they have not received permission to deploy to central Bosnia, close to any expected fighting.


Low Interest Rates Reviving Housing Starts, U.S. Finds
Though falling interest rates have done little to perk up car sales this summer, they are reviving the housing industry, figures released by the Commerce Department showed today.
In a surprisingly robust performance, the nation's builders broke ground for homes in July at the fastest clip so far this year, a 1.38 million annual pace that represented the biggest monthly surge in 16 months.


Mayor and Board of Education Set Aside Bitterness and Meet
For the first time since he took office 20 months ago, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani met with the Board of Education yesterday, setting aside the rancor that has dominated their relationship, at least for the moment, in favor of a cordial discussion of the issues that divide them.
During the 40-minute closed-door meeting at City Hall, the two sides resolved none of their differences on the search for a new schools chancellor, the looming threat of teacher layoffs or the role of the police in school safety.
But they were sufficiently pleased by the tone of the discussion that they agreed to meet again at City Hall today.


Ainsworth Lumber reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Suffolk County Legislature's decision to join an effort to take over the Long Island Lighting Company misstated the legislature's vote.
It was 18 to 0, not 18 to 1.


5 Officers Injured in Crash
Five police officers suffered minor injuries last night when their car was struck at an intersection on the Upper East Side, the police said.
The officers were driving north on Third Avenue around 7:30 P.M. when their unmarked blue Chevrolet was hit by a maroon Toyota Camry traveling east on East 92d Street and then crashed into a light pole, the police said.
The driver of the Camry drove away, the police said.


Parents of Bomb Suspect Weep and Insist He Is No Terrorist
The Jordanian parents of the latest man arrested in the World Trade Center bombing broke down in tears yesterday as their 24-year-old son was led into a Federal courtroom in Manhattan for a routine hearing.
The parents had traveled from a modest stone house in Jordan to New York City, to a strange court in a strange land, to support their baby-faced son, Eyad Ismail, who until a two weeks ago -- in their eyes -- was a promising college student.


A Not-So-Subtle Change Makes Difference for Pulsipher
Twelve starts into his major league career, Bill Pulsipher has some bad news for opposing hitters.
"I feel like I'm more of a pitcher," the Mets' 21-year-old left-hander announced last night.


Imperial Parking reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Mrs. Clinton Should Sit Out Beijing Meeting; Talk, Don't Shove
To the Editor:
Walter Russell Mead's "Danger of Bigger Trouble With the Chinese" (Op-Ed, Aug. 15) is one of the few balanced, thoughtful pieces on China in your paper in the last few months.


Ready for More Tennis, Almost


Honoring Eastwood
Clint Eastwood is to be honored by the Film Society of Lincoln Center at its next annual tribute, on May 6 at Avery Fisher Hall.
This actor, director and producer has been involved in more than 50 films since 1955, most recently "The Bridges of Madison County," which he produced and directed and in which he stars with Meryl Streep.
Ticket information is to be available after Oct. 2 at (212) 875-5610.


Poco Petroleum reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


In the Shadow of Atlantic City, a Tribe Wants to Open a Casino
Acknowledging that they faced an uphill battle in hostile territory, leaders of an Indian tribe from Oklahoma signed an agreement with this seaside community today to operate a gambling casino virtually in the shadow of Atlantic City.
Whether they can win state and Federal approval to actually bring the project out of the planning stage is another matter.


Panel Chief Calls for Test Of Minivans As Taxicabs
If an experiment promoted by the chairman of the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission proves successful, the new vehicle of choice for urban cabdrivers could be the same as one usually favored by suburban mothers and fathers -- namely, the minivan.
Casting around for a replacement for the disappearing Chevrolet Caprices that make up much of the city's taxi fleets, the commission's chairman, Christopher Lynn, has latched onto the minivan as an unlikely -- but spacious -- alternative.


Restaurants
"The people at your table are just paying the check," Lumi Hadri says encouragingly to one group waiting forlornly at the bar.
They look glum.
"I can give you a table downstairs," she adds brightly.


Gaz Metropolitan &amp; Co. L.P. reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


A Punk Temper to Rival Nirvana's
If Dave Grohl wants to borrow some strategies from Nirvana, he's entitled; after all, he was Nirvana's drummer.
In his new band, the Foo Fighters, Mr.
Grohl sings, plays guitar and writes the songs.
At the Academy on Sunday night, the Foo Fighters relied on a sure-fire Nirvana device: the sudden leap from a calm verse to a bashing, howling chorus.
But that was the easy part; what's difficult is to write a song that makes a listener care about the leap.
Mr.
Grohl has done that, too.
Former drummers from leading bands who were not previously known for singing or songwriting don't usually have great prospects.
"I'm alone and I'm an easy target," Mr.
Grohl sang at the Academy.
But he is the exception.
With his guitar in hand, he jumped around the stage and flopped his long hair, a hard-working punk front man.
As did Kurt Cobain for Nirvana, Mr.
Grohl writes songs that incorporate Beatles-tinged melody, hard-rock riffing and punk rants; they're catchy between the blasts of rage, and sometimes during them.
A few songs also echoed Neil Young, trudging forward with strummed, fuzz-toned guitar.


Proffitt's Inc.(PRFT,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in Manhattan that are to close soon:


Smokestacks Not Up to Snuff
Last October, the State Department of Environmental Protection declared an amnesty for companies that had failed to apply for air pollution permits for their smokestacks.
For five months, the agency said, businesses could seek the permits without penalty.
The agency has reviewed half the 1,151 applications received from 250 companies and has found that in nearly one out of three cases, new pollution control equipment was needed, said Robert C. Shinn Jr., Commissioner of the department.


CHRONICLE
The Democrats have no monopoly on political discussion, of course.
Former President GEORGE BUSH announced in Houston yesterday that he will convene a fund-raising gathering of former world leaders in October to discuss the end of the cold war and its legacy.
Acceptances have come from MIKHAIL GORBACHEV of Russia, MARGARET THATCHER of Britain and BRIAN MULRONEY of Canada for the conference on Oct. 8 and 9 in Colorado Springs, Colo.


Licenses Voted For 2 Van Concerns
The City Council has unanimously approved licenses for two van companies that have provided popular but illegal public transportation.
About 5,000 illegal vans operate along some of the major thoroughfares in Brooklyn, Queens and the Bronx.
While the Council's vote yesterday will result in the licensing of just seven vans -- one in the Bronx and six in Brooklyn and lower Manhattan -- it opens the door for more companies to be approved.


Fed Appears Unlikely to Lower Rates
With the Federal Reserve's interest-rate policy committee set to meet on Tuesday, senior Fed officials have expressed satisfaction with the current economic outlook, as well as some uncertainty -- assessments that seem likely to lead them to leave the rate unchanged for now.
Lawrence B. Lindsey, a governor of the Federal Reserve Board, said the economy already appeared to be doing fairly well.
"We're in a situation where we're going to have exactly what the doctor ordered, which is slow, moderate growth," he said.


Weed Killers In Tap Water In Corn Belt
Tap water in the Corn Belt is dangerously contaminated with agricultural weed-killers, posing serious health risks, according to a study released today by the Environmental Working Group.
Herbicides were found in the drinking water of almost all 29 cities and towns tested.
At 18 of them, the levels exceeded Federal safety standards.


Variations On Soul's Tension
Terence Trent D'Arby is a dedicated student of soul music with the gifts to become a master.
He has good looks and a feline grace; he has a voice full of grainy entreaty and melismatic curves.
He also writes songs that renew classic riffs and rhythms, yet invent highly personal variations on soul's central tension between the carnal and spiritual.
Only Mr.
D'Arby would describe finding a new love as "fat wet lips on a sea-salt canvas/goodbye, Picasso, hello, Dali."
But eight years after making his debut album, Mr.
D'Arby still comes across as an apprentice onstage.
At Irving Plaza on Monday night, he imitated musicians from Stevie Wonder to Sly Stone, Marvin Gaye to Otis Redding, Smokey Robinson to James Brown.
He played his first encore wearing a black shag wig, as if to mock those who have compared him to Prince. (When the time came for a direct tribute, however, Mr. D'Arby chose "Children of the Revolution" by the English glam-rocker Marc Bolan.)


Police on a Diet Patrol To Shed Nagging Image; After Years of Job Stress and Doughnuts, Officers Are Seriously Counting Calories
One officer confessed that he had made a difficult arrest and was feeling agitated.
He wolfed down two pieces of pizza and drank a six-pack of beer.
Another said he was angry at his mother, with whom he lives, and raided their refrigerator.
Another said he was so nervous at his daughter's engagement party that he ate uncontrollably.
Still another let out that she stared at bags of cookies in a supermarket aisle for nearly 20 minutes before finally summoning the will to walk away.


The Sturm und Drang Of Girls Who Baby-Sit
If ever a film had a built-in audience, it's "The Baby-Sitters Club," based on the seemingly endless series of books beloved by pre-teen-age girls.
The series' heroines are seven enterprising girls around 13 years old, who live in the fictional Connecticut suburb of Stoneybrook.
They are a comforting (verging on saccharine) crew.
The baby sitters deal with the very problems that seem life-shattering to their fans, everything from boys to school to divorced parents and stepsiblings.
By the end of every book they have reassured readers that their own problems are normal and that life will turn out O.K.
No wonder that in the nine years since the first novel appeared, more than 125 million books have been sold, and the series has spawned real-life baby-sitters clubs, tie-ins from dolls to trading cards, and a television series for HBO (now in repeats on the Disney Channel).
The movie "The Baby-Sitters Club" offers the same comfort factor as the books, but suffers from a definite lack of excitement.
Kristy, a tomboy and the club's bossy leader, gets the girls to start a summer day-care center.
Meanwhile, her long-gone father returns to Stoneybrook for a visit and asks Kristy to keep his presence a secret from her mother and stepfather.
Only Kristy's best friend, the shy Mary Anne, knows the truth.


Simpson Jury to Make Second Visit to Slaying Scene, This Time at Night
The crowd-control fences will be gone, the front door will be open and candles will be burning brightly.
In fact, the vacant condominium in which Nicole Brown Simpson lived and died will be strangely beckoning when the jurors weighing her former husband's fate pay it a second visit on Sunday night.
Turning aside defense objections that such a visit could be expensive and misleading, Judge Lance A. Ito said today that as long as illumination from street lights and front lamps could be shown to resemble conditions at 875 South Bundy Drive when Mrs.
Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman died, the tour would proceed.


Dunkin' Donuts Narrows Its Search
Dunkin' Donuts, a unit of Allied Domecq, has narrowed the review of its account, with billings estimated at $25 million, to 6 semifinalists from 20 or more initial contenders.
The account had been handled for the last 18 years by Ally &amp; Gargano in New York, which was eliminated from the review last month.


We Need to Know About Incompetent Doctors
To the Editor:
The tragic death of 33-year-old Guadalupe Negron at the hands of Dr.
David Benjamin, also known as Elyas Bonrouhi, and his subsequent murder conviction (front page, Aug. 9) marks the first time a physician has been found guilty of murder in New York State stemming from treatment of a patient.
It also underscores in a horrific way the inadequacy of the system for disciplining and monitoring physicians.
Because of the proper aggressiveness of New York bar associations and prosecutors, it is now fairly common to see news articles about lawyers disciplined and disbarred for wrongdoing.
We see far fewer such articles about physicians.
Perhaps that is largely because the public is denied the right to know when charges are filed against physicians.
Had the sorry record of incompetence charges against Dr.
Benjamin and delays in properly disciplining him been made public, Mrs.
Negron might be alive today.


METRO DIGEST
BRADLEY CONSIDERS A PRESIDENTIAL RUN
A day after announcing that he would not run for re-election, Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey, a Democrat, said he was considering entering the 1996 Presidential race as an independent.  [ Page A1. ] FUND-RAISING OFFICIALS DRAW CRITICISM
Two co-chairmen of a fund-raising event for Governor Pataki at Saratoga Race Course are government regulators who, actively or passively, are inviting contributions from the very people they regulate.
Their involvement, though not expressly prohibited under state ethics laws, has drawn sharp criticism from Democratic lawmakers and others.  [ A1. ] NEW YORK CITY  MINIVANS MULLED FOR CAB USE
If an experiment promoted by the chairman of the Taxi and Limousine Commission proves successful, the new vehicle of choice for the city's cabdrivers could be the same as one usually favored by families in the suburbs -- the minivan.  [ B3. ]
Testing the Taxi Rider's Bill of Rights.  [ B3. ]
After weeks of intense public debate, the City Council approved plans to build a large Pathmark supermarket in Queens, preserving a deal under which the company agreed to donate more than $400,000 to other merchants and to youth groups in the area.
The deal was bitterly opposed by Mayor Giuliani, who said it set a bad precedent that could discourage future business development.  [ B3. ] AN OFFICER IS CONVICTED OF PERJURY
A 36-year-old police officer was convicted of two counts of perjury in Federal District Court in Manhattan, ending the only case to come out of a three-year investigation into police misconduct in Washington Heights.  [ B3. ] STATEMENT ON POOR PATIENTS REQUESTED
Responding to criticism from the Queens Borough President, Mayor Giuliani asked his panel recommending the dismantling of the city hospital system to prepare a supplement explaining how poor patients would be treated and who would pay for it.  [ B3. ]
A man raped two women in an upper Manhattan park but was captured after trying to attack a third, the authorities said.  [ B2. ]
The Consumer Affairs Department sprang a trap on 25 unlicensed contractors.  [ B2. ]
Steven Spielberg is exploring new territory -- the Manhattan charity-party circuit.  [ B4. ]
There was more high-humidity agony in the long, hot summer of 1995.  [ B6. ] REGION  NUDE DANCING IN LOCAL DELI
Business at Bomb's Away Country Store, actually a deli in Wappinger, N.Y., is great.
Customers who might once have stopped in for a coffee to go linger over a $6 burger.
And now they come from all over.
The owner gambled on a new idea: naked dancers.
Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves.  [ B5. ] 3 PEOPLE ARE ATTACKED WITH A BLOWGUN
Someone with a blowgun has attacked three people near the Seaford-Massapequa border in Nassau County within the last six weeks, firing steel darts at two joggers and a teen-ager on a bicycle, the police said.  [ B5. ] Chronicle B2


Cambodians Go On
To the Editor:
Re "Cambodians in U.S. Say the Dark Shadow of the Khmer Rouge Is Back" and "Ex-Official's Life in U.S. Evokes Fear" (news articles, Aug. 14): How can Cambodians who have survived such horror waste time contemplating revenge?


Barnes &amp; Noble Inc.(BKS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Spielberg Braves Society for a Cause
At a cocktail party 37 floors above Park Avenue, Steven Spielberg went where he has never gone before.
Not into extraterrestrial space.
Not into Amazonian jungle.
No, onto the Manhattan charity-party circuit.
Although Mr.
Spielberg has homes in Trump Tower and on Georgica Pond in East Hampton, L.I. -- addresses that epitomize social clout -- he is a perpetual no-show on the party scene.
"We did eight events in the Hamptons this summer and he wouldn't dream of coming to any of them," said Peggy Siegal, a publicist and professional celebrity wrangler.


International Briefs; British Sky Reports Two-Thirds Profit Jump
The satellite broadcaster British Sky Broadcasting P.L.C. reported a two-thirds jump yesterday in its fiscal year profit, while the media group Pearson P.L.C. said it planned to sell its 9.75 percent stake in the company.


Hugh M. Raup, 94, Botanist at Harvard
Hugh Miller Raup, a botanist and plant ecologist who was director of the Harvard Forest for 21 years, died on Aug. 10 at a nursing home in Sister Bay, Wis.
He was 94 and formerly lived in Petersham, Mass.
From 1946 until he retired in 1967 as a professor of forestry at Harvard University, Dr.
Raup was the director of the 3,000-acre forest preserve in Petersham, 70 miles west of Cambridge.
Harvard has managed the forest since 1907.


Leg Injury Retires Timber Country
One more moment of drama struck Team Lukas today when Timber Country, last year's 2-year-old champion, tore a tendon in his left foreleg and was retired while his stablemate Thunder Gulch was being installed as the 4-5 favorite for the 126th running of the Travers Stakes on Saturday.
Only six colts were entered in the "summertime Derby" against the colt who won the Kentucky Derby last May, the overachiever trained by D. Wayne Lukas, who said: "It's going to be dog eat dog the rest of the way. They'll sort themselves out on the race track. But this is the Derby winner, and there are no classic winners in here beside him."


A Letter to Granddad, The Tobacco Farmer
Dear Granddad,
I remember being 8 years old, bound for church, wearing a little seersucker monkey suit and -- as we walked toward your Packard -- you turned and chuckled from pure pleasure.
You'd seen your fields spread below us, 40 acres, still varnished with dew.
You said, "Is that tobacco not happy tobacco?" This occurred in '59 in North Carolina, mid-July and the heat was already a standing presence, the horizon seemed jellied.
But those green plants stood tent-high, sure and promising as food.


People
Mike Mainthow was named to the new position of executive vice president and senior account director on the Pepsico International business at BBDO New York, a unit of the Omnicom Group.
He was previously a senior vice president and group director at McCann-Erickson New York, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Cos.
Grace Healey was named senior vice president and strategic planning director at Pedone &amp; Partners, New York, succeeding John Green, who left to join J. Walter Thompson New York, a unit of the WPP Group, as a strategic planning director.
Ms.
Healey was previously a consultant to D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York.


No Headline
The simple promise here is that if you vote for this initiative you will get paid off.
You go out and do your duty as a citizen, and you become a shareholder in casino gambling.
This is unheard of. -- CHUCK SAUVAGE of Common Cause.  [ A1:4. ]


Home Video
Exploring Options
Two new titles from Voyager hint at possible future connections between watching movies the old home-video way -- in this case on laser disk -- and viewing them interactively on a computer.
Next month, the company will release the first subtitled version of Federico Fellini's Oscar-winning "Amarcord" on laser disk (Home Vision is to release the subtitled 1973 film on tape next week).
And last month, the company issued Jon Else's documentary "The Day After Trinity: J. Robert Oppenheimer and the Atomic Bomb" on CD-ROM for Windows and Macintosh.


CACI International (CACI,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


The Spoken Word
"THE LETTERS BETWEEN MOTHER-IN-LAW AND DAUGHTER-IN-LAW: SARA AND ELEANOR ROOSEVELT," Roosevelt-Vanderbilt National Historic Sites, Route 9, Hyde Park, N.Y.
The last in a free series of lectures given by National Park Rangers.
Tomorrow at 7 P.M.
Information: (914) 229-9115.
"THE YANKEES: AN AUTHORIZED HISTORY OF THE NEW YORK YANKEES," Barnes &amp; Noble, 2289 Broadway, at 82d Street.
Phil Pepe, the author, discusses the historic baseball team. 8 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 362-8835.


2 Associated With Clintons Face Charges
A Federal grand jury today indicted two Whitewater business partners of Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton, as well as the Governor of Arkansas, on 21 counts of fraud, conspiracy and making false statements in obtaining millions of dollars of federally backed loans in the 1980's.
The indictment, handed up by a Federal grand jury in Little Rock, Ark., charged that the two partners, James B. McDougal and his former wife, Susan, had concocted a series of fraudulent loans from Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan, an Arkansas savings association at the center of the investigation into the Whitewater land venture.
Madison, which was owned and operated by the McDougals, collapsed in 1989 at a cost to taxpayers of more than $60 million.


Man Recants Complaint Against Muslim Leader
The man whose complaint led to criminal charges last week against the Atlanta Muslim once known as H. Rap Brown said today that he did not know who shot and wounded him last month and that the police pressured him into making the identification.
The complaining witness in the case, William Miles, 22, said in an interview at his home today that he had repeatedly insisted to the police that he did not see who wounded him in the leg on July 26.
He said it was the police who first presented him with the name and photographs of Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin, the Muslim name now used by the former Mr.
Brown, who in the 1970's led the Student Non-violent Coordinating Committee.
Mr.
Miles's assertions were first reported today in The Atlanta Journal and Constitution.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A2-8 U.S.
REACTS TO REPORTS FROM IRAQ  Based on troop movements and warnings from Iraqi defectors that Saddam Hussein considered attacking Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, the Pentagon said it was sending ships and supplies to the Persian Gulf.
Many observers fear that the United States may be overreacting.
A1  A shootout at a Saddam Hussein family dinner led to defections.
A8  CHANCE RISES FOR BALKANS PEACE  News analysis: The Balkan wars aimed at carving ethnically uniform swaths of territory may now be virtually complete, and peace prospects may be stronger than ever.
A1  MEXICO CITY'S POLLUTION  Mexico City's smog is caused by leaks from millions of steel tanks containing bottled gas used for cooking and heating according to a study by an American scientist.
The findings contradict a decade of environmental policy.
A1  RUSSIA BLAMED IN AMERICAN DEATH  Relatives of an American disaster relief expert who disappeared in Chechnya in April said that he was executed by Chechen rebels who were told by Russian intelligence agents that he was a spy.
A3  BOMB IN PARIS INJURES 17  The French police said 17 people were wounded when a bomb exploded near the Arc de Triomphe in Paris.
No one took responsiblity for the blast, or for one last month that killed 7 people.
A3  Despite protests, Vietnam will put a dissident monk on trial.
A7  Managua Journal: Nicaragua's capital gets a facelift.
A2 NATIONAL A10-20, B6-7 CLINTONS' PARTNERS INDICTED  A grand jury indicted the Clintons' business partners in the Whitewater land venture and the Governor of Arkansas on 21 counts of fraud, conspiracy and making false statements in obtaining loans.
A1  INCENTIVE IN GAMBLING VOTE  Indian tribes in Washington State have put an initiative on the ballot that could pay every voter up to $100 if they approve unlimited gambling on reservations.
A1  TAP WATER IS CALLED A RISK  A study said tap water in the Corn Belt is dangerously contaminated with agricultural weed-killers that pose serious health risks.
A10  USING VOODOO AGAINST CRIMINALS  On Wednesday night, a voodoo priestess enticed Ogoun La Flambeau, a voodoo god of war and fire, to prowl the Bywater neighborhood of New Orleans and punish dope peddlers and other criminals.
A10  PARTISAN MEDICARE DEBATE  Democrats are holding meetings around the country to raise alarms about the Republicans' plans on Medicaid and Medicare.
A20  TWIST IN ATLANTA SHOOTING  The man whose complaint led to charges against the man once known as H. Rap Brown said that the police pressured him into making the identification.A18  SMOKERS AND HEART ATTACKS  British researchers reported that smokers in their 30's and 40's suffer five times as many heart attacks as nonsmokers of the same age.
A20  Simpson jurors to have a second tour of the murder scene.
A10  With Hurricane Felix weakening, tourists returned to the coast.
B6  Law D20  Middle aged and studying law.
METRO DIGEST B1 BRADLEY CONSIDERS PRESIDENCY  A day after he announced he would not run for re-election, Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey said he was considering entering the 1996 Presidential race as an independent.
A1  CONFLICT OF INTEREST CHARGES  The involvement of two top Republican officials in a fund-raising venture has drawn criticism from watchdog groups and Democratic lawmakers, who say it puts pressure on people doing business with the state to contribute money.
A1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-26  Where to go for in-line skating.
C1  Elegant bastion of good manners.
C1  For Children C12  Theater: "What You Said." C2  "Troilus and Cressida." C3  Film: "The Baby-Sitters Club." C6  "Hyenas." C6  "Jupiter's Wife." C8  Music: Frances Lucey.
C3  Alanis Morissette.
C5  Terence Trent D'Arby.
C10  Marriner at Mostly Mozart.
C14  The Foo Fighters.
C17  Dance: Young composers and choreographers at Lincoln Center.
C5  Restaurants C21  Architecture: A museum design by Steven Holl.
C18  Art: Outdoor sculptures.
C1  Art in Review C19  Art in children's books.
C24  Books: "The Electronic Republic," by Lawrence K. Grossman.
C25  Home Video D18  Sports B8-16  Baseball: Yanks face key 10-game West coast trip.
B9  Mets' Alfonzo has a herniated disk.
B11  Column: Araton on boxing B9  Lipsyte on Mantle, Seles and Tyson B9  Olympics: The story behind NBC's TV rights coup B9  Obituaries D17  Howard Koch, screenwriter.
Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials  U.S. plan for Bosnian peace.
The detective's tapes.
Parochial school models.
Letters  Bob Herbert: Just your typical myopia.
Allan Gurganus: A letter to Granddad, the tobacco farmer.
Amatzia Baram: In Iraq, the West wins.
Chronicle B2 Crossword C24


The man folks thought was Crazy Eddie is back. He seems saner.
THE television commercial looks like a Crazy Eddie's spot, but on Valium.
As the camera pans over consumer-electronics gear, a round-cheeked man outlines the store's products and services at a smooth canter, rather than a mad gallop.
Then he raises his hands, more like a shrug than a lunge, and says calmly, "Remember Willoughby's, where the focus is always on you."


U.N. Documents Inequities for Women as World Forum Nears
The last two decades have seen advances in the education and health of women around the world, yet hundreds of millions of women in both rich and poor nations are still significantly undervalued economically, denied access to political power and kept down by crippling inequalities under the law, according to a report released today.
"We hear and we say that life is unfair, but what this report shows is that life is dramatically unfair to women," said James Gustave Speth, administrator of the United Nations Development Program, which commissioned the study.


Delta Woodside Industries(DLW,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 1


Where to Go Rolling Without Rocking
AFTER work, three times a week, Patrice Pollard, a 39-year-old training coordinator, takes her 11-year-old son, Mallury, to Cove Island Park in Stamford, Conn., and with the waves of Long Island Sound and the humming of the red-and-white park tram in the background, they skate "the loop."
Mallury, wearing his black and purple "Roller Derby Streets" and white helmet, skates around the loop a little faster than his mom, but Ms.
Pollard, who now owns her second pair of in-line skates, says she's catching up.
"It seems everyone around me is getting better," says Ms.
Pollard, who has been skating for a year in what is becoming a decidedly crowded park.


Younkers Inc.(YONK,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Vietnam to Try Dissident Buddhist Monk Despite U.S. Protest
Rejecting protests by the United States and human rights groups, Vietnam has announced that the nation's most prominent dissident monk will go on trial on charges of "sabotaging religious solidarity."
The trial date for Thich Huyen Quang, 77, has not yet been announced, but foreign diplomats in Hanoi, the Vietnamese capital, said it could begin within days.


Sports of The Times; Vinny From Brockton Hits Jackpot
THE small-time fight guy learned his trade in a tough-knocks town, Brockton, Mass.
His mentor was a promoter named Sam Silverman, known around New England as Suitcase, into which he apparently stashed the contents of his office, rent-free.
This is how far back Suitcase Sam Silverman went: He respected newspaper reporters.
Feared them.


Wallace Computer Services Inc.(WCS,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 31


Mantles Unveil Organ Donor Program
The family of Mickey Mantle carried out his last wish yesterday, unveiling a new organ donor trading card with the baseball great's picture and autograph that will be passed out at major league stadiums.
"My father made this a personal issue," DANNY MANTLE said at a news conference at Baylor University Medical Center in Dallas.
"We want to keep his commitment and dream alive. There are thousands of people waiting for organs."


INSIDE
Children Die in Surf
Two children died in New Jersey in surf churned up by Hurricane Felix, which continued to drift in the Atlantic.
Articles, page B6. 17 Hurt in Paris Explosion
Seventeen people were wounded, three seriously, when a bomb exploded near the Arc de Triomphe, the police said.
Page A3.
Russia Blamed in U.S.
Death
Relatives of a missing American aid expert said that he was executed by Chechen rebels who were told by Russians that he was a spy.
Page A3.


New League Gets TV Deal and Schedule
They don't have any players yet.
But at least the minds behind the United Baseball League have some owners now.
And a television deal.
And a tentative date to start their inaugural season.
Six of the ownership groups were even on hand (Portland and Vancouver were absent).


Varity Corp.(VAT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


Art in Review
Frank Stella  Gemini G.E.L. at Joni Moisant Weyl 375 West Broadway (near Broome Street) SoHo Through Sept. 8
In 1959, when he was 23, Frank Stella was arguably the most important artist in America.
His black-and-white "pinstripe" canvases of that year, along with the notched aluminum paintings that succeeded them in 1960, provided an important model for the mathematical proportions, monochrome palette and industrial finish of Minimalism.
But Mr.
Stella's own path as a painter led him back toward compositional complexity, lush color and gestural brushwork, everything Minimalism had rejected.


Managua Journal; A Mayor Hopes a Fountain Turns Into a Landslide
Whatever charm Nicaragua's capital once may have had vanished when this city was leveled by an earthquake more than two decades ago.
Even today, downtown Managua remains a collection of ruins and vacant lots overgrown with weeds, inhabited only by a few squatters.
So when the mayor of Managua, Arnoldo Aleman, recently inaugurated a gaudy new fountain at a busy traffic circle here, it was not surprising that the project quickly became a major public attraction.
Residents of the capital now gather nightly by the dozens to gape as lights play on the bubbling spray, and ice cream and soft drink vendors hawk their refreshments.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.81
5.86
4.70
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.43
5.41
4.53
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.46
5.43
4.92
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.56
6.53
7.26
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.90
6.88
7.49
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.79
7.78
8.36
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.31
6.30
6.38
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Blue Cross &amp; Blue Shield of Ohio reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Draft-Powell Unit Files With Election Panel
Organizers of a Draft Powell committee that seeks to win the Republican Presidential nomination for Gen.
Colin L. Powell said today that they had formally filed with the Federal Election Commission.
The committee, Citizens for Colin Powell, has not been authorized by General Powell, and he has not disclosed whether he is a Republican or a Democrat.
But its filing with the election commission would let it be converted into an official campaign committee if the former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff announced his candidacy.


Avrett, Free Wins Ovaltine Account
Himmel Nutrition Inc. in New York said yesterday that it had named Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg in New York to handle advertising for its Ovaltine line of milk additives, which had been handled in-house for the last three years.
The billings were estimated at $14.5 million.


Why Mantle's Cancer Was So Aggressive
To the Editor:
Didn't Mickey Mantle go through enough before he died?
The contention that his was "the most aggressive cancer that anyone on the medical team has ever seen" (obituary, Aug. 14), a phrase repeated ad infinitum since his death, must strike fear into the hearts of most people.


Buying a Whole Town And a Death Sentence
"Hyenas" was shown as part of the 1992 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Stephen Holden's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 3, 1992.
The film -- in Wolof with English subtitles -- opens today at the Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village.
Anyone can be bought if the price is right.
That is the message of Friedrich Durrenmatt's viciously misanthropic drama "The Visit," in which a woman buys an entire town to wreak revenge on the lover who betrayed her decades earlier.
In "Hyenas," Djibril Diop Mambety's pungent film adaptation of the story, the setting has been moved from Europe to Africa.


For Children
Bicycle Paths  Liberty State Park Wolf Drive, Jersey City Recommended ages: 4 and up
Urban bicyclists are always looking for untrammeled places to pedal.
And though the bicycle path, which is a mile and a half long, at Liberty State Park is not new, the quiet park makes you feel as if you have crossed more than a state line.


Authentic Fitness Corp.(ASM,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 1


School Board Purge Continues
In a further purge of top officials hired by the disbanded Newark School Board, state officials running the district ordered suspensions with pay for James Kokkalis, director of the division of design and construction, and Connie Caponegro, assistant director of the division of human resource services.


Sculpture Not Meant to Last Forever
EVERY summer, outdoor sculptures shoot up around New York City, some as pert as garden flowers, many as drab as weeds.
They are not, for the most part, public art in the grand tradition: monumental in scale, built to endure.
Instead, gathered in groups in marginal locations and often made of ephemeral stuff, they're meant to last a season and disappear with the coming of cooler weather.
This year's works are a patchy lot, and a few have even wilted ahead of schedule.
One at Socrates Sculpture Park in Long Island City, Queens, suffered meltdown in the intense heat this month.
Another, using sheets of reflective material, has begun to crisp around the edges on Roosevelt Island.
And a tree-top piece at Long Island University in Brooklyn, batting about bravely in the breeze, has clearly seen better days.


Unlicensed Home Repair Contractors' Vehicles Seized
On the stoop of a gray, ramshackle house in Queens, Ron and Karen Wilson waited the other day for the contractor they had called to show up and replace their faulty front door.
He was 20 minutes late, but he had phoned to apologize and say he would be along soon.
"Courteous," Mr. Wilson said.


Fred's Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Microsoft Throws Stones Into Its Windows 95 Ads
The Microsoft Corporation has bought the rights to a Rolling Stones song, "Start Me Up," for use in an advertising campaign for the company's new operating system software, Windows 95.
The Financial Times reported yesterday that the company paid several million dollars for the song, considered a high price in advertising.
A spokeswoman for Microsoft said that the price was "a couple million," but declined to disclose details.


Gottschalks Inc.(GOT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


New Orleans Conjures Old Spirits Against Modern Woes
The voodoo priestess used a mix of gunpowder and old graveyard dirt to draw a magic symbol on a crossroads in the Bywater neighborhood, opening a spiritual door through which a fearsome deity could pass and save her community from the evil of crack cocaine.
For two hours on Wednesday night, as drums pounded along Piety Street and orange flames of fire-eaters and torch carriers danced in the dark, the white-gowned priestess, Sallie Ann Glassman, enticed Ogoun La Flambeau, a voodoo god of war and fire, to prowl among the rows of shotgun houses and punish the dope peddlers and other criminals.


Turtles Return to Cleaner Home
Two 8-year-old Pitman boys saw their efforts to save the turtles in the formerly polluted Alcyon Lake succeed yesterday when, with help from Governor Whitman, they put back 170 turtles that had been kept in trailers since October.
Alcyon Lake is adjacent to Lipari Landfill, among the first toxic sites cleaned up under the Federal Superfund program.


Miscellany
Poppe Tyson Advertising and Public Relations, New York, a unit of Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt, has acquired Werner Chepelsky &amp; Partners, Pittsburgh.
The terms were not disclosed.
Werner Chepelsky, which has been renamed Poppe Tyson WCP, has billings estimated at $15 million from clients like Mellon Bank, Cellular One and the Pittsburgh Penguins.


Pictures in Children's Books, From Cherubs to Divided Faces
Contemporary art seems to address an ever-narrower audience of viewers sufficiently well versed in political ideology, critical theory and art history to appreciate its subtle, ironic symbolism.
This gets pretty frustrating for viewers, and it must also be frustrating for artists yearning to reach a wider audience.
Little wonder, then, that they should be drawn to the medium of the children's book, which would seem to offer both a receptive audience and a license to be didactic.
An exhibition of "Children's Books by Artists," organized by the artist Tomie Arai for Printed Matter (a SoHo bookshop specializing in artists' books), demonstrates both the possibilities and the pitfalls awaiting artists who venture into this deceptively simple medium.
It's not necessarily obvious what will interest children, nor is it easy for artists used to challenging the limits of conventional morality to judge what's appropriate for children today.


Market Place; Corporations are on a diet kick, losing weight through spinoffs.
THE divorce rate is rising in corporate America.
Some of the country's biggest and best-known companies -- including W. R. Grace, Sprint, Hilton, Host Marriott and the granddaddy of all conglomerates, ITT -- are breaking up, and of their own volition.
They are taking one or more of their businesses and turning them over to their shareholders, in what Wall Street calls spinoffs.


A Rival Offer for a Chunk of Rockefeller Center
Tishman Speyer Properties L.P., a large New York City real estate development company, offered yesterday to buy a large chunk of Rockefeller Center and the $1.3 billion mortgage on the trophy property, which is held by a real estate investment trust.
The offer comes a day after an investor group led by the Chicago real estate magnate Sam Zell made a play for control of the 12-building center in midtown Manhattan.
It offered to pay $250 million for a 50 percent stake in a new company that would jointly own the mortgage along with the existing shareholders of the current mortgage holder, Rockefeller Center Properties Inc.


Dew Point Is to Blame as New York Swelters, Experts Say
Right around the time it reached 90 degrees yesterday in Central Park, Glenn Behrmann, an exporter, was seeking relief the same way he has for three decades: sitting in a crowded, foggy steam room in the East Village where the temperatures climbed to 190.
"This way, when I leave to go into the heat outside, it feels better because it's not nearly as hot as it is in here," said Mr.
Behrmann, 45, who had spent two hours sweltering in the radiant heat room at the Russian and Turkish Baths on East 10th Street.


Marriner Conducts Mozart and Beethoven
Perhaps listeners can be forgiven for merging Sir Neville Marriner and the Academy of St.
Martin-in-the-Fields into a single persona.
Since 1959, when Mr.
Marriner founded the group, he and his ensemble have made hundreds of recordings that have become staples of classical radio.
Still, a woman in the row behind me on Tuesday evening at Avery Fisher Hall took this identification to an unusual extreme.
When her companion asked, "What orchestra is this?," she replied: "St. Marriner-in-the-Field. They're very well known."
The very well known London ensemble and its knighted, if not quite sainted, conductor are currently making the rounds of American summer festivals, and they opened the final week of the Mostly Mozart Festival with two concerts devoted primarily to Beethoven.
Of particular interest were the two pianists Mr.
Marriner had in tow.
Till Fellner, a 23-year-old Austrian, played Mozart's Piano Concerto No. 9 (K. 271) on Monday evening.
And Imogen Cooper, a more firmly established English pianist best known to American listeners through her recordings (including some with Alfred Brendel), played the Beethoven Piano Concerto No. 2 (Op. 19) on Tuesday.


Regulators to Rub Elbows With Contributors to Pataki
The invitations for the political fund-raising event came with an offer and a price: Spend Friday afternoon at Saratoga Race Course with Gov.
George E. Pataki, for either $250 or $1,000 per person.
But those invitations also carried a subtle prod for the corporate officials and horse-racing people being invited to contribute.
Included on the printed roster of fund-raising chairmen were two senior government officials whose jobs are to regulate or grant benefits to many of the people on the guest list.


Mrs. Clinton Should Sit Out Beijing Meeting; A Fitting Site?
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 11 Huairou Journal is both entertaining and enlightening.
Rendering Huairou from the Chinese as "soft bosom," humorous as it may seem, is a poor choice of words.
It demeans the ladies who will descend upon Huairou next month.
Literally, Huairou means "to pacify or to appease." It is a time-honored ploy used by ancient Chinese rulers to cope with barbarians, especially those marauding hordes on the borders.
A famous example involves the marriage of a Tang princess to a Tibetan monarch during the seventh century.
Then, Tibet was a powerful but also troublesome state for China.


Bronx Agency Vetoed
Gov.
George E. Pataki announced yesterday that he had vetoed a bill that would have given the Bronx its own industrial development authority, angering local politicians who had wanted to give the borough a measure of economic independence.


Martin L. Paich, 70, Conductor-Arranger
Marty Paich, a conductor, composer, orchestrator and arranger, died on Saturday at his home in Santa Ynez, Calif.
He was 70.
The cause was colon cancer, said Mark Hartley, his manager.


2 Brothers Are Drowned In High Surf
Two young brothers who were playing knee-deep in the water off Point Pleasant Beach, N.J., drowned last night when waves crashed onto them and sucked them into the ocean, the authorities said.
At the time of the accident, waves breaking on the shore reached as high as 10 feet, the United States Coast Guard said.
Hafiz Abdul-Majeed, 11, of Irvington, N.J, was pronounced dead at Point Pleasant Hospital, and his brother, Jaleel, 13, had not been recovered and was presumed dead.


Kestner Winds Up on Top After Playoff at Met Open
The $90,000 Met Open came down to a three-hole aggregate playoff this afternoon between two of the area's top players.
The victor was Darrell Kestner, primarily because Bruce Zabriski double-bogeyed the second hole of the playoff.
Kestner won the three-hole aggregate, 12 to 14.
Kestner and Zabriski shot 73 and 71, respectively, at Atlantic Golf Club, which is 6,940 yards.
The two players were tied at eight-under 208 after three rounds of the tournament, sponsored by MetLife.


A Magna Carta for Taxi Passengers
Two hundred and five years after New York State ratified the original Bill of Rights, New York City's cab riders are getting their very own, guaranteeing such things as air-conditioning on demand and a clean trunk.
But an unscientific survey yesterday indicated that when knowledgeable rider meets recalcitrant cabby, there is a good chance that the new Taxi Rider's Bill of Rights won't be worth the plastic its printed on.


Art in Review
'First Impressions' Photography by Emigre Artists From the Former Soviet Union  Lower East Side Tenement Museum 66 Allen Street Through Thursday
The New York Association for New Americans, which is helping to resettle 20 artists from the former Soviet Union, asked them to take photographs reflecting their experiences in the New World.
Since they had been unable to bring their cameras with them, they were given 35-millimeter disposable cameras, donated by Kodak.
This doesn't seem extraordinarily generous.
Furthermore, the disposable cameras, with their blurry, wide-angle lenses, tended to impose a degree of stylistic uniformity on the six artists whose work is included in this exhibition.Despite the artists' faraway origins, most of the photographs here are composed in the wide-angle style defined in the 1960's by American photographers like Lee Friedlander and Garry Winogrand.
These photographers took the defects of the wide-angle lens -- the exaggeration of diagonals, the disproportion in size between near and far objects -- and made them the basis of a new kind of composition emphasizing both the complexity of the urban environment and the prominence of the photographer's place within it.


High Surf Kills 2 Boys
Two young brothers who were playing knee deep in the water off Point Pleasant Beach, N.J., drowned last night when waves crashed onto them and sucked them into the ocean, the authorities said.
Waves breaking on the shore reached as high as 10 feet, the Coast Guard said.
Hafiz Abdul-Majeed, 11, of Irvington, N.J, drowned, and his brother, Jaleel, 13, was missing and presumed dead.
Article, page B6.


Tyson and His Trainer Share Common History
It will not be enough for Mike Tyson to merely knock out Peter McNeeley on Saturday night.
"Mike can beat the top fighters today," said his trainer, Jay Bright.
"But I want him to look impressive."


America's Plan for Bosnian Peace
Croatian military gains and a newly energized American diplomacy have combined to create an opening for a negotiated Bosnian peace.
The odds remain long, but the effort is worth making.
Despite criticism yesterday by Senator Robert Dole, President Clinton is right to try.
In a lightning offensive two weeks ago, Croatian Government troops reshaped the Balkan battlefield.
They evicted 50,000 rebel Serbian soldiers and 150,000 Serbian civilians from the Krajina region of western Croatia, bordering Bosnia.
That left the larger part of Serbian holdings in Bosnia virtually surrounded by numerically superior Croatian and Bosnian troops.


CHRONICLE
KEN ARETSKY, who parted company in March with the "21" Club, where he had been the chairman and chief executive for eight years, is joining another venerable New York restaurant.
This week he bought Christ Cella, the 69-year-old steakhouse at 160 East 46th Street.


CHRONICLE
From one near candidate to another.
There should no be lack of conversational topics when MARIO M. CUOMO goes on the air tomorrow at 9 A.M. for his weekly radio show on WABC-AM.
The former Governor's guest will be Senator BILL BRADLEY, the New Jersey Democrat who announced on Wednesday that he would not seek re-election next year and suggested at a news conference yesterday that he might seek the Presidency as an independent.
"I've urged him to run for President more than once," said Mr.
Cuomo, who nearly sought the nomination himself four years ago.
"Most of all I want to say to him, 'Bill, tell me you're not going away, whether I like it or not that you'll be walking out of the Senate.' "


Cisco Systems Inc.(CSCO,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 30


Elegant Bastion Of Gentility In the Poconos
THERE was terror in our hearts when we walked into the pine-paneled lobby of Skytop Lodge, a grand 1920's Poconos resort brimming with people in corsages and other winsomely extinct species.
"Gentlemen wear coats after 6:30," read the sign posted outside the dining room.
"Bermuda shorts, tailored slacks, buttoned collared sport shirts and other modest sports attire may be worn until 6:30."


The Relevance of the Detective's Tapes
O.
J.
Simpson's defense team is demanding that the jury hear damaging evidence that Detective Mark Fuhrman, a key prosecution witness, is a racist disposed to harass and frame people, especially blacks.
That evidence is contained in a series of taped interviews that Mr.
Fuhrman granted to an aspiring screenwriter.
From what is now known about the detective's taped comments, they seem clearly germane to the trial and ought to be admitted into evidence, notwithstanding their highly inflammatory content.
If the tapes show that Mr.
Fuhrman repeatedly used racial, ethnic, religious and sexual slurs, as has been reported, they will surely anger many a juror, especially those on the mostly black Simpson jury.
But that will hardly constitute an improper playing of "the race card," as Prosecutor Marcia Clark argues.
Rather, it will be the inescapable result of introducing evidence that the detective may have perjured himself in previous testimony and may have a predisposition to plant evidence to frame a suspect.


Russian Role Seen in Aid Worker's Death
Relatives of an American disaster relief expert who disappeared in Chechnya in April said today that he was executed on April 14 by Chechen rebels who were told by Russian intelligence agents that he was a spy.
"Let it be known to all nations and humanitarian organizations that Russia was responsible for the death of one of the world's great humanitarians," Christopher R. Cuny said grimly at a news conference in Moscow to announce the end of his family's search for his brother, Frederick C. Cuny.


Bradley Weighs Presidential Bid
A day after announcing that he would not run for re-election to the Senate, Bill Bradley said he might enter the 1996 Presidential race as an independent.
He said he had not resigned from the Democratic Party but declared that he had a better chance of reaching a disaffected populace as an outsider.  [ Page A1. ]


Dole Urges End Of New Peace Effort
Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, urged the Clinton Administration today to call off its Balkan peace effort, which he characterized as a "short term, piecemeal approach."
Senator Dole, a Republican presidential candidate, said the Administration's plan to redraw the map of Bosnia and lift economic sanctions against Yugoslavia, which includes Serbia, is overly generous to the Serbian President.


Cinergi Pictures Entertainment Inc.(CINE,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Manhattan Man Charged With Rapes in Harlem Park
A man raped two women hours apart yesterday in an upper Manhattan park but was captured after he tried to carry out a third attack -- on a woman who fled to safety, the authorities said.
The man charged in the attacks, James Harrison, 38, who gave his address as 75 Water Street in lower Manhattan, could be a suspect in other, unsolved rapes in the area, said a police investigator, who spoke only on condition of anonymity.


Injury String Continues for Jet Linebacker
Marvin Jones, the Jets' ill-fated middle linebacker, will be sidelined at least two weeks with a sprained right ankle.
But Bob Reese, the team trainer, did not rule out a return before the season opener on Sept. 3 against the Dolphins in Miami.
Jones was hurt near the end of Wednesday's practice when someone fell on his foot after a tackle.
He screamed, seemingly as much from fright and frustration as from pain, and even today he said, "I don't know the whole extent of it."


Abortion Foes Reach Accord On Adoption
The leaders of a nascent movement that seeks to bridge the bitter differences between advocates and opponents of abortion rights have issued their first public policy recommendation, urging that government and the private sector encourage the wider acceptance of adoption.
"When adoption is a positive, productive and respected option, it enhances the choices available to pregnant women by making birth a more viable choice," says a policy paper that will be issued on Friday by the Steering Committee of the Common Ground Network for Life and Choice, a loose-knit group organized in St.
Louis in 1992.


Giants' Quiet Ironman Anchors an Ailing Line
Lance Smith's idol is St.
Louis Rams offensive lineman Jackie Slater.
Slater is now in his 20th season and is 41 years old.
If anyone has the chance to play and draw Social Security at the same time, it is Slater.
No offensive lineman in the history of the game has played as long as he has.
That is something that Smith can appreciate.
Slater was a third-round pick out of Jackson State, and when he was beginning his career in 1976, Smith was in junior high school.
Even though Smith is having a great camp with the Giants and has been one of the most consistent players in the league since the mid-1980's, his career doesn't come close to Slater's.


When the Museum Itself Is the Artwork
Now here's another major building by an important New York architect that you won't get to see, unless your travel plans include Finland.
But if you get over to the Urban Center on Madison Avenue in the next few weeks, at least you can check out drawings and models depicting Steven Holl's design for the Helsinki Museum of Contemporary Art.
The design, the winner of a 1993 international competition, is Mr.
Holl's first for an art museum.
Roughly one and a half times the size of the Whitney Museum of American Art in Manhattan, the Museum of Contemporary Art will occupy a prominent site in Helsinki's civic center, near Eliel Saarinen's train station and Alvar Aalto's Finlandia Hall.
And Mr.
Holl's irregularly shaped museum, which will exhibit art made since 1960, seeks to bring some formal coherence to the surrounding cityscape.


Just Your Typical Myopia
This week's cover story in New York magazine is an egregious exercise in stereotyping and willful blindness.
"This is the typical New Yorker," the headline says.
That's followed by a subhead: "Actually, there is no one typical New Yorker. There are four, all living very different lives in four very different New Yorks. Which are you?"


Accounts
Infoseek Corp., Santa Clara, Calif., to Winkler McManus Advertising, San Francisco, as the first agency to handle interactive advertising for the information retrieval service.
The billings were estimated at more than $1 million.
Xpander Pak Inc., Glen Allen, Va., to Sawyer Riley Compton, Atlanta, as the first agency to handle consumer and trade advertising and public relations for the maker of padded envelopes.
The billings were estimated at $1 million.


Council Approves Plans For Pathmark in Queens
After weeks of intense public debate, the City Council yesterday approved plans to build a large Pathmark supermarket in Queens, preserving a controversial deal struck with a Councilwoman under which the company agreed to donate more than $400,000 to other merchants and to youth groups in the area.
The deal was bitterly opposed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who said the $400,000 fund set a bad precedent that could discourage future business development.


International Briefs; Three Companies Seek German TV Standard
Deutsche Telekom A.G. said it planned to form a media services company with Bertelsmann A.G. and C.L.T.
Multi Media of Luxembourg that would replace a similar venture vetoed last year by the European Commission.
The aim of Multimedia Betriebsgesellschaft, or MMBG, would be to establish the industry standard in Germany for television set-top decoder boxes that would unscramble satellite and cable signals, authorize pay-per-view and eventually steer interactive television.
If a single standard can be established, the company that controls it would have an enormous advantage as Germany's television market embraces digital transmission and all of the programming and marketing of services and products it promises.


Fivefold Increase in Heart Risk for Some Smokers
Smokers in their 30's and 40's suffer five times as many heart attacks as nonsmokers in the same age group, researchers from Britain are reporting in what they say is the largest study of heart attack survivors.
The risk of heart attacks for young adult smokers is about double what had previously been believed, said the researchers from Oxford University, who conducted the study in Britain.
The study involved 46,000 people and extended findings from many earlier studies that showed that smoking increased the risk of heart attacks in older people.


Dresser Industries(DI,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


Trevino and Seniors on L.I.
Lee Trevino will be defending his title when the $800,000 Northville Long Island Classic gets under way today at the Meadow Brook Club in Jericho, the site of this Senior PGA Tour stop for the last eight years.
Trevino captured last year's 54-hole event by seven shots over Jim Colbert after rounds of 66-69-65, with his 65 tying the course record.
Trevino is playing so well again this year that he is the leading money-winner among the seniors.


BRADLEY WEIGHING INDEPENDENT RACE FOR WHITE HOUSE
A day after announcing that he would not run for re-election, Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey said today that he was considering entering the 1996 Presidential race as an independent, declaring that he had a better chance of reaching a disaffected populace as an outsider.
Mr.
Bradley, a Democrat, maintained that he had not made any firm decisions on his future, but he again said both parties had failed to address everyday concerns of working people.
He said he had spoken on Wednesday night with Gen.
Colin L. Powell, who is often mentioned as a Presidential contender, and had also tried to telephone Ross Perot to discuss his plans.


Devils Put Albelin and Dean Back in Fold
The Stanley Cup champion Devils said yesterday that they have re-signed defensemen TOMMY ALBELIN and KEVIN DEAN.
Details were not released.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  Arkansas Electric Cooperative is selling $124 million of secured facility bonds due in 2008 through Smith Barney Inc.
The noncallable bonds include a sinking-fund provision, which enables the issuer to buy back the bonds early.
The bonds, priced at par to yield 7.33 percent, are rated A3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A+ by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $45 million of notes due in 2000 through Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
Callable in a year, the issue is priced at par to yield 7.155 percent.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Ivanisevic Advances
Goran Ivanisevic used his blistering serve and his new-found confidence on hard courts to achieve a 6-4, 3-6, 6-3 victory over Brett Steven in the third round of the RCA Championships yesterday in Indianapolis.
The Croatian, seeded No. 2, had 19 aces in eliminating the 15th-seeded Steven.
Ivanisevic is 37-16 this season but only 9-6 on hard courts. (AP)


Drop in Yen's Value Heartens Japanese Exporters
A decade ago, Japan began coping with the effects of the Plaza Accord, an agreement reached by the major industrial nations that caused the yen's value against the dollar to double in only two years.
The agreement, still seared in the nation's memory, made Japanese exports less competitive and began an exodus of factories to less expensive sites abroad.
So perhaps it is no surprise that Japan now feels as if a giant weight has been lifted from its shoulders by what some analysts are calling a reverse Plaza Accord -- the concerted intervention in the currency markets this week by the central banks of the United States, Japan and Germany that has helped weaken the yen and strengthen the dollar to its highest levels since February.


Whalers Give Turcotte a New Contract
Center DARREN TURCOTTE, one of the Hartford Whalers' top scorers last season, signed a new multiyear contract yesterday.
Turcotte ranked second on the Whalers in scoring last season with 35 points.
He had 17 goals and 18 assists.
The Whalers acquired him from the Rangers in November 1992.
Turcotte has scored 303 points and collected 209 penalty minutes in 391 games spanning seven seasons.
Terms of the new contract were not released. (AP)


Marco Wachter, 59, Clothing Designer
Marco Wachter, designer of a men's wear line for Mondo Inc. of New York, of which he was a founding partner, died last Saturday in Key Biscayne, Fla., where he was on vacation.
He was 59 and lived in Manhattan and Florence, Italy.
The cause was a heart attack, said Ben Greszes, with whom he founded Mondo, an Italian sportswear company, in 1984.


In Balkans: Power Shift
The wars of Yugoslavia's destruction have essentially involved violent shifts of population aimed at carving ethnically uniform swaths of territory from the ruins of a mixed society.
Because that destructive process is now virtually complete, ended by the Serbian exodus this month from Croatia, the prospects for peace may be stronger now than at any time in the last four years.
The grim fact of the wholesale movement of people, European officials say, constitutes a central impetus behind the new American approach that brought Assistant Secretary of State Richard Holbrooke to Belgrade today for talks with the Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic.
There was agreement, Mr.
Milosevic said, on the need to "achieve as soon as possible peace and stability in the Balkans."


Bomb Near Arc de Triomphe Wounds 17
Seventeen people were wounded when a bomb exploded near the Arc de Triomphe today, the police said.
Investigators combing the site after the blast said the bomb, placed in a trash can, apparently was a butane gas canister filled with nails and bolts.
Three of the victims suffered serious wounds, doctors said.


Cantrex Group reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A Legislator Back Home: Medicare Is Hot Topic
"Lives are at stake," said a hospital administrator.
"Frightening," said the nursing homes spokesman.


A Modest Delicatessen Finds Fame, Immodestly
BOMB'S AWAY COUNTRY STORE was a modest sandwich shop, one of those small brown barns that park themselves between the auto glass stores and gas stations on county roads, hoping to snag passing drivers.
To make its point, a sign on the side of the building, about as big as the sun, announced: EZ-IN-EZ-OUT DELI.
But the store just couldn't attract customers.
The owner, Rich Clark, spent a year and a half watching cars go by.
Then he put up another, smaller sign: "Please take notice: Our dancers are nude Monday-Saturday, 11:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. We also have a topless waitress. Do not enter if you are offended by nudity."


Bombay Co.(BBA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


An Irish Soprano In Debut
Because the question of why things work (or don't) is as interesting as whether they do, critics often find themselves analyzing as much as evaluating.
Frances Lucey, an Irish soprano who made her American debut at the Frick Collection on Wednesday afternoon, provided a fascinating analytical problem.
In groups of English, German, French and Spanish songs, with a touch of Gaelic in her closing group of Irish folk songs, Ms.
Lucey produced a sound that was neither huge nor conventionally sumptuous yet had a distinctiveness and allure that kept a listener riveted.
Several qualities are balanced sympathetically in Ms.
Lucey's sound.
Her timbre is bright and tightly focused, and she seems most comfortable in the middle and upper ranges.
But she has the artistry to make a compact coloristic palette seem quite flexible.
Her vibrato is in the French style: quick but not wide, and judiciously applied.
And the open vowel sounds of her Irish accent gave her German and Spanish (but not her French) a slightly exotic cast, although her diction was always perfectly clear.


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day on Wednesday about the potential for shares of SGS-Thomson Microelectronics N.V. referred incorrectly to the ownership of the company.
It is a publicly traded company controlled by two consortiums of French and Italian shareholders; it is not a joint venture between Thomson S.A. of France and Istituto per la Ricostruzione Industriale of Italy.
Those two companies are among the largest shareholders of SGS-Thomson.


Huskey Called Up As Alfonzo Rests Back
Edgardo Alfonzo's season is not over. Yet.
Dr.
Frank Camissa, a Manhattan spine specialist, yesterday confirmed the diagnosis made by the Mets' team doctor, David Altchek, that Alfonzo has a herniated disk in his lower back.


Women and Power


A Good Girl Getting Good and Mad
Alanis Morissette has two voices.
One is a good girl's mezzo-soprano, the voice of acquiescence and dutiful nurturing; it can open out to a countryish croon.
The second is a pinched rasp on its way to a shriek; it's the enraged voice that appears when the good girl has taken all she can stand and starts to fight back.
Plenty of listeners identify with that anger.
In "You Oughta Know," the hit that has carried Ms.
Morissette's album "Jagged Little Pill" (Maverick Records) into the Top 10, she lashes out, snarling at a lover who left her, "I'm here to remind you of the mess you left when you went away." At Tramps on Wednesday night, the sold-out house cheered at the song's first drumbeat, and high female voices sang the entire first verse before Ms.
Morissette took up the song.
"You're going to put me out of a job," she happily chided.


Mayor Asks Hospitals Panel for a Supplement on Care for the Poor
Responding to criticism from Claire Shulman, the Queens Borough President, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday asked his panel recommending the dismantling of the city hospital system to prepare a supplement explaining how poor patients would be treated and who would pay for it.
Acknowledging that the report had not adequately discussed the question, the Mayor said: "The report does address that, but it doesn't address it as one single subject, and it doesn't put emphasis on that. It could use a good deal of separate elaboration."


Hussein Family Dinner: Politics and Guns
A quarrel at family dinner that led to gunfire was the crisis that led President Saddam Hussein's daughters and their husbands to flee Iraq, according to Saudi newspaper accounts and reports from Iraqi opposition figures.
The dinner, on Aug. 7, was called to discuss the worsening economic and security situation of Iraq.
It ended in shooting that left six bodyguards dead and a half-brother of President Hussein, Watban Ibrahim al-Tikriti, seriously injured, according to a front-page account today in Asharq al-Awsat, a Saudi newspaper.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  Major League Baseball  ARIZONA DIAMONDBACKS -- Signed a two-year affiliation agreement with Lethbridge of the Pioneer League.


Corrections
An article yesterday about surfing at Rockaway Beach in Queens misspelled the surname of one surfer, a New York City firefighter, in some references in some editions.
He is Robert Partano, not Portano.


J. Walter Thompson Gets Honeywell Bid
The Honeywell Environmental Air Control division of Honeywell Inc. in Hagerstown, Md., said yesterday that it had selected J. Walter Thompson Chicago, part of the WPP Group, to handle its account, with billings estimated at $10 million.
For the last two years, Richardson, Myers &amp; Donofrio in Baltimore had handled the account.
Thompson Chicago was awarded the account after a two-month review that also included W. B. Doner &amp; Company in Baltimore and the Martin Agency in Richmond, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies.


The Reason Celebrities Join the Call for Justice
To the Editor:
"The Case That Brought Back Radical Chic" (Week in Review, Aug. 13) implies that calling for a retrial for Mumia Abu-Jamal, the black journalist-activist convicted of murder, is linked to celebrity support.
Radical chic is a phrase that diminishes the reality of a provocative and landmark court case.
Radical chic is what the news media tend to cover.
It has nothing to do with a man on death row who seeks justice.


Red Sox Win in Ninth To Build Lead to 10 1/2
Red Sox 4, Angels 3
Lee Tinsley doubled home the tiebreaking run in the ninth inning last night to lead Boston to its 14th victory in 15 games in a showdown between American League division leaders at California.


Let Careless Climbers Pay for Their Rescue
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 15 news article on the hazards of climbing Washington State's Mount Ranier illustrates the dilemma of preserving the desirable human challenge of the effort while carrying the cost of rescuing those who find themselves in trouble through such activities.
I would certainly not want to see the National Park Service prevent qualified climbers from accepting such challenges, nor would it be desirable to see the process of assessing "qualification" become overbureaucratized.


Yanks Need To Lessen Distractions In California
The Yankees had pleaded with everyone and preached among themselves to finally focus on the baseball in this twisting, turning season.
Let the games begin dominating the discussions.
Let the hits command the headlines.
Let them bury the distractions beneath their blankets.
Perhaps the Yankees should be careful what they wish for.
Maybe they need another controversy to ignite them because the spotlight has shifted to the field and the Yanks have faltered during one of the most pivotal periods of the season.
Frustrating losses, not George or Darryl, have become the new distraction for the team that is hesitant to embrace the wild card.


Challenges for a Troupe Of Fast-Thinking Actors
Listen to people leaving a performance of Chicago City Limits: they tend to talk about the extravagant tests they might put the actors through the next time around.
That is an unusual tribute, especially for a company that has been doing improvisations for 16 years.
"What You Said," the group's new show, has a few dull moments in its written sketches.
But even some of these rehearsed scenes will remind you of this company's parent, Second City, when it was at its height 35 years ago in Chicago.
Especially a 10-second blackout lampoon of nudity in "N.Y.P.D. Blue," and an only slightly longer one in which a sky-high mob of Deadheads has a very confusing time trying to remember, from phrase to phrase, who it is they are mourning.


Alliance Comm. reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Homeless In the Park, And Telling Her Story
"Jupiter's Wife" was broadcast on the Cinemax cable channel on June 21.
Following are excerpts from Walter Goodman's review, which appeared in The New York Times on June 21.
The film opens today at the Quad Cinema, 13th Street west of Fifth Avenue, Greenwich Village.
So you've wondered how that apparently homeless person who catches your eye got that way, but you've never had the nerve to ask?
Well, Michel Negroponte had the nerve, and, since he is also a documentary maker, you can accompany him on his journey of discovery.


Times Appoints 3 To Circulation Jobs
Three senior executive appointments in the circulation department of The New York Times were announced yesterday by William L. Pollak, executive vice president for circulation.
Charles E. Shelton, 49, was named vice president for distribution.
He will oversee development of delivery from the newspaper's printing plant under construction in College Point, Queens, and from planned new printing operations in the Boston and Washington areas, as well as national wholesale and third-party distribution.
Mr.
Shelton had been vice president for circulation sales.


Three Agencies Form Partnership
Katz Dochtermann &amp; Epstein in New York is joining with Grapho Marketing and Communications in Rome and Hammerstein, Holtzweiler &amp; Associates in Frankfurt to form an international agency partnership specializing in advertising and promotions for gourmet foods.
The terms were not disclosed.
The three agencies have already completed international ad and promotional projects for clients including Pecorino Romano cheese and Prosciutto di Parma.


Hayes Wheels International Inc.(HAY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
Comments at Fed Point To No Change in Rates  The Federal Reserve's interest-rate policy committee appears likely to leave rates unchanged at its meeting next Tuesday.
Senior Fed officials expressed satisfaction this week with the current economic outlook.
Lawrence B. Lindsey and Edward W. Kelley Jr., Fed governors, said in interviews that they were pleased with the economy's direction.
Mr.
Even more of a pleasant surprise were Dell's strong gross profit margins, which increased to 21.8 percent, compared with 21.4 percent in the first quarter of this year.  [ D4. ] Russian Hacker Cited at Citibank  A hacker in St.
Petersburg, Russia, penetrated Citibank's computers and stole $2.8 million from corporate accounts in New York, United States officials told a British court.
Valdimir Levin, 34, a mathematician, was said to have electronically transferred the money to bank accounts in California and Israel.  [ D6. ] Net Up at Deere and Navistar  Deere and Navistar International posted higher earnings, but Wall Street was unimpressed, focusing more on signs that the companies' markets were weakening.
Deere said fiscal third-quarter earnings rose 14.2 percent to $180.1 million, or $2.07 a share.
Navistar's earnings jumped nearly 95 percent to $39 million, or 43 cents a share.  [ D4. ] Inquiry Into Psychiatric Centers  Community Psychiatric Centers said it was the subject of a whistle-blower lawsuit that has led to a Federal investigation of its billing practices.
It closed up 3.49 points, to 1,029.24.
The S.&amp; P. index fell.  [ D6. ] Davis Polk Lands RJR, Again  The law firm Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell lost RJR Nabisco as a longtime client after the Kohlberg Kravis Roberts takeover, but in a highly unusual arrangement, one of the law firm's partners is now serving as RJR's general counsel.  [ D20. ] Crazy Eddie Pitchman Is Back  Jerry Carroll, the man who made those Crazy Eddie commercials so famous, is back doing ads for another consumer electronics company, but this time he's being a lot quieter.
Mr.
Carroll, 48, is appearing in a distinctly low-wattage spot for Willoughby's, his first for a consumer-electronics store since 1992.
Advertising.  [ D5. ] Microsoft to Use Stones' Song  Microsoft has paid some $2 million for the rights to the Rolling Stones' song "Start Me Up" for use in an advertising campaign for its new Windows 95 software.  [ D5. ]


New Face at New Jersey Transit
After two and a half years as Elizabeth's police director, Mary Rabadeau is resigning to become police chief of New Jersey Transit on Oct. 2.
Ms.
Rabadeau said she would draw on her experience in Elizabeth to improve cooperation between the New Jersey Transit police and municipal police departments around the state to protect people who are commuting.
"The criminals had better watch out," she said.


Extending Coverage to Disabled
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman signed into law yesterday a measure that requires insurance companies that provide Medigap coverage for the elderly on Medicare to extend that coverage to disabled people age 50 and over, The Associated Press reported.
Medicare, the Federal health insurance program, generally covers the retired elderly but also provides medical coverage to disabled people and to people who need regular treatments like kidney dialysis.
Medigap is private insurance coverage, regulated by the state, that Medicare clients can buy to cover the costs that the Government program does not pay.


Terry Miller, 47, Photographer And Chronicler of the Village
Terry Miller, who turned his love of the theater, his devotion to Greenwich Village and his fondness for obscure facts into an eclectic, if hand-to-mouth, career as a writer, photographer, collector, archivist, researcher and historian, died on Tuesday at the Rivington House Nursing Home in Manhattan.
He was 47.
His family said the cause was complications from AIDS.


The Pros and Cons Of Call-In Democracy
THE ELECTRONIC REPUBLIC Reshaping Democracy in the Information Age  By Lawrence K. Grossman  290 pages.
A 20th Century Fund Book/Viking.
Among Newt Gingrich's first acts as Speaker of the House this year was the unveiling of a vast new electronic archive named Thomas (after that great avatar of direct democracy, Thomas Jefferson), which would make every bill submitted to Congress and every speech made in the House or Senate immediately available to users of the Internet.
"There is a pervasive cynicism in the culture of Washington," he declared.
"What this is going to do is get information beyond the cynicism of the elite."


Mrs. Clinton Should Sit Out Beijing Meeting
To the Editor:
"Join the Women in Beijing" (editorial, Aug. 11) suggests that it is appropriate for the First Lady, Hillary Rodham Clinton, to lead our official delegation to the United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women.
While I agree we should have a high-powered delegation at the conference, the presence of the First Lady in Beijing would be a boost to the repressive Chinese regime and a setback for those brave dissidents who speak out for freedom.


MicroAge Inc.(MICA,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 30


Howard Koch, a Screenwriter For 'Casablanca,' Dies at 93
Howard Koch, a Hollywood screenwriter who won an Academy Award as one of the authors of the film "Casablanca," died yesterday at Kingston Hospital in Kingston, N.Y.
He was 93 and lived in Woodstock, N.Y.
In a long, diverse career, Mr.
Koch wrote plays as well as screenplays, was the author of Orson Welles's radio adaptation of "The War of the Worlds" and wrote several books.
But the single defining moment of his life was his collaboration with Julian and Philip Epstein on "Casablanca." Wherever movies are taught, seen and enjoyed, Mr.
Koch and his writing partners are quoted.


Croats Bid Tearful Farewell To Serb-Held City in Bosnia
At the Rock coffee bar, their favorite hangout in downtown Banja Luka, Sanda Svetinovic, 19, said good-bye to her friends last night.
Through their tears, the nine young women expressed the hope that they would see each other again.
They were Serbs, Croats and Muslims. "They were my best friends," said Ms. Svetinovic.


In Middle Age and Taking Up Law
Barbara Griff is living the dream life of the young, ambitious and hip.
The energetic law student goes for a mile-and-a-half jog at 6:30 every morning, has a summer job at a prestigious law firm and lives in a Greenwich Village loft that she and a male companion have decorated with modern sculptures.
"This has got to be the best period in my life," she said one afternoon in early July.
"It is this wonderful feeling of moving on to another plateau and another space."


Home Holdings Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Corrections
A front-page picture caption about Senator Bradley's announcement misspelled the first name of his daughter in some copies.
She is Theresa Anne Bradley.


Patterson Dental Co.(PDCO,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 29


Absorption Within a Fidgety Context
The American Dance Festival and its Young Choreographers and Composers program came to the Lincoln Center Out of Doors festival on Wednesday afternoon with a revelation or two about context and collaboration.
Steve Gross makes intimate dances that look best, one might expect, with the kind of framing provided by a formal theater space.
But an excerpt from his rather cutely titled "Doin' Time, Thinkin' About Adam and Eve" fared best of the three pieces on the festival's outdoor stage.
Airplanes, honking cars and seat-changing audience members didn't have a chance in the face of the duet's intensity of focus and the simplicity of the dance and its score by Nana Simopoulos.
Equally absorbing were the ways the music supported and heightened the fairly complex emotions of a disaffected but needy Adam and Eve, played by Mr.
Gross and RoseAnne Spradlin.


U.N. Warns Serbs on Threats to Enclaves
Formally imposing a change of rules intended to increase protection to hundreds of thousands of Bosnians living under the threat of Serbian artillery, the United Nations told Bosnian Serb leaders today that it will retaliate aggressively with NATO air strikes in the event of attacks or the threat of attacks on the four remaining Muslim "safe areas" in Bosnia.
Serbian officers were also told that from now on retaliation could take place anywhere and could be carried out on a much larger scale than before.
With the warning, the culmination of policy decisions made by NATO members at meetings in London and Brussels last month, the United Nations appeared to enhance its protection considerably.


College Woes and a Lack of Desire Have U.S. Seeking a Few Good Men
John Roethlisberger of Minnesota won his fourth United States gymnastics all-around title in the last five years tonight, extending the lead he had after compulsories by more than 2 points.
Roethlisberger, known as Mr. Consistency finished with a final score of 113.42.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the 33d annual New York Film Festival at Lincoln Center misstated the festival's opening and closing dates.
It runs from Sept. 29 through Oct. 15, not from Sept. 23 through Oct. 6.


Parochial School Models
Warning that the New York City school system is on the brink of collapse, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani offers parochial schools as the model for salvation.
Mr.
Giuliani, who attended Bishop Loughlin High School in Brooklyn, one of the city's best Catholic schools, is entitled to a favorable opinion of parochial education, but his comparison to the public schools is misplaced.
The two systems are simply not comparable.
Mr.
Giuliani misses the mark by failing to recognize the broader mission of public schools and the need for thoughtful and even costly solutions to alleviate their current plight.


International Briefs; Hoechst Profit Up By 96% in First Half
The German chemical producer Hoechst A.G. said yesterday that its pretax profit rose 96 percent in the first half of 1995 to 2.13 billion marks, or $1.44 billion, mainly as a result of gains in its chemicals and plastics units.


Wilson McKerrow, Child Advocate, 89
Wilson D. McKerrow, a leader in social work who spent his career working to protect abused and neglected children, died on Aug. 10 in Chapel Hill, N.C.
He was 89.
Mr.
McKerrow retired as executive director in 1972 after 32 years with the Brooklyn Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children.
During those years, he introduced innovative programs for the care, rehabilitation and schooling of troubled youths.


Budd Canada reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Surfing Through Shakespeare
Early in Mark Wing-Davey's deliriously overcooked production of "Troilus and Cressida," at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park, that fabled Greek warrior Ulysses decides to go channel surfing.
He's delivering his famous "degree" speech, about the internal chaos in the Greek camps seven years into the Trojan War, but his fellow soldiers can't be unglued from the television set, which seems to be tuned to CNN.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a news analysis article yesterday about Senator Bill Bradley's decision not to seek re-election omitted a clause in a discussion of his Presidential aspirations, changing the meaning of the passage.
The passage, "This week and last, he talked again with advisers and aides about challenging Mr. Clinton, whom he has sometimes described as indecisive and insufficiently principled," should have ended with the clause, "and of running for President as an independent." The paragraph continued: "Few of them think he will actually choose that course, though he is famously hard to read."


Sounds Around Town
Kaleidoscopic Fuji
Adewale Ayuba, Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) (727-7788).
One of the leading musicians in the Nigerian style called fuji, Adewale Ayuba leads a group of drummers, percussionists, singers and dancers.
Layered vocal melodies and even more layers of rhythm add up to kaleidoscopic, propulsive music, using only the most primal of musical instruments.
Tonight at 10.
Tickets are $15.
Hip-Hop Salsa
La India, Prospect Park Band Shell, near Ninth Street and Prospect Park West, Brooklyn, (718) 855-7882.
A young singer who has reignited traditional salsa, La India smokes cigars, sings with a rasp and revitalizes time-tested mambo rhythms with a touch of hip-hop audacity.
She is performing at a free Celebrate Brooklyn concert, on a bill with Juan Carlos Formel and Cubalibre.
Tonight at 7.
Extra Passenger
The Jazz Passengers with Deborah Harry, the Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-7880.
The Jazz Passengers started out playing skewed, affectionate parodies of 1960's hard-bop.
The crafty wit hasn't disappeared, but the cheap laughs have given way to knotty, thoughtful compositions and, on the group's most recent album, songs about love.
Deborah Harry, the blond mastermind of Blondie, appeared on that album and will join the Jazz Passengers tonight.
Shows are at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets are $15.
Pure Jazz
Kevin Mahogany, Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, above Bleecker Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 242-1785.
At 37 years old, Kevin Mahogany is a rarity in his generation: a pure jazz singer, dedicated to swing, improvisation and sensuously phrased ballads.
With his deep velvet-and-smoke baritone, he sings a repertory that stretches from Duke Ellington to Milton Nascimento to obscure hard-bop tunes.
He can stroll through a blues, scat-sing like a husky trombone or linger over the curves of a ballad, all with unerring pitch and thoughtful phrasing.
At Sweet Basil, his quartet includes the pianist James Weidman.
Tonight and tomorrow night at 9 and 11; Sunday at 9 and 11 P.M.
There is a $15 cover and a $10 minimum.
Multi-style Saxophone
Pharoah Sanders, Knitting Factory, 74 Leonard Street, at Broadway, TriBeCa, (212) 219-3055.
One of the blustering, screaming avant-garde tenor saxophonists of the 1960's, Pharoah Sanders also came up with the meditative tune "The Creator Has a Master Plan," and has in recent years delved back into more straightforward swing and hard-bop.
Any and all of those styles are likely to figure in the course of a set with his current quartet.
Tonight through Sunday night at 9 and 11.
Admission is $15.
Beyond the Juke Joints
Big Jack Johnson, Chicago Blues, 73 Eighth Avenue, at 14th Street, West Village, (212) 924-9755.
Big Jack Johnson learned the blues on its home turf, in the juke joints of Mississippi, and he is a commanding player, utterly convincing in every hard-luck moan, every amorous boast and every stinging guitar solo.
Sets are tonight and tomorrow night at 9:30 and 11 and 12:30 A.M.
There is a $10 cover and a two-drink minimum at tables.


Corrections
The Personal Computers column in Science Times Tuesday misstated the electronic address for obtaining a list of hardware and software compatible with Windows 95.
The correct address is: http://www.microsoft. com/windows/.


How Do You Top 'Pocahontas'?
Yes, $19 billion is an eye-popping sum, even if it is going to buy Capital Cities/ABC, with its popular television network and the nation's leading sports channel.
And O.K., Michael Eisner's decision this week to hire Michael Ovitz, the restless talent agent, as his new president at the Walt Disney Company caught everybody by surprise.
But when it comes to the real bets that are likely to determine the future of Disney's movie business and the company's efforts to dominate the entertainment world, people in Hollywood are looking deeper.
What many film-industry insiders are scrutinizing are the smaller deals and the clear-eyed gambler who has made them, such as the decision to plop down $3 million for the film rights to an unpublished romance by a first-time novelist.
In short, people are talking about Joe Roth.


3 Attacks With Darts Are Reported In Nassau
Someone with a blowgun has attacked three people near the Seaford-Massapequa border within the last six weeks, firing steel darts at the back or legs of two joggers and a teen-ager on a bicycle, the Nassau County police said today.
All the attacks occurred shortly after dusk within a two-mile radius, the police said.
None of the victims was seriously hurt, and none saw the attacker.


Dell Computer Earnings Top Expectations
Continuing to cash in on a boom in personal computer sales, the Dell Computer Corporation said yesterday that earnings more than doubled in its second fiscal quarter.
Dell earned $65.1 million, or $1.32 a share, in the quarter, which ended on July 31, compared with $28.6 million, or 65 cents a share, in the corresponding quarter last year.
Revenues rose 52 percent, to $1.21 billion, from $791.5 million in 1994.


School Chiefs See Layoffs In Budget Cuts
More than two-thirds of New York City's 32 community school districts have notified Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines that they will have to shorten their school day, increase class size and possibly lay off teachers to meet his demand that they trim $72 million from their budgets.
At the same time, all 32 districts have asked the Chancellor to negotiate with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani for more money to prevent such cuts from reaching the classroom.


Sanchez Vicario Is Upset and Hingis Is Out of Her Depth
Like a swimmer out of her depth, 14-year-old Martina Hingis flailed and floundered and was never tossed a life jacket, or a short ball, by Mary Pierce on the du Maurier Ltd.
Open's stadium court on this muggy afternoon.
Hingis never even won a game.
And if the defending champion, Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, already fighting off a cold, anticipated sympathetic treatment from her former doubles partner, 13th-seeded Helena Sukova, she was sadly mistaken.
The third-seeded Sanchez Vicario never even won a set, and was duly upset, 7-5, 6-4.


At the Bar; Lawyers are thrilled by the proximity of fame and notoriety at their annual meeting.
Lawyers love celebrities.
No one knows that better than the American Bar Association, which each year dangles a star-studded lineup to lure its members to its conferences.
But the annual gathering in Chicago last week may have pushed stardom to its limits.
There among the big guns of the legal profession -- Justice Stephen G. Breyer of the Supreme Court; Scott Turow, the best-selling lawyer-author; the Los Angeles District Attorney, Gil Garcetti, taking a breather from the "trial of the century," and the White House counsel, Abner J. Mikva -- was Gen.
Colin F. Powell, former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and political wannabe, snared for a mere $60,000 to speak to, what else, the business-law section of the A.B.A.


AC Milan's Van Basten Retires
A chronic ankle injury forced the Dutch international soccer star MARCO VAN BASTEN into retirement yesterday.
It was the end of a spectacular 14-year career for the forward many regard as one of the game's all-time greats.


Waban Inc.(WBN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Hedging Bets on Democracy, Casinos Offer Cash to Voters
In the evolution of democracy, a ballot proposal to allow unrestricted casino gambling in the state of Washington is unlikely to merit anything more than a footnote.
But the way that the initiative is trying to sell itself to voters may give it a place in election history.
If Initiative 651 passes, the casino promoters have promised to pay every Washington resident who votes this fall an annual dividend of a share of 10 percent of the profits from slot machines -- an amount that could bring each voter $100 a year.
In typical off-year elections in the state, about one million people vote.


Dominion Textile Inc. reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Stokes's Injury Is 49ers' 2d Bad Break
For the second consecutive day, the San Francisco 49ers lost a vital part of their offense for the early portion of the season when receiver J. J. Stokes broke his right hand in practice.
Stokes, the club's No. 1 draft pick, flew to San Francisco and was examined by the team's hand specialist, Dr.
Gordon Brody, who determined that the injured hand would be placed in a cast for at least four weeks and that Stokes could resume playing in five or six weeks.
That would allow Stokes to return for either the fourth or fifth game of the regular season.


Cooking Gas, Not Cars, May Cause Mexico Smog
The veil of brown smog that perpetually hangs over Mexico City, stinging the eyes and burning the throats of the nearly 20 million people who live here, is not caused primarily by automobile exhaust as officials have long believed, according to a study by an American scientist.
Rather it is caused by leaks from millions of steel tanks containing bottled gas used for cooking and heating.
The surprising findings, to be published in the United States on Friday in the journal Science, contradict a decade of Government environmental policy that has focused heavily on curtailing emissions from cars and factories while ignoring controls on the two million tons of liquefied petroleum gas used each year for cooking and heating in virtually every home in Mexico City.


Mitchell Goes on Team's Farm Roster
KEVIN MITCHELL, who is in the United States getting his ailing right knee checked, was put on a farm team roster yesterday by the Fukuoka Daiei Hawks of Japan.
A team spokesman, KENGO NONOYAMA, said Mitchell can still return to the Hawks on Aug. 29.
Nonoyama declined to discuss Mitchell's injury.
Mitchell returned to the United States last Friday after reinjuring his right knee in a game last week. (AP)


Marvin Becker, 67, Plastics Innovator
Marvin Becker, president of the Network Polymers Corporation and an innovator in specialty plastics, died Aug. 9 in Branford, Conn.
He was 67.
The cause was stomach cancer, according to his brother, Gary, an economist at the University of Chicago and a winner of the Nobel Prize.


Hormel Foods Corp.(HRL,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 29


World News Briefs; Spanish Court Clears Death-Squad Inquiry
The Supreme Court has decided that it will allow an investigation into whether Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez and three Socialist Party colleagues organized or knew about death squads that killed 26 suspected Basque separatists in the 1980's.
The court's decision does not imply that the magistrates have found incriminating evidence, Magistrate Fernando Cotta, who is presiding over the investigation, said today.
He said the court merely agreed to examine the case and hand over all material to a special investigating magistrate who will then determine whether to proceed.


Perrigo Co.(PRGO,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Art in Review
'Summer Salon II (Pictures We Like)'  Bonni Benrubi Gallery 52 East 76th Street Manhattan Through Aug. 31
Even calling this group show a potpourri makes it sound more ordered than it appears to be at first glance.
But similarities of subject matter and style among its diverse works suggest thematic threads.


U.S. TAKES STEPS TO BOLSTER FORCE IN PERSIAN GULF
Based on troop movements and warnings from two Iraqi defectors that President Saddam Hussein had considered attacking Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, the Pentagon said today that it was sending ships carrying equipment and supplies to the Persian Gulf, and could ultimately deploy more than 22,000 ground troops.
Although there is no indication that an Iraqi attack is imminent, two senior American military officials told reporters today that elite Iraqi troops around Baghdad have conducted "unusual training activities" in the last five weeks that caused concern among United States analysts.


World News Briefs; Western Experts Join Kashmir Hostage Effort
Indian officials said today that American and British anti-terrorist experts had joined Indian efforts to win the release of an American, two Britons and a German held hostage by a Muslim separatist group that has already killed a Norwegian.
More than six weeks after the tourists were abducted in Kashmir, contacts between the Indian Government and Al Faran separatist group remained deadlocked.
The kidnappers are demanding the release of 15 separatist militants held in Indian jails, but India, with backing from the United States, Britain and Germany, has refused to exchange militants for the hostages.


Government Securities Prices Fall
Prices of Government securities declined yesterday, after more economic reports showed the economy growing at a moderate pace with inflation under control.
Some investors saw that trend adding weight to the idea that the Fed will not cut interest rates at its Federal Open Market Committee meeting next week.
In addition, technical factors, notably a September options expiration today, kept the market from slipping away altogether.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan gallery shows:  "EMBODY," Schmidt-Bingham Gallery, 41 East 57th Street (through today).
A five-artist show devoted to the human body serves largely to demonstrate how much better the portraitist Alice Neel is than most realist painters; her loopy, seemingly casual line fixes her subjects indelibly on the canvas or page.
Also notable is Jose Vermeersch, whose plump figurines have a mute eloquence recalling Marino Marini (Pepe Karmel).


Officer Convicted of Perjury In Washington Hts. Inquiry
A 36-year-old police officer was convicted of two counts of perjury last night in Federal District Court in Manhattan, ending the only case to come out of a three-year investigation into police misconduct in Washington Heights.
After deliberating almost six hours, a Federal jury read its verdict against Officer Patrick Regan in a crowded courtroom, where tension between Federal prosecutors and the police had run high.


Trade Deficit Grew in June As Exports Fell
The nation's trade deficit widened in June as exports eased from record levels and consumers and businesses maintained a surprisingly brisk demand for imports, the Commerce Department reported today.
The $11.31 billion deficit brought the total for the first half of the year to $63.8 billion, or 28 percent more than the deficit in the comparable period of 1994.


Prosecutors Seek Death Penalty
Prosecutors said yesterday they would seek the death penalty against two members of the Warlocks motorcycle gang who are charged with fatally shooting a Franklin Township police officer during a routine traffic stop last May.
The accused, Robert Simon and Charles Staples, pleaded not guilty to the murder of Ippolito Gonzalez yesterday in Gloucester County Superior Court.


Dow Off 8.45, but Nasdaq Index Soars Again
Stocks were mixed yesterday in directionless trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average edged downward, while the technology-laden Nasdaq composite index reached a new high for the third time this week.
A report showing that the United States trade deficit unexpectedly advanced 2.4 percent in June had little apparent impact on the market.
But the market was moved by a report from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia showing that manufacturing rebounded into plus territory this month.
The bank also reported that manufacturers expected business to get better in the next six months.


U.S. to Urge A New Policy On Software
The Clinton Administration broke a year of silence on its data-scrambling policy yesterday by saying it would soon propose an alternative to the Government's so-called Clipper Chip system, which has been widely criticized by makers and users of computer technology.
The Administration announcement is an attempt to reach a compromise with American corporations on a software coding system that would protect the privacy of communication over computer networks while still permitting court-authorized wiretaps and eavesdropping by law enforcement officials.


Hollinger Inc.(HLGRF,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Russian Accused of Citibank Computer Fraud
A Russian hacker penetrated Citibank's computers and stole $2.8 million from corporate accounts in New York, the Justice Department told a British court yesterday.
Vladimir Levin, 34, a mathematician who graduated from the University of St.
Petersburg, is accused of transferring the money in a series of electronic break-ins in August and September of last year, a Justice Department spokesman, Gregory J. King, said late last night.


Couple's Death Still a Mystery
Officials investigating the death of a couple whose bodies were discovered in their Teaneck home said yesterday that they had not determined if Leslie E. Ellisson, 76, and Catherine Nowak, 46, took their own lives.
Traces of carbon monoxide were detected in the house and the ignition of their car was turned on, said Frank Puccio, first assistant prosecutor for Bergen County.
But he could not say how long they had been dead or whether asphyxiation was definitely the cause.
One of the couple's dogs was also found dead, but another survived.


With an Eye on the Skies, Tourists Return to Resorts
The sun broke through today over the Outer Banks of North Carolina, and residents and tourists along this once-presumed target of Hurricane Felix were told to stay on guard for bad weather as they returned to their businesses and vacation homes.
But the faces squinting into the bright afternoon skies were still not all happy.
With the storm adrift 150 miles offshore, officials here in Dare County lifted evacuation warnings that were posted on Tuesday, but many tourists, as well as local residents, rebuked the storm for disrupting one of the prime vacation weeks of the year.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CHAMPION INTERNATIONAL CORP., Stamford, Conn., a maker of paper and wood products, said it planned to buy back up to five million common shares, or about 5 percent of the 96.6 million outstanding.
FOXMEYER HEALTH CORP., Carrollton, Tex., a provider of health care products, won a five-year, $1.5 billion contract to be the sole distributor of pharmaceuticals and related products to Omnicare Inc., Cincinnati, a provider of health care services.


When You Wish Upon a Star
Mickey, Monica and Mike -- separated by generation, gender, sport and race, and seemingly linked only by the timing of their departures and returns -- have been on our minds this week.
Mantle went out a tragic hero, Seles came back a soap opera diva, and Tyson's carefully staged return is treated like a distant war, distasteful but worthy of serious attention.
Despite the differences, all three offer lessons about how we feel about our stars.
Seles, being young, a woman and a tennis player, is treated with the least respect; her return to the tennis tour this week in Toronto was properly appreciated by the crowd, but many of the rest of us have been snickering at her cover-girl make-over and her high anxiety; hey, let's get on with it, you'll feel better if you play, just do it.
Do we want to forget that when she left two and a half years ago it was as victim of the single most awful sports crime in memory?


A Troupe From Taiwan
It is a pity that the Dance Forum Taipei did not perform its recent and reportedly witty "Pornographia ad Absurdum" at the Lincoln Center Out of Doors festival on Tuesday afternoon.
Instead, the Taiwanese modern-dance company presented a program of three pieces that at best was likable.
Things got off to a pleasant start with "Fold and Unfold," a dance by Norman Fung that smoothly established the hybrid style of this six-year-old company, which draws upon Chinese traditional and Western dance for its repertory of works by company members.


Leafy Interludes


Mecklermedia Picks A Group President
Mecklermedia, a publisher and interactive media company in Westport, Conn., has named Jeffrey Dearth to the new position of group president of its magazine and World Wide Web site division.
Mr.
Dearth, 44, was previously president of the New Republic Corporation in Washington and chief executive of the Electronic Newsstand, which markets magazines on the Internet.
At The New Republic, Joan Stapleton, 42, the publisher since 1988, was promoted to the additional position of president, assuming responsibilities from Mr.
Dearth.


Olympic TV Rights Are All About Who You Know
When NBC acquired the TV rights to the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney, Australia, and the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City for $1.27 billion this month, it described the stunning coup as one based on rapid, strategic action.
NBC dramatically gave the International Olympic Committee little time to accept the remarkable offer -- or it would be pulled off the table.
The I.O.C. bit, happy for the unexpectedly large booty, of which it keeps 10 percent.


Partnership Has Done Much to Help Homeless
To the Editor:
Re "How Not to Run a Homeless Program" (editorial, Aug. 12):
There seems to be much variance between coverage of Robert Hayes's report on the Social Services Corporation of the Grand Central Partnership and the full text of the report.
Many positive points need to be shared with a public understandably deeply concerned about New York City's homeless individuals and families.


Angelica Corp.(AGL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Quorum Health Group Inc.(QHGI,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Gander Mountain Inc.(GNDR,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 1


A Surprised Butler Goes Back to the Dodgers
It had already been a trying time for Brett Butler.
It started with the death of his mother, Betty Butler, on Aug. 9, after her long battle with cancer.
Two wakes in Chicago.
The burial in California.
He returned to New York yesterday, presumably to rejoin the Mets and resume a season headed nowhere.
Upon his arrival at Shea Stadium, he learned that he had been traded to the opposing team, the Los Angeles Dodgers, a team he had played with for the previous four seasons before signing with the Mets during the spring.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Aug. 11 about the dominance of Chemical Bank in the loan syndication business misspelled the surname of a former bank executive.
He is Jeff Colquhoun, not Calhoun.


A Coup for the King
The defection of a top Iraqi military official to Jordan last week may tantalize the West with the possibility of Iraqi military secrets, but it has already handed numerous tangible rewards to King Hussein.
Aside from expressions of good will from President Clinton and deep gratitude from Israel there are signs that Saudi Arabia and other Arab countries are poised to end their five-year boycott of Jordan.
The King -- who has run this country for 43 years, escaped two dozen assassination attempts and maneuvered skillfully through the byzantine world of Middle Eastern politics -- has played the defection of a caravan from Iraq's ruling family for all it's worth.
Indeed, in opening the door to the Iraqi defectors, King Hussein seems to have let in all sorts of political and economic opportunities at virtually no risk.


Mets, Without Butler, Win With Butler-Ball
For a while, it looked as if the entire day would belong to Brett Butler.
Before the game he was traded from the Mets to his former team, the Dodgers, for two minor league outfielders, and he proceeded to play as if the Mets should have waited until after this weekend series before making the deal.
But in the end, it was the youthful Mets who stole the show by playing the kind of baseball Butler can appreciate.
He may be the best bunter in baseball, but even Butler had to be in awe of how the Mets executed two critical bunts in the ninth inning to pull out a dramatic 3-2 victory over the Dodgers before 17,710 at Shea Stadium.


New York City's Transit Chief Is Stepping Down
Alan F. Kiepper, who has led New York City's subway and bus system since 1990, said yesterday that he would resign when his two-year contract expires next February.
Mr.
Kiepper, whose tenure as president won praise from many officials but mixed reviews from transit riders' groups, is leaving the nation's largest municipal transit system, the New York City Transit Authority, at a turbulent time.
Only a week ago, the system's parent agency, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, gave preliminary approval for a sharp increase in bus and subway fares, to $1.50, and several cuts in subway service intended to close a looming budget gap.


For Privately Run Prisons, New Evidence of Success
Except for the corporate shoulder patch on the guards' uniforms, the South Central Correctional Center could be mistaken for any other modern prison, a campus of squat concrete structures surrounded by a double chain-link fence topped with coils of razor wire glinting under the sun.
But two recent studies by a special committee of the Tennessee Legislature have concluded that the prison here, run by the Corrections Corporation of America, is operating at a lower cost and providing better and safer services than comparable prisons administered by the State Department of Corrections.


CHRONICLE
AL ROKER wheeled a flower-laden baby carriage onto NBC's "Today" program yesterday as KATIE COURIC announced what her friends and family already knew: that she is pregnant.
The baby is due in January, The Associated Press reported.
"I know people think I need to lay off the jelly doughnuts because they haven't seen my waist in weeks," she added.


Deal Could Free Riley
The Knicks are negotiating a deal that could enable Pat Riley to coach the Miami Heat next season, a Knicks official said.
Riley, who quit as the Knicks' coach on June 14, is under contract to the team through next season.
The Knicks are believed to be asking for one of the Heat's two first-round 1996 draft picks, players or both.


Corrections
Because of a production error, a picture on Wednesday with an article about support in the United States for the Palestinian group Hamas carried an erroneous caption in some copies.
The picture showed men praying at a mosque in Chicago, not a Hong Kong real-estate tycoon.


Sports of The Times; Set Sails Can't Control The Wind
THE pre-draft scouting reports kept coming back to Tyrone Wheatley's stubborn streak.
After praising his size, speed and competitive spirit, the reports and the psychological profiles would always return to the Michigan running back's unshakable resolve.
He played eight positions on his high school football team.
He ran track, too, but quit that team when his coach refused to let him run four individual events and told him to quit if he didn't like it.
The coach relented, and Wheatley led the school to its first state championship.


Mr. Packwood's Offensive Offensive
The already strong case for holding public hearings on the ethics charges pending against Bob Packwood got even stronger this week.
Ending months of public silence, the Oregon Senator has begun a new offensive aimed at discrediting allegations of sexual misconduct -- including a new charge by a former intern, who was 17 at the time she says he kissed her against her will in 1983.
In May the Senate Ethics Committee found "substantial credible evidence" that Mr.
Packwood had tampered with his diary, sought jobs from lobbyists for his estranged wife and made unwanted sexual advances to 17 women.
Public hearings have long been standard procedure for the committee when ethics matters reach this stage.
Unfortunately, that did not prevent Senate Republicans and one Democrat, New York's Daniel Patrick Moynihan, from circling the wagons earlier this month to defeat a resolution to require the committee's chairman, Mitch McConnell, to follow precedent and hold hearings.


Interest Fades in Blue Chips, And Dow Slips 13.03 Points
Investors continued to shift their attention yesterday away from the large blue-chip stocks and toward the broader market.
Some major multinational corporations were once again hit hard by concerns over pressure on earnings from a stronger dollar.
Coca-Cola, which was downgraded by Goldman, Sachs, declined 1 3/8 a share, to 63; Eastman Kodak, 1 1/4, to 57 3/4, and General Mills, 1, to 51 1/2.


Krone, in a Slump, Changes Agents
On the eve of the 126th running of the Travers Stakes, the pinnacle of the Saratoga racing season, Thunder Gulch was reunited with Gary Stevens, the jockey who rode him to victory in the Kentucky Derby and the Belmont Stakes.
But the Travers jockeys were upstaged today by someone who won't even be riding in the race: Julie Krone, who announced that she was changing agents in an attempt to "re-establish myself as one of the leading riders in the country."
Krone said that she was ending 13 years with Larry (Snake) Cooper, who booked the mounts that made her the most successful female jockey in racing history.
But she has been bedeviled by injuries and, lately, by criticism from some trainers, and she will now be represented by Tony Cobitz, a former paddock announcer at Gulfstream Park in Florida and a bloodstock agent who is well-known on the backstretches of race tracks.


Talbots Inc.(TLB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


U.S. Action in Persian Gulf Is Said to Seek Iraqi's Ouster
American military preparations in the Persian Gulf and a high-level diplomatic mission to the Middle East are aimed at speeding the ouster of President Saddam Hussein as well as responding to recent Iraqi troop movements, Administration officials said today.
The Pentagon said today that it was moving up a scheduled training exercise in Kuwait to later this month.
About 1,400 soldiers from the First Cavalry Division at Fort Hood, Tex., will deploy to Kuwait, where M1-A1 battle tanks and Bradley fighting vehicles are in place.


States in Dispute Over Tolls
In a dispute that could cause tensions between their Republican Governors, New York and New Jersey are increasingly at odds over whether to raise the tolls on six bridges and tunnels that connect the two states, as well as the fare on the PATH commuter railway.


Female Cadet Quits The Citadel, Citing Stress of Her Legal Battle
Shannon R. Faulkner, the 20-year-old South Carolina woman who waged a ferocious legal battle to march as a cadet in an all-male military academy here, abruptly withdrew from the college today, fighting back tears and explaining that two and a half years of stress had "all crashed in" on her in her first few days here.
Standing in a driving rain in front of the infirmary where she had stayed under close watch since late Monday, Ms.
Faulkner said she hoped other women would follow through what she began at The Citadel and become graduates of the harsh program that the college has used for 153 years to train some of the top military, political and business leaders in the South.


Broten Gets a New Deal With Devils
The Stanley Cup champion Devils said yesterday that they have re-signed center NEAL BROTEN.
Terms of the contract were not given.
Broten, 35, was acquired from Dallas on Feb. 27 after spending more than 13 seasons in the Stars organization.


Broadway-Bound Sets Are Destroyed by Fire
The sets and properties for Broadway-bound revivals of "Hello, Dolly!" and "Ain't Misbehavin' " were destroyed in a fire on Thursday night at the Atlas Scenic Studios in Bridgeport, Conn.
The cause of the fire has not yet been determined.


Turin Journal; In Italy, There's Just No Stopping the AIDS Gang
The video image was fuzzy, but the lumbering figure and black curly hair of Sergio Magnis were unmistakable to police officers who had seen him come and go in Turin's jails ever since he arrived in this smoggy industrial city from Sicily 13 years ago.
Mr.
Magnis, 29, was filmed in July in the act of robbing the Banco di Sicilia here with two men he met in jail, Ferdinando Attanasio, 37, and Antonio Lamarra, 26, called "The Puppy" for his short stature.
The police picked them up, but because all three men have AIDS, they were taken to a special part of the Amedeo di Savoia Hospital.


Eight Wounded in Gaza Shootout


Protest Over Officer Goes On
Offended by a Police Department reorganization that changed the responsibilities of Jersey City's top-ranking black officer, protesters have decided to send their message home, literally, to Mayor Bret Schundler.
Yesterday, for the 28th morning, demonstrators picketed outside the town house of the Mayor, who has rejected demands that Deputy Chief Arthur Pease be reinstated to his old post, and that Police Director Michael Moriarty resign.
Mr.
Schundler has also gone to court trying to stop the picketing, but on Thursday a Superior Court judge said no, at least for now.
The judge did say the protesters must start after 8:30 A.M., limit their numbers to 10 and keep their voices down.


Audience Shrugs Off Cherubini
The Mostly Mozart Festival has seemed determined, in its shortened season this year, to cram in just as many soloists as in prior years.
And you had to wonder about the wisdom of spoiling audiences in this way, on Thursday evening, when many listeners bailed out of Avery Fisher Hall before the biggest and least familiar piece in the long program, Cherubini's Symphony in D.
Certainly, Janos Starker was most welcome in Haydn's D-major Cello Concerto, investing relaxed tempos with a volatility that kept Gerard Schwarz and the festival orchestra on their toes throughout.
For all its considerable backbone, Mr.
Starker's performance was wonderfully wide-ranging and fluid.


No Headline
"It's hard for me to leave because this was something I had worked for for so long. And there is even added stress because I don't know what's going to happen with the case. But I really hope that next year a whole group of women will be going in, because maybe it would have been different if there had been other women with me." -- SHANNON FAULKNER, dropping out of the Citadel.  [ 9:4. ]


Venezuela Gains Ground on Corruption
To the Editor:
Re "New Watchdog Group Ranks Nations in 'Corruption Index' " (news article, Aug. 13):


Woman in Alomar Case Released on Bail
A woman charged with threatening the life of Toronto Blue Jays infielder ROBERTO ALOMAR was released on $15,000 bail yesterday.
TRICIA MILLER, 31, of Port Hope, Ontario, was arrested July 2 after allegedly telling the staff at the Skydome hotel she wanted to kill Alomar, the police said.
The judge told her to report to the police every day by phone and in person once a week.
She is scheduled to appear in court again Sept. 11. (AP)


Ito Set to Remain On Simpson Case
The continued stewardship of Judge Lance A. Ito over the O. J. Simpson trial was all but assured yesterday when a fellow judge on the Los Angeles County Superior Court ruled that prosecutors could not call Judge Ito's wife, a police captain, as a witness.
In a one-paragraph ruling, the judge said it was unlikely that Judge Ito's wife could contribute anything relevant to the case.
Article, page 7.


Canadian Fracmaster reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


World News Briefs; U.N. Yields to Rwanda, Suspending Ban on Arms
The Security Council has suspended an arms embargo on Rwanda for a year and ordered that it be lifted permanently if no major problems arise during the suspension.
The measure passed on Wednesday by a unanimous 15-0 vote.


A Voice in Defiance of Time
No sooner had Vic Damone finished singing the Howard Dietz-Arthur Schwartz standard "You and the Night and the Music," at Rainbow and Stars on Thursday evening, than an enthusiastic fan shouted, "You do have the best pipes in the business!"
The fan was agreeing with a comment on Mr.
Damone's voice that Frank Sinatra made decades ago.
And within the realm of traditional pop singing that Mr.
Damone and Mr.
Sinatra both inhabit, that evaluation still holds true.


L.I.R.R. Service Disrupted
Long Island Rail Road service in and out of Penn Station was suspended yesterday from 2:10 to 3:50 P.M. when fire broke out in brush about a mile west of the Woodside station in Queens.
A railroad spokesman, Mike Charles, said 16 trains were delayed or canceled at a time when the line is preparing for the rush hour, which begins at 4 P.M.


Ex-Detective Fatally Shot Trying to Halt A Robbery
A retired police detective was shot in the chest and killed yesterday when he pulled out a gun and tried to stop two armed men from robbing a bodega in the Bronx, the police said.
The victim, who was identified as Oswald H. Potter, was watching two friends play dominoes in a back room at the New Hope Grocery at 213th Street and Laconia Avenue in Williamsbridge, where a group of retired men have been gathering for several years to socialize.
At about 6:30 P.M., investigators said, two men walked into the store, burst into the back room and announced a robbery.


From Overrun Enclave, New Evidence of Mass Killings
An American reporter who ventured into Bosnian Serb territory around a former Muslim enclave this week has found evidence to support the Clinton Administration's allegations that hundreds of Bosnian Muslim prisoners may have been massacred and buried in mass graves after the fall of the "safe area" in July.
The reporter, David Rohde of The Christian Science Monitor, saw a building littered with feces and blood near a soccer stadium where hundreds of prisoners were held.
In a nearby field, part of a human leg protruded from an area of freshly dug earth.
He was told by Bosnian Serb soldiers that all Bosnian Muslims from the enclave, Srebrenica, are being hunted down and summarily executed if they are captured.
The Bosnian Serb leadership had denied the charges.


Holdup on the Casino Floor
An armed robber got away with $250 in a gunpoint robbery at the Showboat Casino Hotel yesterday.
The authorities said the man approached a woman who makes change on the casino floor; after asking for change for a $20 bill, he told her he wanted all the money in her change cart.
"You're joking," she said, before looking up to see a silver gun at her head.
She gave him the money and he fled on foot.


Corrections
An answer in the Q&amp;A column in Science Times on Tuesday about the formation of sea foam misstated how the surface tension of the water changes as the foam is formed.
It decreases, not increases.


Giant Projects Don't Conserve World's Water
To the Editor:
"Severe Water Crisis Ahead for Poorest Nations" (news article, Aug. 10) quotes Ismail Serageldin, vice president for Environmentally Sustainable Development at the World Bank.
He is right to sound an alarm over the sorry state of the world's water resources; however, he has left out the significant role of his employer in helping create this situation.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6  CONTAINING TAIWAN
China is preparing a series of military maneuvers over the coming months intended to bring Taiwan's political leadership to heel. 1  CLINTON'S SHIFT ON BALKANS
President Clinton's frustration over Bosnia led to a new strategy this summer that has made the United States the dominant Western player in the region. 1  SIGNS OF KILLINGS IN BOSNIA
An American reporter has found evidence to support allegations that Bosnian Muslim prisoners may have been massacred after Bosnian Serbs overran an enclave. 4  U.N.
PULLBACK FROM 'SAFE AREA'
The United Nations said it is withdrawing almost all its troops from the Bosnian "safe area" of Gorazde, relying on air power alone to deter an attack. 4  NAMIBIA CLINGS TO SEAL HUNTS
The world's last large-scale commercial harvesting of seals began this week on Namibia's coast, once again causing fierce debate. 3  JORDAN'S GAIN IN IRAQ'S PAIN
News analysis: The defection of a top Iraqi military official to Jordan has already handed numerous tangible rewards to King Hussein. 6  U.S.
PRESSURES IRAQI LEADER
American military preparations in the Persian Gulf are aimed at speeding President Saddam Hussein's ouster as well as responding to Iraqi troop movements. 6  Turin Journal: In Italy, bold gang with a grim twist. 2  National 7-9  CONFOUNDING HIS CRITICS
Senator Trent Lott has surprised his critics, most notably Bob Dole, in the way he has handled himself and his No. 2 role in the Senate's Republican hierarchy.  1  FEMALE CADET WITHDRAWS
Shannon Faulkner, who fought a two-and-a-half year legal battle to enter The Citadel as a full-fledged cadet, announced she was leaving after having spent most of her first week in the infirmary.  1  BATTLING YOUTHFUL SMOKING
Massachusetts spends $36 million a year to discourage smoking, especially among young people, and officials say they get results.  1  MAKING CRIME PAY
Studies by the Tennessee Legislature concluded that a privately run, for-profit state prison was operating at a lower cost and providing better and safer services than comparable prisons run by the State Department of Corrections.  7  JUDGE REMAINING ON SIMPSON CASE
A fellow judge's ruling involving Judge Lance Ito's wife meant that Judge Ito would probably not have to excuse himself from presiding over the Simpson murder trial.  7  Los Angeles' police chief seeks a tape recording of a detective.  7  SMALL RISE IN CHARITY DOLLARS
The United Way reported a 1 percent gain in contributions, for a total of $3.08 billion for 1994, but after adjusting for inflation, that figure represented a small decrease.  8  BUDGET CONTINGENCY PLANS
President Clinton's budget director authorized Federal agencies to begin planning for the possibility that Congress and the President will not agree on a budget by the start of the next fiscal year, Oct. 1.  8  Beliefs: Dr.
Seuss, sacred texts and male-centered religions.  9  Metro Digest 21  BATTLE OVER TOLL INCREASES
New York and New Jersey are at odds over whether to raise the tolls on six bridges and tunnels that connect the two states, as well as the fare on the PATH commuter railway, setting the stage for a battle that could cause friction between the two Republican governors. 1  EXECUTIVE ARRESTED IN KILLING
After 19 years, the police arrested a Brooklyn man being sought for a drive-by killing.
Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19  Editorials  Glib advice on selling hospitals.
Packwood's offensive offensive.
Tigers and snakes in Sri Lanka.
The summer city.
Letters  Frank Rich: At the fair.
Whitfield Diffie: Washington's computer insecurity.
Gary Matsumoto: Lost years, lost peace.
Andrew Postman: Batting fourth, No. 7 . . .
Jerry Garcia.
Chronicle 20  Bridge 15  Crossword 15


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article about refugees from "ethnic cleansing" in Bosnia carried an incorrect dateline in some editions.
The article was filed from Davor, Croatia, not Dvor, which is also in Croatia.


Snakes and Tigers in Sri Lanka
What is loosely called the international community tends to tune out when Sri Lanka is mentioned, and understandably.
Efforts to end the island's 12-year-old civil war have been marked by repeated false starts and false hopes.
Frivolous peace plans put forth by leaders speaking for the Sinhalese majority have drawn frivolous responses from insurgents upholding the rights of the Tamil minority.
Both sides have soiled their reputations, as terrorist killings by Tamil Tigers reflexively provoked ferocious reprisals by the Sri Lankan military.
But this time, a genuinely serious effort seems under way to end this wasting war.
President Chandrika Kumaratunga would change Sri Lanka into a "union of regions," giving the predominantly Tamil north and east the substantial autonomy that Tamils have long sought.
This offers a solid basis for negotiations, and deserves better than its offhanded rejection last week by a low-level spokesman for the Tamil Tigers.


Journal; At The Fair
Oscar Hammerstein II was born a century ago this summer, but the idyllic America that he and Richard Rodgers celebrated in the Broadway musicals of my childhood sometimes seems to belong to an even more distant past.
"The corn is as high as an elephant's eye." "June is bustin' out all over." "There is nothin' like a dame." While Hammerstein's phrases are inseparable from our language, where can you still find his sentiments in the landscape?


Federal Agencies Start to Plan For Problems From Budget Delay
President Clinton's budget director has authorized Federal agencies to begin planning for the possibility that Congress and the President will not agree on a budget until long after the next fiscal year begins on Oct. 1.
If a budget is not approved until November or December, as appears increasingly likely, then the Federal Government could be temporarily shut down.
If budget cuts were ultimately adopted, they would be retroactive to the beginning of October, complicating spending plans for the entire year.


Seles, Grunting Again, Is 3 for 3 in Comeback
When the competition finally got tougher in this sunset quarterfinal at the du Maurier Ltd.
Open, Monica Seles turned up the volume.
Back came the dual-decibel grunt -- after all, tonight's opponent, seventh-seeded Anke Huber, has one, too.
Back came the ferocious forehand -- after all, Huber has one of those as well, even if it's of the conventional one-handed variety.
Back came the ironclad will to win, the intangible that made Seles the most feared tennis teen-ager on the planet before she was stabbed 28 months ago in Hamburg, Germany.
Then, as now, Huber could come up with no facsimile for that.


CHRONICLE
MALIK YOBA, who stars in the television series "New York Undercover" and movies including "Cool Runnings," is getting used to celebrity treatment.
So, every once in a while, he said, it is good to be reminded of reality.
Mr.
Yoba learned that TERE WALKER, 11, who is being treated for bone cancer at Tisch Hospital of New York University, wanted to meet him.
And on Thursday, he paid her a visit.


Smucker (J.M.) Co.(SJMA,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 31


For Now, Rizzuto Leaving Yanks' Broadcast Booth
Phil Rizzuto resigned yesterday as a broadcaster for the Yankees, near the end of 39 seasons of "Holy Cows," cannoli, anniversaries and huckleberries.
Or maybe he didn't.


Grateful Dead Fans Plan Central Park Rally
In defiance of the Mayor's office, which has denied permits for a formal gathering in Central Park, fans of the Grateful Dead plan to gather on the Great Lawn this afternoon for a memorial service for the rock band's leader, Jerry Garcia, who died on Aug. 9.
How many will come, and what sort of reception they will get from police officers, is uncertain.


Tyson May Stop McNeeley's Joy Ride
What chance does someone whose paydays could barely cover his cab fares have against one of boxing's most feared attackers?
About 1 in 20, according to the wisdom of this odds-driven environment, where Mike (He's Back) Tyson will emerge after a layoff of more than four years and face Peter McNeeley on Saturday night.


Father Who Owes Thousands in Child Support Is Back in Jail
A state judge in Manhattan sent a prominent investment adviser back to jail yesterday and said he would stay there until he paid $68,000 of the $580,000 he owes in child support payments covering the last five years.
State Supreme Court Justice Phyllis Gangel-Jacob said the man, Jeffrey A. Nichols -- who has a $500,000 house in Vermont with swimming pool and whose business took in more than $200,000 last year -- had failed to convince her during testimony in State Civil Court yesterday that he was too deeply in debt to come up with the money.
Brushing aside Mr.
Nichols's professions of remorse, she said that until he came up with the money she would consider him in contempt of court.
Then she returned him to the Bronx House of Detention, where he has been since Monday.


Harris Steel Group Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Petroleum Geo-Services A/S (PGSAY,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Books-A-Million Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Woman Accused of Breaking Into House as Son, 4, Waited in Car
A 27-year-old woman with a history of drug abuse was charged today with leaving her 4-year-old son in the front seat of a stolen car while she broke into a home in Dix Hills, the Suffolk County police said.
After the break-in, on Thursday morning, the woman led two police cruisers on a high-speed chase, the police said.
She stopped only after she ran onto a curb and blew out the front tires of the car, the police said.


La Guardia's Main Terminal Is Cleared After Bomb Threat
The main terminal at La Guardia Airport was evacuated for more than an hour last night while police officers investigated a bomb threat directed at American Airlines, which operates in the terminal, officials said.
The search, in which dozens of police officers fanned out to examine luggage, trash cans, ticket counters and bathrooms, turned up no evidence of a bomb.
But the Federal Aviation Administration reported that several flights were either delayed or diverted to other airports during the investigation because air traffic controllers, whose tower sits atop the Central Terminal Building, had to leave their posts and move operations to an emergency command center in the USAir terminal.


Eagle Food Centers Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Executive Changes
THE BANK OF NEW YORK CO., New York, named Catherine I. Marsh president and chief operating officer of its credit card unit, based in Newark, Del.
BELL ATLANTIC CORP.
Philadelphia, named Thomas Bartlett president and chief executive of its Bell Atlantic International Wireless division.


Into the Vortex to Save the Earth
"Mortal Kombat," the flashy movie version of the popular video game, reverses the customary cinematic role of using special effects to enhance the drama.
Its eerie photographic distortions and computer-animated transformations of rocks and statues into fire-breathing monsters are the drama.
The actors and the story are mere appendages of the action and pyrotechnics.
The movie's extensive martial arts sequences, in which combatants bounce off each other doing triple handsprings, suggest a slightly more earthbound version of the aerial ballets in Hong Kong action-adventure films.
In the movie, which opened yesterday, three plucky young warriors -- Liu Kang (Robin Shou), Johnny Cage (Linden Ashby) and Sonya Blade (Bridgette Wilson) -- team up to keep the earth from falling into the hands of Shang Tsung (Cary-Hiroyki Tagawa), an evil sorcerer who rules a hellish alternate reality called Outworld.
Shang Tsung's power is from the collected souls of the warriors he has defeated, whom he summons into his body when fighting.


Mexico's Sanchez to Play in U.S. League
HUGO SANCHEZ, the veteran Mexican star, says he will play in the new United States soccer league next season.
An announcement is to be made at a news conference Monday in Los Angeles.
Sanchez was a five-time scoring champion with Real Madrid of the Spanish league.
But at 36, he is obviously near the end of his career and was used sparingly by Mexico's national team in last year's World Cup tournament in the United States.


New York Spay-Neuter Law Won't Reduce Pet Overpopulation
To the Editor:
New York's spay-neuter bill signed into law by Gov.
George E. Pataki (news article, Aug. 11) will do little to reduce the serious overpopulation of cats and dogs.


Business Digest
Broader Market Rises As Dow Slips 13.03  The Dow industrials fell 13.03 points, to 4,617.60, as investors continued to shift their attention away from the large blue-chip stocks and toward the broader market.
Some companies, like Coca-Cola and Eastman Kodak, were hit by concerns over pressure on earnings from a stronger dollar.
But the Nasdaq composite index rose 2.04 points to a record 1,031.28.  [ Page 35. ] Rap Label Sues Time Warner  Death Row Records, a leading label for gangsta rap music, filed a lawsuit in Los Angeles against Time Warner and its chief executive, Gerald M. Levin, accusing them of trying to lure the record label away from Interscope Records.
The suit asserts that Mr.
Levin authorized Time Warner to negotiate an unlawful distribution deal with Death Row, which produces gangsta rap artists like Snoop Doggy Dogg.  [ 33. ] Insurer May Face Challenge  A plan to convert the State Mutual Life Assurance Company of America in Worcester, Mass., to ownership by stockholders may face a legal challenge.
Such a delay could shut the Federal Government down temporarily.  [ 8. ] E.P.A.
Broadens Car Repairs  The E.P.A. has ruled that independent auto repair shops have the right to the computer programs that repair auto pollution control systems.
Car makers had wanted to keep the software proprietary, giving dealerships a monopoly on repairs.  [ 34. ] Europe Pressed on Bananas  The Clinton Administration is planning to use the World Trade Organization next month in a case against the European Union's policy on banana imports.
The Administration has said the union's quotas and import-and-export licensing arrangements with Caribbean nations discriminate against American companies.  [ 32. ] Antismoking Work Praised  A youth antismoking program in Massachusetts has drawn Federal attention and helped make the state a model for programs to counteract the youth-oriented marketing of the tobacco industry.  [ 1. ] United Way Reports 1% Gain  United Way reported that contributions rose 1 percent, to $3.08 billion in 1994.
Total giving has still not returned to the $3.17 billion peak of 1991, before problems began to surface involving misuse of funds by the former president of United Way of America.  [ 8. ] Namibia Stands by Seal Hunt  Sealing generates about $500,000 a year in Namibia and employs about 100 people, Government officials say, in a country with a total working population of about 150,000.
But animal rights groups say the killing of the seals is inhumane and unnecessary.
Namibia has the world's only remaining large-scale commercial seal hunt.  [ 3. ] Oil Rises on Mideast Fears  Crude oil prices rose for the third consecutive day after the Pentagon said it would send 1,400 more soldiers to the Middle East to forestall potential aggression by Iraq.
Crude oil for September delivery climbed 21 cents, to $17.87 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
This was the fourth consecutive week of higher crude prices, which have rallied from $17.14 in early July.  [ 41. ]


Julio Caro Baroja, Anthropologist, 80
Julio Caro Baroja, a noted Basque anthropologist and historian whose many books on Spanish society, history and customs have become texts for generations of students, died on Friday in his home in Vera de Bidasoa in northern Spain.
He was 80.
Born on Nov. 13, 1914, in Madrid, Mr.
Caro Baroja was the grandnephew of the novelist Pio Baroja and was acquainted with many of Spain's famous authors and intellectuals, including the poet and playwright Ramon Maria Valle Inclan and the philosopher Jose Ortega y Gasset.


Business Is Good on the Shore
The shore is having a good summer, hurricanes and all.
Peter J. Calderone, the Labor Commissioner, said that an informal survey of economic activity through last month found shore businesses reporting more tourists, who evidently were spending more money than usual.
And he said yesterday that restrictions on swimming because of Hurricane Felix were not necessarily bad as they had increased activities in areas like shopping and restaurants.


INSIDE
Corporate Prisons
A Tennessee prison run by a private company is safer and better-managed than comparable state-run prisons, two studies say.
Page 7. 6 Million 'Contingent' Jobs
Some 6 million Americans hold jobs they do not consider permanent, the Government says, and the group is markedly youthful.
Page 31.
U.S.
Pressures Iraqi Leader
The U.S. says military maneuvers and a diplomatic effort are meant to undercut Saddam Hussein.
Page 6.
Rizzuto Resigns
Phil Rizzuto, a Yankee player and broadcaster for 54 years, has resigned.
For the moment.
Page 25.


Bridge
Bridge experts have been a major British export in the last year.
Tony Forrester, who has been the top-ranked English player for many years, has settled in Florida.
His regular partner, Andrew Robson, is now in California.
And Barry Rigal, a leading writer and commentator, is in Manhattan.
Rigal made his mark as a player in the Spring Nationals in Phoenix in April.
With three young teammates, and playing with a new partner, he reached the round of 16 of the Vanderbilt Knockout Teams.
En route they eliminated the defending champions, a star-studded squad that included five world champions.
One of them gave credit to Rigal and his partner for a superb performance, and the diagramed deal was part of the story.


Rhone-Poulenc Bids $2.6 Billion For a British Drug Maker
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, the French-American pharmaceuticals company, made an unsolicited $2.6 billion bid today for the British drug company Fisons P.L.C., which quickly rejected the offer as too low.
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, which is based in Collegeville, Pa., said it had offered $:2.40 in cash, or about $3.67, for each Fisons share, a total of $:1.7 billion.


Los Angeles Police Chief Seeking Disputed Tapes of Detective Fuhrman
Facing increasing public pressure, Chief Willie L. Williams of the Los Angeles Police Department announced today that he would try to acquire copies of the disputed tape recordings of Detective Mark Fuhrman as soon as possible, rather than waiting until the end of the O. J. Simpson trial as the prosecution has requested.
In a news conference today, Chief Williams said he wanted to hear the recordings, in which Mr.
Fuhrman is reported to describe incidents of police beatings of civilians, before deciding what actions to take.


In Surprise, No. 2 to Dole Works Well With the Boss
When Trent Lott, the spit-and-polish Mississippi Senator, won the No. 2 job in the Senate's Republican hierarchy last December, Bob Dole, the Republican leader, was not happy.
As a conservative soul mate of Senator Phil Gramm of Texas, one of Mr.
Dole's rivals for the Republican Presidential nomination next year, and as an alumnus of the rough-and-tumble House, Mr.
Lott was in a good position to undermine Mr.
Dole and disrupt the Senate, as his critics contended he would.


President Hopes to See Ripken Set Record
PRESIDENT CLINTON wants to see Orioles shortstop CAL RIPKEN break Lou Gehrig's consecutive game record in person, according to a published report.
The White House press secretary, MIKE McCURRY, told The Baltimore Sun that Clinton would like to attend the game.
Provided there are no rainouts or injuries, Ripken will break the record Sept. 6 at Oriole Park against California. (AP)


Pataki Admits Aides Erred In Fund-Raiser
Gov.
George E. Pataki acknowledged today that two senior members of his administration should not have been allowed to serve as chairmen of a political fund-raising event held this afternoon and pledged that it would not happen again.
"I think that the criticism is justified," Mr.
Pataki said, responding to questions from reporters about the two officials' roles.
Speaking to reporters during a hastily called news conference at Saratoga Race Course this afternoon, while the fund raising was under way, Mr.
Pataki added: "It shouldn't have happened, and it's not going to happen again."


RESULTS PLUS
GYMNASTICS  Moceanu Catches Miller
One minute into her first routine of the all-around finals at the United States gymnastics championships last night at New Orleans, Shannon Miller fell off the balance beam, taking a five-tenths deduction, and second place along with it.
The break was all the 13-year-old Dominique Moceanu needed to slip away with the title.


Vietnam's Oil-Rich Dreams Go Largely Unfulfilled
One hint of oil's importance here, if not its potential, is the three offshore oil rigs engraved on the back of a piece of Vietnamese currency, the 5,000-dong bank note, worth about 45 cents.
For Vietnam, and for the dozens of global oil companies that have descended on this country, the South China Sea once stirred dreams of great oil wealth.
But it has not turned out that way.


A Rock Star China Allows to Shine
Cui Jian thinks young people in China today are like caged birds: when they try to fly, they don't go very far.
"They're weak," said the 34-year-old Mr.
Cui, China's biggest rock star.
"They're not able to express themselves very easily."


Insurer's Plan To Convert Might Face Court Fight
A plan to convert the State Mutual Life Assurance Company of America in Worcester, Mass., to ownership by stockholders rather than its policyholders may face a legal challenge, an opponent of the plan said yesterday.
Jason Adkins, director of the Center for Insurance Research in Boston, said the odds of an appeal increased when a state official ordered the Insurance Commissioner on Thursday to open for public inspection the records of talks between the company and the State Insurance Department.
He predicted that the records would include "very embarassing information about how much influence State Mutual had over the Insurance Department."


Pataki Reveals Vacation Spot
The destinations of Gov.
George E. Pataki's first two vacations after his election were kept top secret: last November and again in July, his aides would not reveal even the general geographic latitude, much less the state, as he headed off for a few days' rest.
But this evening marked a departure from the routine.
The Governor's schedule, delivered each weekday, included the following announcement: "Governor Pataki will be in Lake George vacationing with his family, Sunday, Aug. 20, through Tuesday, Aug. 22."


CHRONICLE
Like son, like father.
HARRY CONNICK SR. has always liked to sing, but he has been the District Attorney of New Orleans since 1974 and had never given much thought to performing for audiences.


Trying to Keep the Lid on Rents
Jack Alter, the Democratic Mayor of Fort Lee, said he would block an attempt to change local rent control laws, now that Republicans on the Borough Council no longer have the votes to override his veto.
While Republicans have four members on the Council -- ordinarily, a veto-proof margin -- one of them, John Criscione, is a landlord who was advised by the Borough Attorney to abstain from voting.
So the vote was only 3-2 on Thursday night when the Council approved a measure that would allow landlords to raise rents by as much as 15 percent, and to charge whatever the market will bear on any unit that becomes vacant.


World's Last Baby Seal Hunt Is Jobs for Namibians
Before the early-morning fog had lifted here, more than 200 seal pups were lined up in rows on the concrete quay behind Aldert Brink's tumble-down factory, some with eyes bulging, others with bloody snouts, the result of being clubbed to death.
Workers moved among the lifeless animals performing different tasks.
First, the males' bellies were slit open and their penises were removed to be sold as aphrodisiacs in the Far East.
Then, cuts were made around the fins and heads, readying the pups for the skinning machine.


A New Identity and 19 Years Can't Hide a Murder Suspect
For 19 years, the picture has hung on the wall of the Brooklyn North Homicide Squad, a photo of a curly-haired man with sideburns wanted in the fatal drive-by shooting of a Bushwick woman as she sat on her stoop on the night of May 10, 1976.
The picture was still there yesterday.
But the suspect, David Galletti, was in custody -- arrested Wednesday by New York City detectives and agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation in the tiny tobacco-country town of Hemingway, S.C. (population 650), where he was a respected manager for a food company serving the local Tupperware plant.


In Brief
*
Tokyo Kyodo Bank is likely to take over the remnants of the Cosmo Credit Corporation, a failed Japanese credit union, the Japanese Finance Ministry said yesterday.
The bank was created late last year to take over the operations of two other failed credit unions: Tokyo Kyowa and Anzen. (Dow Jones) *
The Mitsubishi Corporation said in Tokyo yesterday that one of its units would spend $326 million to expand output of computer memory chips in Salem, Ore.
The unit, the Mitsubishi Materials Corporation, will invest $71 million in an existing plant, and in October, construction will start on a new plant that will begin making chips in 1997, a spokeswoman said. (AP)


Remember Libertarians
To the Editor:
"Poll Shows Disenchantment With Politicians and Politics" (front page, Aug. 12) mentions that 55 percent of the people you surveyed thought the United States needs a new political party.
The article discusses distrust of the two major political parties and United We Stand America, Ross Perot's political nonparty.


10% of City's Alarm Boxes To Be Turned Off in Trial
The City Council completed a tentative agreement with the Fire Department yesterday to turn off 10 percent of the fire alarm boxes in the city, selecting areas of southern Brooklyn, southern Queens, the central Bronx and midtown Manhattan for a 45-day trial, settling a long-simmering dispute between the Council and the Giuliani administration.
The plan to disconnect but not remove 1,600 fire alarm boxes is a scaled-down version of a Fire Department proposal earlier this summer to shut down about 43 percent of the fire alarm boxes in the four boroughs.
To accommodate the Council's concerns, the department has also agreed to let the Council review the pilot program after the trial period.
The Council will then have 60 days to decide whether to block the Giuliani administration's plans to remove all of the city's 16,300 fire boxes by the year 2000.


METRO DIGEST
TOLL ISSUE DIVIDES TRENTON AND ALBANY In a dispute that could cause tensions between their Republican Governors, New York and New Jersey are increasingly at odds over whether to raise the tolls on six bridges and tunnels that connect the two states, as well as PATH commuter railway fares.
The issue is flaring now because of a budget deficit at the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, the bistate agency that runs the PATH and the crossings.  [ Page 1. ] SUSPECT IN A 1976 SHOOTING IS ARRESTED A man wanted in the fatal drive-by shooting of a Brooklyn woman in 1976 was arrested by New York City detectives and F.B.I. agents in a tiny tobacco-country town in South Carolina.
The identity of the suspect, a respected manager in a food company, was discovered during a routine fingerprint check.  [ 1. ] NEW YORK CITY  PAROCHIAL MODEL TROUBLES BROTHER Educated by the De La Salle Christian Brothers, Brian Carty joined their order and pledged his life to the idea that an education grounded in tradition and values could make the difference between Yale and jail.
So why is he uneasy that Mayor Giuliani is holding up the Catholic system as a model for public education?


Rangers Sign Grimson to an Offer Sheet
STU GRIMSON, a restricted free agent who finished last season with the Detroit Red Wings, signed an offer sheet with the Rangers.
NEIL SMITH, the Rangers' president and general manager, made the announcement yesterday but did not disclose terms.
The Red Wings have seven days to match the offer to the 30-year-old forward.
Grimson started last season with Anaheim.
He also played for Calgary and Chicago. (AP)


Beliefs
To millions of American children and their parents, "The Cat in the Hat Comes Back" is one of Dr.
Seuss's Beginner Books, a concoction of rollicking rhyme and pared-down vocabulary intended to encourage children to read -- and to teach the alphabet.
Did any of those rookie readers or their parents realize that "The Cat in the Hat Comes Back" is actually "a popular expression of an idea that is present in many of the religious texts within Western tradition"?
Or that the book's message is that sacred texts are really male creations "handed down by a supernatural male figure in order to obscure female functions and appropriate them for men"?


HOW EVENTS DREW U.S. INTO BALKANS
Early on a hot July night President Bill Clinton was bent over the practice green in the backyard of the White House, missing putts and once again venting his frustration over Bosnia.
The Administration was already in the middle of a high-level review of its policy, and Mr.
Clinton was impatient for some results.
Looking ahead to September, and the likely withdrawal of United Nations peacekeeping forces, Mr.
Clinton told a small group of aides: "The status quo is not acceptable. We've got to really dig in and think about this."


CHINA WAR GAMES VIEWED AS TACTIC TO PRESS TAIWAN
With its second military exercise near Taiwan this summer under way, China is preparing an escalating series of naval, air and missile force maneuvers intended to bring Taiwan's political leadership to heel, American military officials and foreign diplomats say.
Plans for the new exercises over the coming weeks and months have broad support among Chinese military and civilian officials and represent a distinct turn away from a resumption of dialogue with Taiwan, which China believes is forsaking its adherence to the principle of "one China" and pursuing world recognition as an independent nation.


Accord on Fire Boxes
The New York City Council completed a tentative agreement with the Fire Department yesterday to turn off 10 percent of the fire alarm boxes in the city, selecting areas of southern Brooklyn, southern Queens, the central Bronx and midtown Manhattan for a 45-day trial.
The agreement settled a long-simmering dispute between the Council and the Giuliani administration by scaling down an earlier proposal.
Article, page 23.


Carter, No. 1 Draft Pick, Is Out for Season
Last month, the Cincinnati Bengals made Ki-Jana Carter a rich young man of 21.
As befit the first choice over all in the National Football League draft, they signed the Penn State running back to a seven-year contract worth $19.2 million, including a $7.125-million signing bonus.
Now he is lost for the year.
On Thursday night, in the Bengals' 20-13 defeat by the Detroit Lions, Carter planted his left leg on a draw play and cut back to the right.
As Robert Porcher, a Lions defensive lineman, tackled him high, Carter's left knee seemed to give out, and he fell awkwardly.


Giant Projects Don't Conserve World's Water; Credit Mayor's Role
To the Editor:
"In Unusual Partnership, Farmers Help Safeguard New York Water" (front page, Aug. 13) draws deserved attention to New York City's groundbreaking water quality protection partnerships with upstate farmers.
You fail, however, to credit properly the leadership role of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.


Gangsta Label Accuses Time Warner of Racketeering
A gangsta label contends it is up against gangsters.
Death Row Records, a leading label for gangsta rap music, cited the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations statute yesterday in a suit against Time Warner and its chief executive, Gerald M. Levin, that accuses them of trying to lure the record label away from Interscope Records.


Venezuela Gains Ground on Corruption; Watchdog's Masters
To the Editor:
The Aug. 13 article about Transparency International, "a worldwide lobby against corruption," might have left the impression that the group is a nonpartisan public interest organization.
It is not.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Agreed to terms with Jeff Liefer, third baseman.


New Jersey and New York Argue Over Raising Port Authority Tolls
In a dispute that could cause tensions between their Republican Governors, New York and New Jersey are increasingly at odds over whether to raise the tolls on six bridges and tunnels that connect the two states, as well as the fare on the PATH commuter railway.
Officials in New Jersey are lining up against a higher PATH fare and tolls, fearful of angering their constituents, who use these services more than New Yorkers do.
But many of their New York counterparts favor raising at least some of these fees, which, they maintain, are being kept artificially low.


Devils' Lease Negotiations
With a Sept. 15 deadline ahead, the Devils and the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority are negotiating -- without evident rancor -- the final details of a 12-year lease.
"I'd have to say, yes, talks are going well," said John McMullen, the team's owner.
"Everybody's working very diligently to get things done."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article Wednesday about a book tour by Speaker Newt Gingrich omitted the first name of a bookseller who called the tour "an extraordinary act of promotion." He is Tom Dwyer, a buyer for Borders Inc., the large chain based in Ann Arbor.


Elster Helps Phils Take Home Run Derby
Phillies 16, Giants 8
Even though he only played half the game last night, Kevin Elster had a night to remember.


Robert S. Hirschfield, Professor, CUNY-TV Chief and Author, 66
Robert S. Hirschfield, a political scientist, professor and author who was the dean of communications at the City University of New York, died yesterday at the Mount Sinai Medical Center.
Dr.
Hirschfield, who lived in Manhattan, was 66.
His wife, Muriel, said the cause of death was heart failure.


La-Z-Boy Chair (LZB,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 29


Dan W. Dodson, 88, Foe and Scholar of Racism
Dr.
Dan W. Dodson, a Texas sharecropper's son who submitted his sun-baked boyhood prejudices to such a searing intellectual analysis that he became one of the nation's leading advocates of racial equality, died on Aug. 5 in Austin, Tex.
He was 88 and had lived in Texas since 1972, when he retired as a professor of sociology at New York University.
Known as the philosopher of intergroup relations for the torrent of scholarly research papers he produced as director of the N.Y.U.
Center for Human Relations Studies, Dr.
Dodson did more than provide the theoretical underpinnings for the movement to achieve racial and ethnic harmony.


COMPANY BRIEFS
APPLIED BIOSCIENCE INTERNATIONAL INC., Arlington, Va., a pharmaceutical safety testing and environmental consulting concern, said it had entered into a letter of intent to sell two laboratories to Huntington International Holdings P.L.C., a British engineering and scientific services company, for $32.5 million in cash and Huntington's Phase I clinical center in Leicester, England.
HARBOUR GROUP, St.
Louis, a closely held steel and industrial-products maker, said it had purchased closely held Trak International Inc., Port Washington, Wis., for an undisclosed amount of money.
NEWMONT GOLD CO., Denver, a gold exploration and mining concern and a subsidiary of Newmont Mining Corp., has formed a joint venture with Du Pont, Wilmington, Del., to market a new technology to increase the recovery of gold in deposits with a high copper content.


Indresco Inc.(ID,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


Christie Withdraws for Medical Reasons
LINFORD CHRISTIE, the 1992 Olympic 100-meter champion, withdrew yesterday from the British team that will face the United States at Gateshead, England, on Monday.
Christie, who injured a hamstring while losing his world title to DONOVAN BAILEY two weeks ago at Goteborg, Sweden, bounced back by beating the Canadian at Zurich on Wednesday, clocking his best time of the season, 10.04 seconds.


Ruling Appears to Keep Judge Ito in Simpson Case and Put the Trial Back on Track
Judge Lance A. Ito's continued stewardship of the O. J. Simpson trial was all but assured today when a fellow jurist on the Los Angeles County Superior Court ruled that prosecutors could not call Judge Ito's wife as a witness.
Taking but one paragraph to resolve a dispute that had embroiled the Simpson case for days and could have effectively aborted it altogether, Judge John H. Reid held that there was "no reasonable expectation" that Judge Ito's wife, a police captain named Margaret York, could contribute anything relevant to the trial.


Thomson Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Israeli Settlers Seek Peaceful Coexistence
To the Editor:
Allow me to correct some misstatements by my student and friend Michael Berenbaum in "Israeli West Bank Isn't Another Selma" (letter, Aug. 12).
The settlement of Efrat was encouraged and approved by the Golda Meir Government and was founded on the principle of peace with the local Palestinians based on territorial compromise and partnerships.
Indeed, vineyards owned by Palestinians enhance the Efrat landscape, and our youngsters often help the vine planters harvest their grapes.


Honoring Equal Rights Pioneer
Seventy-five years ago, American women won the right to vote, in no small part because of Alice Paul, a pioneer of the women's movement.
She went on to campaign for an equal rights amendment to the Constitution and to lobby successfully for references to sex equality in the United National Charter and the 1964 Federal Civil Rights Act.
Now there's a stamp honoring the achievements of Miss Paul, who died in 1977.
The 78-cent stamp, introduced yesterday at Paulsdale, the home in Mount Laurel where she was born, goes on sale nationwide today.
SUSAN JO KELLER


Citibank Fraud Case Raises Computer Security Questions
A $10 million computer fraud against Citibank appeared to be the first successful penetration by a hacker into the systems that transfer trillions of dollars a day around the world's banks, bank security experts said yesterday.
New details of the case were disclosed as a Federal complaint was unsealed in Manhattan.
A 34-year-old Russian and his accomplices were accused of tapping into Citibank's computer system and transferring $10 million to various bank accounts around the world.


Robbery Suspect Still in Canada
A suspect in a Somerset County jewelry store robbery may not be leaving Ottawa anytime soon.
A hearing scheduled yesterday to decide if Avram David Gottlieb would be deported from Canada was postponed indefinitely because Canadian immigration officials and Mr.
Gottlieb's lawyer were unprepared, The Associated Press reported.


Spinal Cord Research
To the Editor:
I take exception to Murry J. Cohen's Aug. 14 letter, "Animals Don't Hold Key to Spinal Cord Injury." I have treated and operated on hundreds of spinal-cord-injured patients and for years undertook research supported by the National Institutes of Health on the damaged spinal cord of the subhuman primate.


Survey Finds 6 Million, Fewer Than Thought, in Temporary Jobs
Six million Americans hold jobs they do not consider permanent, far fewer than experts expected, the first Government survey of its kind has found.
These workers are markedly youthful and slightly more likely than workers over all to be female and black.
Only a third of these so-called contingent workers, a group that includes students, were satisfied with their situation, while the rest said they would prefer permanent jobs, according to the survey, released today by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
And relatively few had their own health insurance.


United Way Holds Steady In Donations
The United Way, which raises money for local charities through payroll checkoff plans, yesterday reported a 1 percent gain in contributions across the country, for a total of $3.08 billion for 1994.
After adjusting for inflation of 2.6 percent, that represented a small decrease from the previous year.
Elaine Chao, president of United Way of America, called the figures a "very respectable showing," noting that they came during an overall decrease in contributions to human services.


Giuliani Says City May Elect To Keep a Hospital or Three
A few days after a mayoral panel recommended selling all 11 municipal hospitals, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that the city may well decide to hold on to two or three of them.
Previously the Mayor had not stated a firm position on the report's central finding, though he had praised the panel's findings in general.
But at a news conference yesterday he said: "I would think New York would be similar to other cities in which, at the end of the process, there would be one or two or three municipal, or in some cases county, hospitals. That's true in most other major cities in the United States, and it may very well end up being the case in New York."


99 Panes of Glass on the Wall, 99 Panes of Glass . . . .


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
5.76
4.64
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.42
5.43
4.54
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.45
5.46
4.90
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.54
6.56
7.25
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.90
6.90
7.49
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.79
7.79
8.36
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.31
6.31
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Dancers' AIDS Benefit
Dancers from six major ballet and modern dance companies will perform in "Dancers in the Afternoon," a benefit for Broadway Cares/Equity Fights AIDS and Dancers Responding to AIDS, today at 5 P.M. at By-the-Sea on Gin Lane in Southampton, L.I., the home of Martin Richards, the theater and film producer.
Companies participating in the performance, produced by Herbert Ross, are American Ballet Theater, the Joffrey Ballet, the New York City Ballet, American Ballroom Theater and the Alvin Ailey and Paul Taylor troupes.
Tickets are $175 and $250.
Reservations: (212) 840-0770.


Becker's Loss Guarantees Another New Volvo Champ
When Boris Becker, the defending champion, was informed after beating Patrick McEnroe on Thursday that no one had ever repeated as the title-holder since the Volvo International tournament moved here in 1988, he said, "I'd say it's about time to change that routine."
Not this year, though.
Becker, seeded No. 2, was upset today in the quarterfinals by eighth-seeded Richard Krajicek, 7-6 (7-5), 3-6, 7-6 (7-5).
So a new champion will be crowned on Sunday, as has been the case since Jimmy Connors, the only repeat Volvo champion, won titles in 1975 and 1976, when the event was played in North Conway, N.H.


'Smart Buildings' Are Granted a Tax Exemption
Gov.
George E. Pataki signed legislation today granting property tax exemptions to companies that construct so-called smart buildings, structures equipped with fiber optics, higher-capacity electrical lines and back-up power systems, in parts of Manhattan.
The telecommunications-friendly measure was part of a broader law the Governor signed aimed at continuing a series of decades-old economic incentives for constructing and renovating buildings in New York City, particularly in midtown Manhattan.
The incentives, mostly in the form of property tax exemptions, began in the late 1970's.


The Summer City
Recently a New Yorker who, like many of her ilk, spends more time working in than actually experiencing this city was sentenced (by convalescence) to six weeks' incarceration in her own neighborhood.
She might as well have been deported to a foreign country, so new was her view of its customs, its amenities and even of its dining habits.
About those dining habits.
Because midtown Manhattan is her bailiwick, where people stuff their faces at noon, then bolt back to their desks, she did not realize that many New Yorkers actually have lunch.
They sit, they dawdle, they chat, they seem to have all the time in the world.


Insight Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


International Aluminum Corp.(IAL,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Dr. Helen Kaplan, 66, Dies; Pioneer in Sex Therapy Field
Helen Singer Kaplan, a pioneer in the field of sex therapy and founder of the country's first clinic for sexual disorders established at a medical school, died on Thursday at her home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
She was 66.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


California Dreaming: Yankees Beat Angels
The first three innings of their grudge match were miserable for Jack McDowell and Jim Abbott, but the Yankees snuck away with a 7-3 victory over the Angels tonight at Anaheim Stadium.
Neither McDowell nor Abbott will want to save the videotape of their effort in the first one-third of the game unless they wanted to see exactly what they did wrong.
There were walks, solid hits and a feeling that both bullpens were about to be buzzed.
The calls were never made as both starters experienced a resurgence until the ninth, when the Yanks ripped Abbott and Mike James for three insurance runs.


The Parochial Model: A Brother Doubts
LIKE many immigrant families who settled into blue-collar neighborhoods, Brian Carty's parents toiled with their hands so he could work with his mind, entrusting some of their wages and all of his future to the brothers and nuns at the parish school.
Educated by the De La Salle Christian Brothers in the 1950's, he joined their order and taught in a succession of Catholic schools.
He pledged his life to the idea that an education grounded in tradition and values could sometimes make the difference between going to Yale and going to jail.
Brother Brian takes pride in having opened young minds to the worlds that lie beyond the borders of concrete and asphalt.
So why is he uneasy that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani -- who was educated by the same Christian Brothers -- held up the Catholic system as a model for public education?


Giants Are Focusing On Injuries, Not Jets
The Giants don't mean to offend anyone, but Saturday night's game against the Jets in Giants Stadium is just another exhibition to most of the players.
The Jets are their competitive neighbors and there may be greater motivation to try to beat them, but this week, few have spoken the words "Jets" and "bragging rights" in the same sentence.
"We're playing the Jets this week?" tight end Howard Cross said sarcastically.
"I didn't know that."


Corrections
An article on Monday about the wife of a paramedic calling for a criminal investigation into his death misstated the operating hours of the Brooklyn District Attorney's office.
According to the District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, the office is open 24 hours a day, seven days a week.


Tragedy Forces Town To Face Its Divisions; Breaching Barriers of Creed and Culture
The suburbs have long been places where people are divided by barriers as concrete as walls and as subtle as class.
They have also been places where institutions like the public school system, the Little League and the P.T.A. have helped to breach those barriers.
But Lakewood, in central New Jersey, is a town divided by creed and culture, obstacles that are proving resistant to change.


Cain's Eagle on First Hole Sets the Tone
John Paul Cain never played on the PGA Tour.
He has been a stockbroker for 33 years, splitting his time between golf and his business since joining the senior tour four years ago.
But today, at the Northville Long Island Classic, Cain played like a golfer who is used to seeing his name at the top of the leader board.
The 59-year-old Cain blistered the 6,775-yard Meadow Brook layout with a course-tying seven-under 65, including a 90-foot eagle putt on the first hole and birdies on Nos. 2 and 3 to take the first-round lead.
He also sank an 80-footer for birdie on No. 11 and had eight one-putt greens.


Glib Advice on Selling Hospitals
An advisory panel appointed by Mayor Rudolph Giuliani of New York City called this week for dismantling the municipal hospital system while preserving access to health care for poor residents.
That may prove an inviting goal, but the panel failed to show how it could be achieved.
Exhortation is fine, but it needs to be accompanied by something more than flippant analysis.
The Mayor seemed to recognize as much when he asked the panel, after it released its report, to spell out ways the poor can be served outside government-run facilities.
Perhaps the panel can go back to work and return with feasible guidelines.
The Mayor suggested yesterday that, in the end, the city may want to retain a few hospitals.


Antismoking Fight Enlists a Teen-Age Corps
Priscilla Purvis was outraged when she saw a small boy buy a single cigarette at a convenience store in her inner-city neighborhood not long ago.
"He said, 'Can I get a 'loosie'?' " recalled Priscilla, 16, who has never smoked a cigarette and vows she never will.
"He paid 15 cents for it and left. He was about 9 years old. I just went totally off on the store owner. I said, 'He's a little boy -- that's illegal.' "


Relief for the Turboprop Blues; Small Is Suddenly Beautiful for Short-Hop Travelers
Until recently, whenever Scott Hansen, a Salt Lake City lawyer, had to visit clients in Boise, Idaho, he dreaded calling his travel agent.
Of the eight daily flights, four were on 135-passenger Delta Air Lines jets but the four others were on much smaller turboprops flown by SkyWest Airlines, a Delta commuter affiliate.
Of his last 75 flights, Mr.
Hansen said, 45 required him to squeeze into the bumpy, low-flying turboprops.
"There's no comparison," he said.
"In the jet you have good seats, you board through a jetway and you can stand up when you walk down the aisle."


Giant Projects Don't Conserve World's Water; New York Reservoirs
To the Editor:
The cooperation between New York City officials and farmers to reduce the pollution entering the city's upstate reservoirs (front page, Aug. 13) is heartwarming.
Reducing pollution from farm runoff is essential and relatively inexpensive.


The Jets Play Down Giants Rivalry
When the Jets and Giants first started meeting in preseason, their games took on monstrous importance for management, players and fans.
The Jets were the upstarts from a new league who had the audacity to win Super Bowl III.
The Giants were National Football League establishment.
Now they share a stadium, and the fans of one team often seem indifferent to the fate of the other.
So when Jets Coach Rich Kotite says tonight's game against the Giants at Giants Stadium is the key game of the Jets' preseason, is he trying to revive the hype of old?
Hardly.


Sunglass Hut Intl.(RAYS,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


U.N. to Withdraw Troops From Safe Area
A day after announcing it would increase protection of Bosnia's "safe areas" by threatening NATO air strikes, the United Nations said today it is withdrawing almost all its troops from Gorazde, one of the safe areas, relying on air power alone to deter an attack on the estimated 50,000 civilians there.
Previously the use of air power had been disdained by United Nations officials as being ineffective unless accompanied by coordinated action with ground troops.


Alice D. Murphy, W. M. Bancroft Jr.
Dr.
Alice Delight Murphy, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James S. Murphy of Santa Fe, N.M., was married yesterday to William Manton Bancroft Jr., the son of Mrs.
Bancroft of Windham, Conn., and the late Mr.
Bancroft.
The Rev.
William McP.
Bigelow, a minister of the United Church of Christ, performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's-by-the-Sea Episcopal Church in Northeast Harbor, Me.
The Rev.
Paul Gilbert, the rector of St.
Mary's, assisted.
Dr.
Murphy, 29, is a resident in internal medicine at New England Deaconess Hospital in Boston.
She graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University and received her M.D. from Tufts University.
Her father, a virologist, is a professor emeritus at Rockefeller University in New York.
Her mother, Dr.
Victoria T. Murphy, taught English at the Brearley School and at Hunter College, both in New York.


'Un-Hampton' Simmering On Car Show
CALL it quaint, call it cozy, call it unchic, but don't call Sag Harbor a tourist town.
Don't talk about burnishing its image with Hamptons-style glamour.
Its defenders will come down on you.
That is what has happened to Louis Vuitton, the French luggage company, and supporters of its plan to add Sag Harbor to St.
Tropez, London and Paris as a site of a major promotional event.


The Choice to Bow Out Was 'Classic Bradley'
When he first ran for the Senate in 1978, Bill Bradley travelled in a car packed with changes of clothes.
Going from a breakfast meeting to a factory to greet workers, he would doff his jacket, don a sweater and then carefully consider the final touch, murmuring, "sweater with a tie, sweater without a tie."
Mr.
Bradley also liked to seek advice and, after careful consideration, do just the opposite.
He once told of being advised to play professional basketball after graduating from Princeton University as an All-American, and deciding instead to go to Oxford University as a Rhodes Scholar.
After that, his friends said he should run for public office, but he decided it was then that he wanted to play basketball, and he joined the New York Knicks.


Knicks and Heat Talk
The Knicks and the Miami Heat are talking through their respective legal counsels, but so far no accord has been reached that will allow Pat Riley to become Miami's coach next season.
"We have had conversations, but that is about it," said one Knicks official.
"We're still listening."
The Knicks filed a tampering charge with the National Basketball Association earlier this summer after public comments made by the Heat owner, Mickey Arison, indicated the franchise's interest in Riley.


Thinking About Drugs Without Hysteria
To the Editor:
The tragedy of Patricia Marback's heroin overdose death (news article, Aug. 14) says more about the hazards of our drug policies than about the dangers of the drug itself.


NOT SO FAST
Bill McKibben's "Not So Fast" (July 23) piece perfectly illustrates why organized environmentalism in this country has achieved near total political irrelevance in recent years.


A Suburban Border War, With Real Guns
ON a steamy Saturday morning so deep into summer that even the lawn-service brigades were quiet, the buzz of cicadas in the trees was the only sound on sleepy Oakwood Road in Allendale.
Until gunfire erupted through the woods.
Suddenly, crows shrieked as furious volleys of small-arms fire split the calm.


Unsold Shares in A Co-op
FOR many co-op dwellers, the main consolation for submitting to the subtle indignities of co-op ownership -- things like flip taxes, sublet fees and the requirement for board approval of sales and sublets -- is the knowledge that fellow shareholders share the same burden.
Some shareholders, however, are exempt from such details.


Texas Farm Workers Won Half a Victory
To the Editor:
Re your Aug. 16 front-page article on Texas A &amp; M's paying farm workers as contractors, not employees:


The Fine, Fading Art Of Riding The Rail
In the deep, mournful wail of a rumbling train, a song once echoed across America, the ballad of the journey, the romance of vistas gazed upon through windows as the world swept past, a mile at a time.
It was the way to go, a long time ago.
Ordinary Joes and Janes rode the train.
Business big shots rode the train.
Movie stars rode the train.


A Trip to Our 6th Borough (the Hamptons)
I DID not come here only for the waters; I wanted to sight Salman Rushdie, Michael Jackson, Marvin Davis's chair.
I wanted an authentic Hamptons experience of my own, perhaps in an air-conditioned limo on the way to a scorching beach, instead of just reading about it in the gossip columns while waiting for a refrigerated subway car on a microwaved platform.
"You really think Rushdie was here?" asked the best-connected person I know here.
This was on the phone.


Bill to Ease Cuba Suits Faces a Veto By Clinton
Clinton Administration officials are warning that the President could veto a bill devised to tighten the trade embargo against Cuba because it includes a provision that would entangle the Castro Government and its successors in new claims for property expropriated in 1959.
That provision would allow tens of thousands of Cuban-Americans to file lawsuits in American courts demanding billions of dollars in compensation from the Cuban Government and foreign companies using expropriated assets, even though these people were not American citizens when their property was lost.


Q and A
Eclipse Over Asia
Q.
My husband has read that a solar eclipse will be visible over part of southern Asia in late October.
What companies offer tours to the region then? -- D. Mallard, Miami Beach


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
BETTER THAN T-SHIRTS
Big craft shows can be a source of some extraordinary finds, but small shows can be just as productive and a lot less harried -- like the one in Bethany on Saturday from 10 to 4.
Only 45 artisans have been picked for this juried exhibition and sale, making booth visiting quite do-able in the time alotted.
Be warned that this is not a venue for the ultimate T-shirt seeker or macrame addict.
What visitors come back for year after year (this will be the ninth) are Colonial crafts, including hand-hooked rugs, wheat weavings, chip carvings, cornhusk dolls, quilts, samplers, theorems and basketry, plus lots of linens, ceramics, clothing, stuffed animals, game boards and dolls.


Roots Of a 'Diatribe'
To the Editor:
In his essay "Hero to the Bad and Truly Awful"  [ July 23 ] , Bernard Holland took revenge on me because of what I published about him in The New York Times and elsewhere.


Who Are Those Women Embedded in the Sidewalk?
Melissa Goldstein, her hazel eyes cast downward, walks around SoHo, staring at the ground as if she expects to find something other than urban flotsam.
Suddenly, she stops at the northeast corner of Spring and Greene Streets.
"Here's one over here!" she says, her sandaled foot pointing to a slightly shiny object embedded in the sidewalk.
From afar, it looks like a stone, but upon closer inspection, one can see that it is a photograph of a woman, swathed only in a sheet, her body slightly curled in a quasi-fetal position.


None of That Sultry Innocence For a Change
THERE IS HER LITTLE girl voice, almost a whisper.
The crooked tooth, as if from sucking her thumb.
Then, there are the tight dress, bleached blonde hair, milky skin, glowing blue eyes.
Patricia Arquette, 27, is a million-dollar girl -- that's the fee she got for "Beyond Rangoon," directed by John Boorman, to be released on Wednesday.
Until now, audiences have seen Ms.
Arquette mostly in roles displaying her peculiar blend of sexuality and innocence -- the gum-popping hooker in "True Romance," the loyal wife in "Ed Wood," the servant girl in "Ethan Frome," the witless pregnant teen-ager in Sean Penn's "Indian Runner." Like a whole generation of actresses -- Meg Ryan, Melanie Griffiths, Jennifer Jason Leigh -- Ms.
Arquette plays women who are sexual and at the same time child-like and unthreatening.
Ms.
Arquette plays the role better than most, with an almost frightening openness.


Who Will Watch the Baby?
AFTER the cooing of friends and family have faded and the baby gifts are unwrapped and put away, new parents must face the challenge they could never quite fathom before the birth: they have to figure out how to take care of the child when they're not home.
Mothers or fathers who don't want to stay home full time, or can't afford to -- the majority in suburban New Jersey -- have the weighty task of finding loving, responsible, intelligent and not-too-costly help.
Love may be beyond price, but child care certainly is not.


Pianists Highlight Philharmonic Fare
EVERY August, this column takes advantage of the rapidly waning summer season to look ahead to musical attractions and opportunities in the fall.
Series subscribers, of course, not only pay lower prices for better seats but usually are offered ticket-exchange privileges and other nonmusical perks.
Some of the orchestral series will be outlined today.
Next week, the focus will be on chamber, vocal and other presentation cycles.
Off to the earliest start is the Westchester Philharmonic, with a season of six paired concerts beginning on Sept. 30.
"The works chosen for our 13th season could only be played by a virtuoso orchestra," said Paul Lustig Dunkel, the music director, who added that these works "will be appealing and satisfying to people of all musical tastes, for along with our 'in-demand' repertoire, we are presenting two of the world's greatest pianists, and a young violinist who most certainly will join the top ranks soon."


Lori Olans and Matthew Waldor
Dr.
Lori Beth Olans, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul S. Olans of Peabody, Mass., is to be married today to Dr.
Matthew Kaden Waldor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome N. Waldor of South Orange, N.J.
Rabbi David Meyer is to officiate at the Harvard Club in Boston.
The bride, 32, graduated summa cum laude from Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and from which she also received an M.D. and a master's degree in public health.
She is an assistant professor of gastroenterology and internal medicine at Tufts University School of Medicine in Boston.


No Cheap Shots at Mexico, Please
Remember who your friends are.
Always good advice in life.
And now, words to keep in mind as the rhetoric of the 1996 election begins.
Mexico currently wears the bright red bulls-eye in the ongoing political crossfire.
The issues of the 1996 campaign will be emotional.
There should be lively debate and discussion.
But discussion about immigration and Mexico can turn ugly and destructive very quickly, severely damaging a positive and beneficial relationship.
So when it comes to the debates over trade, immigration and other border concerns, the candidates must not try to build themselves up by tearing our friends down.


The Pathmark Wars, Part Three
Starting last year, the battleground was 125th Street: local retailers fought tooth and nail -- without success -- to stop Pathmark from building a superstore.
Then the scene shifted to Springfield Gardens, Queens: last week the City Council approved a plan for a Pathmark store, but angry local store owners have not given up their fight.
Now Pathmark has returned to Harlem with a proposal to build a store on 145th Street between Bradhurst and Eighth Avenues -- and local supermarket owners are up in arms.
They have hired the same consultant who led the struggle against the 125th Street market, and they are trying to persuade city officials that one of their number should be allowed to put up a market on the site, not Pathmark.


DIARY
HEALTH CARE  Who Can Heal New York?
Here's the question: Is there a place in the brave new world of managed health care for municipal hospitals like New York's?
Can they possibly survive?
The answer, from a mayoral advisory panel, was a resounding no.
The panel, saying the hospitals delivered inefficient, low-quality care, called last week for abolition of the whole system.
The obvious question, from a 43-year-old Bellevue patient with AIDS, was this: "Where will the poor people go for medical care?" The mayor's panel, though, insisted that the poor will get better care at revamped hospitals or at private medical centers.
LAWSUITS  Promises, Costly Promises  It happens all the time: some big company, on the prowl for bargain labor, closes one plant and opens another elsewhere.
As long as it goes by the book and gives 60 days' notice, the company's nose is clean.
Or so Maytag thought when, in 1991, it shut a vending-machine plant in West Virginia and opened one in South Carolina.
Workers say Maytag assured them this would never happen, and the workers -- first one, then a class-action parade -- decided this was a legal promise and sued.
And last week Maytag settled the case by agreeing to pay $16.5 million -- it was "risk avoidance," mind you; the company remained pure as a new-laundered sheet.
Lawyers, bless their billable souls, will devour $5 million of that, but that still leaves a tidy sum for 800 workers.
ENTERTAINMENT  Rocking Hollywood's Boat  Think of Hollywood as a huge rowboat, managing a delicate balance even under its heavy load of ego and money -- mighty agents on one side, mighty studios on the other.
Then, without warning, a giant among giants leaps from one side to the other, sending everyone else scampering for equilibrium.
That's basically what happened last week when Michael Ovitz, agent to the gods and just about everyone else, decided that, well, working for a studio might not be that bad.
MCA hadn't worked out, so the buzz (sorry, but Hollywoodspeak is de rigueur) was that nothing would shake him from Creative Artists.
But then Disney came calling -- its new jewel, ABC, in hand -- and Mr.
Ovitz couldn't resist, even though he'll play second fiddle to Michael Eisner, Disney's chairman.
You can bet he'll be a loud second fiddle.
GUIDING NATURE  Writing E-Mail in the Sand  Beaches are big business -- people go to unholy lengths to sit on them and fry, and pay unholy prices for shelter and hot dogs nearby.
But only God can make a beach -- well, God and the Army Corps of Engineers.
The big difference: when engineers do it, it costs hundreds of millions of dollars.
And when God then washes away man's sand, there's hell to pay -- and more sand to cart in.
Take, say, New Jersey.
Man built beaches recently at vast expense -- Federal money that miraculously flowed freely -- but (of all the nerve!) water barged in and took much of it away.
And so the debate heats up, with some insisting that, yes, man can shape the earth, but other heretical souls (they probably don't even like running barefoot on the sand) talking about pouring tax dollars into the ocean.
REGULATION  A Tobacco-Country Judge  The battle is joined.
The F.D.A. wants to regulate the sale and promotion of cigarettes -- because it wants fewer teen-agers to start smoking.
The tobacco industry doesn't like that idea, possibly because if people don't get the habit young, they usually don't get it.
So the industry sued, and by all signs got just the arbiter it would want last week -- a North Carolina judge who had ruled pro-tobacco in a suit involving the E.P.A. and had, as a lawyer, defended an R.J.
Reynolds heir.
Why North Carolina?
It's "the only jurisdiction that makes any sense," Reynolds said.
But the head of an anti-smoking group said, "Among Southern lawyers, it's called home cooking, helping out the friends and neighbors."  ROCKEFELLER CENTER  What Price Location Now?
What next?
Just when you thought you'd figured out who owns Rockefeller Center -- no simple matter, in case you've missed it all; the overlapping trusts and groups and holding companies create a dazzling financial maze -- here come two more investors battling for a piece of it.
First was Sam Zell of Chicago, who, like others drawn to the fabled towers, is all gaga about "location, location, location," a rule he learned "when my daddy put me on his knee." (Well, at least his daddy didn't say, "Plastics.") And the very next day this bankruptcy-smudged landmark got a rival offer, from Tishman Speyer Properties of New York.
Don't even ask what the ownership chart might look like now; the family tree of British royalty is a sapling in comparison.
THE FED  A Rate Cut?
Probably Not  Oh, yes -- interest rates.
Is the Federal Reserve going to give borrowers another break, as it did a month or so ago, when it cut rates slightly after that endless string of increases?
The Fed gathers on Tuesday, but people who think they know such things expect no more rate cuts just yet.
True, official rates still hover farther than usual above inflation -- which the Fed is slapping itself gleefully on the back for taming.
But Fed officials seem to think things are going just fine, with a sharp rise in housing starts last week just the latest bit of strength.
Or perhaps it's just too hot for them to think about anything so strenuous as tinkering with those all-powerful rates.
Maybe in September.
EQUALITY  Women of Value  Life is unfair: Any 12-year-old denied extra dessert or a new computer will tell you that.
But for the world's women, life is truly unfair -- as a United Nations report out last week made vividly and statistically clear.
Among the findings: 70 percent of the world's poor are women, and women hold just 14 percent of top managerial jobs.
Not that women don't do their fair share of the world's work -- far from it.
One of the study's more intriguing findings is the extreme economic undervaluation of women's work.
They pull their weight; they just don't get paid for it.
WORK FORCE  Employees, by Another Name  No one wants employees anymore.
Employees want pesky things like health benefits. (Health benefits?) They want companies to be loyal to them. (A quaint idea.) You have to pay payroll taxes so they can get stuff like Social Security.
It's all such a nuisance!
More and more, companies prefer "independent contractors" -- not too independent, mind you -- and the ranks of such semi-employees have soared with all the layoffs lately.
But there are rules about who can be called a contractor -- rules, no doubt, often stretched to, and past, the limit -- and last week Texas A&amp;M University admitted that it had illegally paid 400 farm workers as contractors, cheating the Government out of $86,000 in payroll taxes.
The Republicans, meanwhile, have a solution: they're pushing a bill that would liberalize the use of contractors.


Mr. Champigneulle, Ms. O'Sullivan
Courtenay Holmes O'Sullivan, a daughter of Karla L. Friedlich of New York and Kenneth D. O'Sullivan of Nokomis, Fla., was married yesterday to Pierre Gilles Champigneulle, a son of Claude Champigneulle of Courcelles-Chaussy, France, and the late Charlotte Champigneulle.
The Rev.
Charles H. Clark, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Union Chapel in the Grove on Shelter Island, L.I.
The bride, 26, is an account representative at BBDO, the advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree in international relations from Johns Hopkins University.
Her father is a real estate developer based in Nokomis.
Her grandfather Henry Luce 3d is the chairman of the Luce Foundation.


AMERICAN EXPRESS
I have two Visa gold cards (no annual fee) and never use them, unless I can't find what I want at a place that accepts American Express.
If I have a complaint about a charge, Visa continues to bill me for the disputed item, with interest, until the dispute is eventually settled in my favor.
The process can last for months.
American Express removes the disputed billing from my statement and settles the matter quickly and courteously.
American Express -- I'll never leave home without it.
BARBARA H. SALAZAR Ithaca, N.Y.


In Schools, More Cuts Than Fat To Trim
Rudolph W. Giuliani makes no secret of his goal to "crush," in his words, the Board of Education's notorious bureaucracy and gain more control over New York City's schools.
The Mayor trained his oratorical howitzers on the school system again last week, saying that it was close to collapse and that its bloated bureaucracy was the biggest obstacle to improving public education.


School Days


Where Provincetown Fare Takes a Lively Turn
PROVINCETOWN, the gangly spit of sand that sweeps away from Cape Cod Bay to form a spine of dunes that flank the Atlantic on the town's back side, is a fragile land.
It is vulnerable to and constantly reshaped by tide and wind.
Were it not for the rocky, man-built breakwaters, waves would regularly gobble whole neighborhoods.
And if the dunes were not planted with beach grass, the dunes themselves would slide back and forth, from ocean to bay, burying both the hurly-burly and the echo of a fishing industry that are Provincetown.
It's always been this way.
Historians, poets and writers have long speculated that the hazards of the landscape forced people to live by their wits, to be aware of danger, appreciative of pleasure -- particularly the pleasure of a good meal.


Enough Saving
To the Editor: The Travel section has, over the past several years, lost almost all sense of balance in its reporting and coverage.
Many vacationers do not find it amusing, tolerable or interesting when traveling abroad, to slop hogs, forage for breakfast, eat at communal tables with total strangers in various far-flung and anonymous pensions, hike or bicycle long distances over rough terrain, or stay in pinched fifth-floor walkups in cheap hotels (no matter how quaint the slice of view, how twinkly the proprietor or how crusty the croissants).
Many travelers, lacking a nostalgie de boue, find these experiences penitential and would rather stay home in comfort than to subject themselves to them.


Jennifer Williams, Peter S. Taub
Jennifer Alison Williams, a daughter of Greta and Averill Williams of South Salem, N.Y., is to be married today in Lawrence, L.I., to Peter Seth Taub, the son of Lynn and Dr.
Harlan Taub of Port Jefferson, L.I.
Rabbi Moshe Edelman is to officiate at Temple Israel of Lawrence.
The couple received master's degrees in environmental law from Pace University.


Jane Taylor, Brett Summers
Jane Taylor, an associate general counsel in New York for Barclays Bank, was married yesterday to Brett Freeland Summers, a senior enforcement attorney in the New York office of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
Diane Mott, a justice of the peace, officiated at the Mead Chapel of Middlebury College in Middlebury, Vt.
Mrs.
Summers, 37, graduated summa cum laude from the State University at Albany, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a daughter of Robert and E. Martha Taylor of Jamaica Estates, Queens.


Allison Fluhr, Jordan Kaufman
Allison Leigh Fluhr, a daughter of Howard and Margaret Fluhr of Manhattan, was married last evening in Brooklyn to Jordan Zeke Kaufman, a son of Laurie and Dr.
Steven Kaufman of Greenlawn, L.I.
Rabbi Laurence Kotok performed the ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
The couple, both 25, graduated from the University of Wisconsin at Madison.
The bride is a candidate for a master's degree in social work at New York University.
Her father is the president and chief executive of the Segal Company, an employee benefits consulting concern in New York.
Her mother is a psychotherapist in New York.


Conversations / Robert B. Reich; How an American Industry Gets Away With Slave Labor
JUST 10 days after about 70 illegal immigrants from Thailand were freed from a prison-like California garment factory, where they had worked in virtual slavery, Federal labor officials notified more than a dozen large retailers last week that goods from the sweatshop may have ended up in their stores.
Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich said the retailers had been asked to attend a meeting in Washington next month to discuss ways of preventing apparel made by slave labor from being sold in American stores.
The invitation came amid a widening investigation of the garment shop in El Monte, Calif., and debate about the many other, more traditional sweatshops that still fail to pay minimum wage or overtime and often ignore health and safety laws.


Rivals Stack the Deck in Iowa's Straw Poll
As Republicans gathered here today for a straw poll to choose among Presidential hopefuls, the key issue was transportation -- the planes, trains, buses and motor home caravans importing participants from around the country for an event that has grown from grass-roots exercise into the campaign equivalent of the Berlin airlift.
Thanks to an interesting loophole in the event's rules, Iowa residency is optional -- the only requirement being a $25 ticket.


Cheers for Wilander, A Victory for Agassi
Andre Agassi finally met an opponent in the Volvo International tennis tournament who was at least his equal in fan popularity and superior in terms of titles: Mats Wilander, the Swede who lives 40 miles down the Merritt Parkway in Greenwich.
But, as was the case in the du Maurier Ltd.
Open three weeks ago, the top-seeded Agassi beat Wilander in the semifinals, this time by a score of 6-3, 6-3, to advance to the final on Sunday afternoon when he will meet eighth-seeded Richard Krajicek.
Krajicek advanced this afternoon when he upset fourth-seeded Yevgeny Kafelnikov, 6-4, 6-4.


Correction
A brief article in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday about G &amp; P, a luncheonette that closed recently on West 25th Street, misstated its location.
It was between the Avenue of the Americas and Seventh Avenue, not Eighth and Ninth Avenues.


Towns Along Route 31 Fought an Interstate Link
To the Editor:
Regarding your July 23 article "Truckers Carve a New Route, Crowding a Two-Lane Road," I don't have much sympathy for the folks in the Hopewell area.
Years ago, Hopewell and nearby towns helped get a connecting link from I-287 to I-95 deleted from the interstate.


After 75 Years, Scholz Fizz Has Gone Flat
The vats that once churned liquid sugar and flavor extracts into syrups of cola, sarsaparilla and cocoa cream sit empty at the Scholz Brothers soda factory on 18th Avenue.
Carbon gas and water no longer rush through the pipes.
The rickety bottling machines are silent.
For more than 75 years, Scholz Brothers Beverages manufactured its own sodas and delivered them to homes all over northern Queens.
It was an old-style operation founded by two German-Hungarian immigrant brothers in the pre-supermarket era of ice cream parlors and counter drug stores.


FOR AN AMERICAN THAT LOVED FREAKS
BEFORE P. T. BARNUM BECAME KNOWN AS a shrewd operator of circuses, he ran the American Museum in New York.
Beginning in the 1840's, one of its biggest draws was his collection of "living curiosities": extreme examples of the human form, from giants and midgets to the very fat and the very thin.
"I want none except those who represent distinct and novel peculiarities in their appearance," Barnum insisted -- preferably individuals "with some skill to render their exhibition more attractive."
For almost two decades Barnum advertised chiefly through written ads, color lithographs and banners that could exaggerate the features of his exhibits.
But by the 1860's, the invention of mass-produced "carte-de-visite" photographs offered a new product for him to sell.
And so, one by one or in groups, Barnum's "curiosities" made their way to the photography studio of Mathew B. Brady, whose business had prospered partly from Barnum's patronage.
In 1863, Barnum helped Brady obtain the largest single order of his career: official pictures for Tom Thumb's wedding.
Weeks before the ceremony, Brady posed the couple in his studio in full attire; on the wedding day, tens of thousands of finished pictures were available for 25 cents apiece.


Maureen Towers And J. P. Natkin
Maureen Towers, a daughter of Mary Towers of Morristown, N.J., and the late Edward J. Towers, was married yesterday to J. P. Natkin, the son of Judith and Robert Natkin of West Redding, Conn.
The Rev.
Clifton Palmer, a minister of the Church of Religious Science, performed the ceremony at the summit of Big Mountain in Whitefish, Mont.
The couple both received master's degrees in international relations from Johns Hopkins University.
Mrs.
Natkin, 30, graduated from Dartmouth College, and Mr.
Natkin, 35, from Boston University.


Fat Biographies
To the Editor:
I have a modest proposal for Mr.
Teachout: Stamp out the electronic word processor, which has made loquaciousness effortless and efficient.
There is no penalty for verbosity with the computer to cut, paste and process one's words.


Amy Lynn Walsh, William Walker
Amy Lynn Walsh, the daughter of Catherine and George Walsh of Salisbury, Md., was married yesterday to William Alexander Walker, a son of Susan and John Walker of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Molly McGreevy performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of St.
Luke in the Fields in New York.
Ms.
Walsh, 30, is keeping her name.
She is an assistant United States attorney in the Eastern District of New York.
She graduated from Vassar College and received her law degree from Fordham University.
Her father is a professor emeritus of philosophy at Salisbury State University, where her mother is a nursing instructor.


F.Y.I.
The Helpful Icy Blast Q.  I often see a kind of overgrown scuba tank, labeled liquid nitrogen and marked Nynex, on street curbs. (For instance, there was one the other day at Broadway and 41st Street.) Sometimes they have tubing running out of them, taped to the asphalt, which leads down under the sidewalk via manholes.
What's going on here?
A.
Dry-cleaning with chemistry!
But before you get images of Nynex workers freezing their fingers off while washing with supercold liquids, here are the facts.
Nynex has many, many three-inch cables running under the streets, each of which contains 3,600 pairs of copper wires (each pair carries a conversation).
Steam, created by subways and heating vents, sometimes gets inside these cables and causes crossed connections and corrosion of the copper wires, said Bob Varettoni, a spokesman for Nynex.
The tanks are actually more like glorified thermoses, keeping the nitrogen very, very cold.
Nitrogen boils (that is, starts turning to gas) at about minus 320 degrees Fahrenheit.
So when the nitrogen is pumped out of the tank into the tubing you see, it becomes a gas.
The gas is compressed and then blown into the three-inch cables, sopping up moisture without otherwise affecting the copper wires, before escaping through a venting hole to dissipate in the air, like steam.
Checkitout
Q.
I'm aware that Times Square is named after your paper.
But prior to that designation, the location was known as Longacre Square.
Whence that name?
A.
Like most of the place names in America, it was stolen.
Longacre Square's name was taken from a commercial street in central London called the Long Acre, according to "On Broadway: A Journey Uptown Over Time" (Rizzoli, 1990), by David W. Dunlap, a reporter for The New York Times.
The reason was this: Back in the second half of the 19th century, the principal businesses in the area were horse dealerships, carriage factories and stables. (The location made horse sense because Broadway was the city's major thoroughfare.) Long Acre in London had the same type of businesses.
So, the area came to be known as Longacre Square (Us 'Mericans had to crunch it all together, of course).
Revenge Is Sweet
Q.
Are bicyclists and in-line skaters subject to municipal traffic laws?
What are the penalties for violations?
You can guess why I want to know.
A.
Bicyclists, yes; in-line skaters, no.
Much to the chagrin of bikers, in-line skaters are pedestrians in the eyes of the law, said Sgt.
Steve Waters of the New York Police Department's Legal Bureau, and therefore don't have to obey the same traffic laws and speed limits that bikers (and drivers) do.
And unless the City Council or the State Legislature changes the laws, the worst a pedestrian can be charged with in non-injury cases is jaywalking.
Fines for jaywalking do not exceed $50.
By contrast, a biker running a red light can face a first-offense fine of at least $50 and up to $100.
Terra-Cotta Heyday
Q.
At the foot of the 59th Street Bridge in Long Island City sits a lonely, abandoned, reddish-brick building with a very steep, dark Dutch-style roof, and an unusual chimney topped with three small chimney stacks.
It is the only building of its style I have seen in the city, and it looks very out of place among the area's warehouses.
What is it?
A.
That little chalet at 42-16 Vernon Boulevard is the last piece of the once-elegant offices of the New York Architectural Terra-Cotta Company, which supplied the brown-red ceramic for many of the city's turn-of-the-century buildings.
Built in 1892 by Francis H. Kimball, the building itself has a terra-cotta trim, in addition to three antique chimney pots and a design that the A.I.A.
Guide to New York City calls "Sullivan-esque." The company went out of business in the 1920's, and after a series of commercial tenants, the building has been shuttered for about 10 years and is currently owned by Citibank.
A spokesman for the bank, Richard Howe, said there were currently no plans for the site.
And, oh yes, the building has been a New York City landmark since 1982. JESSE McKINLEY


The World; The Rich Idioms of Russian: Verbal Soul Food of a Culture
OF all the horrors confronting Russian society political and economic instability, a lingering war, an average life expectancy for men so low it's hard to believe (57 years) -- worrying about the current state of Russian conversational language might seem a little, well, petty.
But that would be taking the short view.


The Candidates Are Coming! And Some Are Spending More Than Ever
Just when you think it's safe to come out of the water, towel off and get the kids ready for school, another tidal wave of mind-numbing electioneering heads your way.
In a couple of weeks, hundreds of candidates for all 80 seats in the New Jersey Assembly will try to win votes and will spend millions of dollars in the process.
For the first time since 1979, the State Assembly has the top of the ballot all to itself.
Campaign signs reading "For State Assembly" will soon grow like weeds on roads and lawns up and down the state.


Garages Along the Kearny: There Are Better Solutions
To The Editor:
In your article about the criticism of New Jersey Transit's plans for parking garages in Maplewood and other communities ("Bumpy Ride: A Faster Rail Link to Manhattan Runs Into Parking Problems," July 30), a New Jersey Transit official was quoted: "I think there is a not-in-my-backyard sentiment . . ." That is simply an excuse to prevent progressive transportation alternatives.


High Fashion Is No Longer In Fashion
The decision to make the documentary "The Hollywood Fashion Machine," which traces the history of fashion in film, was based on fashion designers' claims that the old movies shown on American Movie Classics were influencing their work.
Hence the burst, last season, of fashions of the 1930's to the 1970's on runways.
By tracking the history of designers' influence on film, and film's influence on designers from the beginning of movies, the documentary makes its case through insiders like Isaac Mizrahi, who noted, "For an American designer, Hollywood is probably the most important source of inspiration."


Dick Armey's Research
To the Editor:
Michael Lind's critique of my book "The Freedom Revolution" (July 23) would be more compelling if he had done a little research.
While I can understand why a liberal might not enjoy my work, he should have kept his objections within the realm of ideology rather than challenging the accuracy of my data.


August 13-19; Who Was the First Upright Man?
If molecular biologists are right, the evolutionary paths of human beings and apes split 5 million to 7 million years ago.
But the fossil record for protohuman species is essentially blank before 3 or 4 million years ago.
So, to fill out the missing stems of the human family tree, paleontologists have been concentrating their searches in African sediments that might bear the remains of the earliest human ancestors.


A Prison Rehabilitation Program, With Yogurt on the Side
Edwin L. Crotty is a little worried about the future of the Skillman Dairy Farm here.
Not because of the money; the farm has been profitable each of the last 12 years.
Not because of the products; people like the milk, yogurt and beef.
He is worried because the Skillman Dairy Farm is a prison farm.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Drawing a Line . . . in Court
IT'S not that Deborah Kooperstein has anything against thighs.
It's just that Judge Kooperstein, of Southampton Town, believes there is a time and a place for everything.
And the place for bare thighs, she says, is not in court.
Even in a resort town.
So Judge Kooperstein is a strong proponent of Southampton's ban on shorts, and tank tops as well, in the courtroom.
"The ban has been in effect for a long time," Judge Kooperstein said.
"Truman Capote was thrown out for wearing shorts in court."


Lori M. Nahoum, Michael Bernstein
Lori Michele Nahoum, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Isadore Nahoum of Brooklyn, is to be married today to Dr.
Michael David Bernstein, the son of Gladys Bernstein of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Arthur I. Bernstein.
Rabbi Alvin Kass is to perform the ceremony at the Manhattan Beach Jewish Center in Brooklyn.
The bride is a reading specialist at the Highlawn Elementary School in Brooklyn.
She graduated from Brooklyn College.
Her father, now retired, was a New York City firefighter on Staten Island.
Her mother, Sheila Nahoum, is the coordinator of the cardiology department at Coney Island Hospital in Brooklyn.


The Pathmark Wars, Part Three
Starting last year, the battleground was 125th Street: local retailers fought tooth and nail -- without success -- to stop Pathmark from building a superstore.
Then the scene shifted to Springfield Gardens, Queens: last week the City Council approved a plan for a Pathmark store, but angry local store owners have not given up their fight.
Now Pathmark has returned to Harlem with a proposal to build a store on 145th Street between Bradhurst and Eighth Avenues -- and local supermarket owners are up in arms.
They have hired the same consultant who led the struggle against the 125th Street market, and they are trying to persuade city officials that one of their number should be allowed to put up a market on the site, not Pathmark.


A Short Cruise With a View
In the summertime, the journey under the Hudson River to New York can be a stifling, dismal experience.
But there is another way: ferry service across the river from three Hudson County towns.
The ferries, all operated by Weehawken-based New York Waterway, offer what amount to five-minute getaway cruises on 87-foot boats that scoot across the water at top speeds of 18 knots.
For those used to car and train tunnels, the view on the ride over is a revelation.
You can get a good look at the top-heavy Art Deco towers of the Holland Tunnel ventilation system -- one on each side of the river.
And though the ventilation buildings do their job well, the breeze on the river sure beats rolling down your windows inside the tunnel.
For more information call 1-800-53-FERRY.
ANDY NEWMAN FROM HOBOKEN Leaves from the PATH station for the World Financial Center every 5 to 10 minutes during rush hour, every 20 minutes other times.
Last ferry: 10:45 P.M. weekdays, 10 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday.
Parking available.
FROM JERSEY CITY Leaves from Hudson Street south of Exchange Place for the World Financial Center every 15 minutes, weekdays only.
Last ferry: 10 P.M.
Parking $7 a day.
FROM WEEHAWKEN Leaves from the terminal near Port Imperial for West 38th Street near Jacob Javits Center every 15 minutes.
Last ferry: midnight Sunday through Thursday, 1 A.M. weekends.
Parking $5 a day.


POSTINGS: Harlem River Rail Plan Backed by Court; Bronx Project Moves Forward
An innovative rail facility-cum-paper mill project is on track again in the South Bronx after an appeals court reversed a lower court ruling that had halted the redevelopment of the Harlem River Rail Yards as a multi-use rail facility and industrial park.
"We will bid out infrastructure costs and contracts this fall," said Anthony M. Riccio Jr., the project director for Hudson River Yards Ventures, part of the Galesi Group, which is leasing the site.
"Rail service should commence by the end of this year. Lease negotiations that had been put on hold will now proceed in earnest."


Coming Transit Reductions: What They Mean for You
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority has voted to reduce bus and subway service.
Here are major changes, due Sept. 10, and any alternatives.
Subway Service  MANHATTAN
42d Street Shuttle CURRENT 24 hours/day.
SEPT. 10 No service midnight-6 A.M.
ALTERNATIVE No. 7 train.
Lenox Avenue Shuttle CURRENT 24 hours/day.
SEPT. 10 No service 11 P.M.-6 A.M., daily.
ALTERNATIVE Bus service (every 20 minutes): Southbound, 10:30 P.M.-6:30, weekdays; northbound, midnight-7 A.M., weekdays.
Southbound, 11 P.M.-6 A.M., weekends; northbound, 11:30 P.M.-7 A.M., weekends.
BROOKLYN
Dean Street Station SEPT 10 Closing.  Bus Service  MANHATTAN
M9: Union Sq. to Battery Park City CURRENT 6 A.M.-10:20 P.M., weekdays; 8 A.M.-11:15 P.M., weekends.
SEPT. 10 6 A.M.-9 P.M., weekdays; 8 A.M.-9 P.M., weekends.
ALTERNATIVES M14, M21, M15, M22, M101, M102, M6.
M30: East 72d to West 57th St.
CURRENT 7 A.M.-7 P.M., weekdays; 10 A.M.-6:30 P.M., Saturdays.
SEPT. 10 No service 10 A.M.-4 P.M., weekdays.
No Saturday service.
ALTERNATIVES Southbound on Second, Lexington, and Fifth; crosstown on East 79th and East 66th; M72, M31.
M35: 125th St./Lexington Ave. to Wards Island/Randalls Island, with some trips across Triborough Bridge to Queens.
CURRENT 5:30 A.M.-1 A.M., weekdays; 5:30 A.M.-12:30 A.M., weekends. 6 trips to/from Astoria, 6 A.M.-9 A.M., daily; 7 trips to/from Astoria, 3:15 P.M.-6:50 P.M., daily.
SEPT 10 No service to/from Astoria.
ALTERNATIVE M60.
M116: 116th St./F.D.R.
Dr. to 106th St./Broadway CURRENT 24 hours/day.
SEPT. 10 5 A.M.-1 A.M., daily.
BRONX
Bx3: West 238th St./Broadway to West 181st St./Broadway; shortened nighttime service Kingsbridge Rd./ University Ave. to West 181st St.
CURRENT 24 hours/day.
SEPT. 10 5 A.M.-12:30 A.M., daily.
Bx13: Broadway/181st St. to 161st St./River Ave.
CURRENT 24 hours/day.
SEPT. 10 5 A.M.-12:30 A.M., daily.
Bx14: Research Ave./Ampere Ave. to Hugh Grant Circle CURRENT 5:50 A.M.-midnight, weekdays; 6:45 A.M.-midnight, weekends.
SEPT. 10 5:50 A.M.-10:30 P.M., weekdays; 6:45 A.M.-10:30 P.M., weekends.
ALTERNATIVES Bx40, Bx4, No. 6 subway line.
Bx17: Third Ave./Fordham Rd. to East 132d St./Walnut Ave.
CURRENT 24 hours/day.
SEPT. 10 Northbound service, 4:20 A.M.-midnight, weekdays; southbound service, 5 A.M.-midnight, weekdays. northbound and southbound service, 5 A.M.-midnight, weekends.
Bx18: One-way loop starting at Grand Concourse/170th St.
CURRENT 6 A.M.-10:30 P.M., weekdays; 7 A.M.-10:30 P.M., Saturdays; 7:45 A.M.-10:30 P.M.
Sundays.
SEPT. 10 6:30 A.M.-8:30 P.M., weekdays; 7:30 A.M.-8:30 P.M., weekends.
Bx20: Henry Hudson Parkway/ West 246th St. to Broadway/West 207th St.
CURRENT 4:50 A.M.-12:30 A.M., weekdays; 5:50 A.M.-12:20 A.M., weekends.
SEPT. 10 Northbound service, 5:30 A.M.-11:30 P.M., weekdays; southbound service, 6 A.M.-midnight, weekdays.
Northbound service, 7:30 A.M.-11 P.M.
Saturdays; southbound service, 8 A.M.-11:30 P.M., Saturdays.
No Sunday service.
ALTERNATIVES Bx7 to No. 1 and A subway lines; Bx10 to No. 1 and other subway lines.
Bx24: West 256th St./Fieldston Rd. to Fordham Plaza CURRENT 6:40 A.M.-6:20 P.M., weekdays; 9 A.M.-5:40 P.M., Saturdays.
SEPT. 10 No service.
ALTERNATIVES Bx10, Bx20, Bx 12.
Bx32: East 138th St./Lincoln Ave. to Veterans Administration Medical Center CURRENT 5:15 A.M.-12:10 A.M., weekdays; 6:30 A.M.-12:15 A.M., weekends.
SEPT. 10 No change in weekday service.
Northbound service, 7:30 A.M.-10 P.M., weekends; southbound service, 8:15 A.M.-10:45 P.M., weekends.
ALTERNATIVES Bx9, Bx3.
Bx55: Gun Hill Rd./White Plains Rd. to East 149th St./Third Ave.
CURRENT 24 hours/day.
SEPT. 10 No service past Fordham Plaza, 1 A.M.-5 A.M., daily.
ALTERNATIVE Bx41.
BROOKLYN
B2: Kings Highway subway station (D&amp;Q lines) to Kings Plaza shopping mall CURRENT 24 hours/day.
SEPT. 10 Eastbound service, 5:15 A.M.-1 A.M., weekdays; westbound service, 5 A.M.-12:30 A.M., weekdays.
Eastbound service, 5:30 A.M.-1 A.M., weekends; westbound service, 5:15 A.M.-12:30 A.M., weekends.
ALTERNATIVES B3, B41, B44.
B5/B50 CURRENT B5 Canal Ave./Cropsey Ave. to Flatbush Ave./Kings Highway; CURRENT B50 Kings Highway/ Coney Island Ave. to Seaview Ave./ Pennsylvania Ave.
SEPT. 10 B5 and B50 merge (new B82 line); runs 24 hours/day.
B11: Brooklyn Army Terminal to Flatbush Ave./Nostrand Ave.
CURRENT 24 hours/day.
SEPT. 10 Eastbound service, 4:14 A.M.-12:15 A.M., daily; westbound service, 4:45 A.M.-12:45 A.M., daily.
ALTERNATIVE B6 between Flatbush and Coney Island Aves.
No alternative west of Coney Island Ave.
B16: Empire Blvd. to Shore Road CURRENT 24 hours/day.
SEPT. 10 Northbound service, 4:30 A.M.-1 A.M., weekdays; southbound service, 4:45 A.M.-12:45 A.M., weekdays.
Northbound service, 5 A.M.-1 A.M., weekends; southbound service, 4:45 A.M.-12:45 A.M., weekends.
B18: Metropolitan Ave. to Crescent St.
CURRENT 4:20 A.M.-12:20 A.M., daily.
SEPT. 10 Northbound and southbound service, 5:45 A.M.-midnight, weekdays.
Northbound and southbound service, 7 A.M.-midnight, weekends.
ALTERNATIVES B13; L and J/Z subway trains.
B23: B, M, and N subway stations in Bensonhurst to Flatbush Ave./ Cortelyou Rd.
CURRENT 5:30 A.M.-1:30 A.M., daily.
SEPT. 10 Eastbound service, 5:30 A.M.-11 P.M., daily; westbound service, 5:45 A.M.-11:15 P.M., daily.
ALTERNATIVES No single alternative service.
B47/62 CURRENT B47 Williamsburg Bridge Plaza to Empire Boulevard/Flatbush Ave.
CURRENT B62 Graham Ave./Broadway to Box St./Manhattan Ave.
SEPT. 10 B47 and B62 merge (new B43 line); runs 24 hour/day.
B69: Windsor Terrace to the Manhattan Bridge CURRENT 24 hours/day.
SEPT. 10 Northbound service, 5:10 A.M.-12:30 A.M., daily; southbound service, 5:50 A.M.-1 A.M., daily.
ALTERNATIVES B67 in Park Slope; B48 north of Park Slope.


Flying in the Face of Discrimination
During World War II, a group of black Army Air Forces pilots valiantly fought two enemies - Nazism and racism - to become one of the most decorated squadrons in American military history.
They were known as the Tuskegee airmen, after the segregated military complex near Tuskegee, Ala., where they were trained.
They were idealistic, college-educated men, boys really, willing to fight and die for a country that denied them the rights and privileges of first-class citizenship.
Their actions and determination helped remove racial barriers and push the military toward full integration; their heroism helped vindicate a race accused of lacking the courage, skill or intelligence to fight a war.


Corrections
An article and picture captions on July 30 about the Minnesota Valley National Wildlife Refuge misidentified a bird.
It was a great egret, or American egret, not a snowy egret.
In addition, the caption showing the egret with Route 77 in the background misidentifies the setting.
It is the Long Meadow Lake unit, not Black Dog Preserve.


Man Held in Wounding Of Reputed Aide to Gotti
A 59-year-old ex-convict from the Bronx was charged yesterday in the shooting of the reputed mob figure John P. Giordano outside Lenox Hill Hospital in April.
The suspect, Ernesto Rodriguez, was arrested Friday night at a Bronx apartment where he was hiding, the authorities said yesterday.
Two other men, described by the police as accomplices, were arrested in April.
The shooting left Mr.
Giordano, reportedly a top figure in the Gambino crime family and close associate of John Gotti Sr., paralyzed from the neck down.


Vive la Difference!


The View From: New London; Where to Find a Dragon Named Bud
WE didn't brush last night or this morning," said David Yoselevsky, who with six other youngsters had forgone dental hygiene for the sake of science.
"We're doing an experiment," said Tom Woudenberg, the fifth to eighth graders' instructor in the program "Be a Microbe Hunter in the Invisible Jungle" at the new Science Center of Eastern Connecticut in New London.
After not brushing since the previous morning, each youngster placed drops of saliva on one side of a prepared plate.
Then each brushed and put some saliva on the other side of the plate, in order to compare bacterial growth. (Everybody did have a toothbrush.)


Angie Mina Ha, Daniel Master Jr.
Angie Mina Ha, the daughter of Min and John Ha of Spokane, Wash., was married yesterday to Daniel Louis Master Jr., the son of Florence and Daniel Master of Todt Hill, S.I.
The Rev.
Dr.
Gerald R. Harris officiated at the New Dorp Moravian Church in New Dorp, S.I.
The bride, 26, is to enter the M.B.A. program at Columbia University in September.
She graduated from Stanford University, from which she also received a master's degree in international education policy.
Her father is the owner and manager of the Otis Hotel in Spokane.


Streetscapes/James Bogardus; Inventor as an Architect and a Cast-Iron Pioneer
AFTER three decades of historic preservation in New York City, is there nothing left to discover about how New York was built?
Actually, there's plenty of research remaining to be done, even about nationally significant architects.
James Bogardus, the pioneer of cast-iron architecture, is a good example, and suggests that we are much more advanced in protecting our architectural history than we are in understanding it.
Bogardus was one of New York's most famous architects -- even though he didn't consider himself an architect.
Instead he was an inventor in the 19th-century tradition, patenting cotton-spinning machinery, clocks, grinding mills, gas meters and printing apparatus.


Finding Fraud
To the Editor:
"Worried About Access to Insurance?" (Spending It, July 9) outlined a recent agreement between the Medical Information Bureau and the Federal Trade Commission.
The significance of the agreement and use of M.I.B. reports should be clarified.


Sports of The Times; He Who Has Pulpit Preaches
BEFORE Mike Tyson ever laid a glove on Peter McNeeley last night, the former heavyweight champion from the Brownsville section of Brooklyn unleashed a two-fisted attack on the news media last week.
Tyson, who served three years in prison for a rape conviction, called one writer an assassin and referred to members of the media, in so many words, as vultures feeding on the misfortunes of others.


August 13-19: Payback Time; White Separatists on Ruby Ridge Awarded $3.1 Million
Hoping to close a painful chapter in law enforcement history, the Justice Department last week agreed to pay $3.1 million to the family of a white separatist, Randall C. Weaver, whose wife and teen-age son were shot and killed three years ago by Federal agents at their home on a remote bluff in Idaho known as Ruby Ridge.
Earlier this year, the F.B.I. acknowledged that it had violated the Constitution when it relaxed its rules and, in effect, permitted the agents to shoot on sight without provocation.


Flying Blind -- A special report; Aging Control System Brings Chaos to Air Travel
At least 11 times in the last year, air traffic control centers have stumbled or broken down completely, robbing controllers of the tools they use to keep airplanes separated and on course, sometimes leaving them completely deaf, mute and blind.
The main problem, everyone agrees, is that some computers that help controllers track airplanes are at least 25 years old and long past due for replacement, but updated technology has been delayed because contractors have not been able to write the software for new equipment.
Even though the Federal Aviation Administration is facing a difficult stretch, until new systems are designed, tested and installed it is doing something surprising with maintenance: cutting back.
It is also letting equipment go unattended on night shifts, eliminating training for technicians and cutting back on hiring, so that in some busy air traffic control centers half the technicians are eligible to retire.


Frommer Adds Guides For American Drivers
A new series of road-travel guides, Frommer's "America on Wheels," is challenging the familiar Mobil Travel Guide series and American Automobile Association Tour Books.
Macmillan Travel published the first four volumes at the end of April: Arizona and New Mexico; California and Nevada; Florida; the Mid-Atlantic States, comprising Delaware, the District of Columbia, Maryland, Virginia and West Virginia.
Five more volumes, due next year, will cover the rest of the country.
After 1996, the books will be revised annually.
Travel writers from each region reviewed the lodgings and restaurants.
They rated the lodgings after inspecting two rooms at each hotel or motel and spending at least an hour there, according to Gretchen Henderson, the project director.
Lodging ratings are in flags, with an "ultra" for outstanding.
Reporters did not stay overnight except at the few places in the running for an "ultra."


Rethinking Plan For New Trains To the Planes
Plans for a rail system linking the two Queens airports and Manhattan have been dead since May.
Now, as the Port Authority presses forward with plans for a 7.5-mile monorail connecting the terminals at Kennedy International Airport to the Howard Beach station on the A subway line, community leaders are rethinking their positions.
Like many Howard Beach residents, Betty Braton, the chairwoman of Community Board 10, lives under the scream of jet airplanes.
People in her neighborhood are more concerned with getting away from the airport than getting to it.


At the Sagamore
To the Editor: I was rather perturbed by Adam Bryant's less than exalted review of the Sagamore Hotel on Lake George ("One 4-Year Old, Two Resorts," June 11).
My husband and I have stayed at the Sagamore six times in the past 10 years.
First of all, I believe Mr.
Bryant was misguided into thinking that the Sagamore is a family resort.
Although certain child-oriented services do exist (such as the baby-sitting service), the Sagamore is primarily a resort for adults who want to relax away from the tensions of everyday life.


Correction
A brief article in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday about G &amp; P, a luncheonette that closed recently on West 25th Street, misstated its location.
It was between the Avenue of the Americas and Seventh Avenue, not Eighth and Ninth Avenues.


A COAST WITH A BUSY HISTORY
BOUND to Britain by centuries of commerce and conflict, the southeastern coast of Ireland affords even casual visitors perspective on what happens when cultures clash and merge.
This very accessible corner of the country -- only a few hours' drive from Dublin and connected to England and France by ferry at Rosslare Harbor -- is rich with the history of invasion and rebellion, and offers Ireland's mildest weather along with a great variety of sandy beaches, villages, castles and ancient walled towns whose layers reveal the succession of power.
Geologists refer to this region as the Leinster Ridge because of the swatch of granite mountains, the Wicklow and Blackstairs ranges, that sets off the coastal towns.
Celtic chieftains, Christian monks and generations of English nobility built their castles, abbeys, or great houses along the rivers -- the Slaney, Barrow, Suir and Blackwater -- that flow from those heights out to the sea.
The rivers and magnificent natural harbors at Wexford, Waterford and Youghal brought trade and cultural exchange during peacetime but made the lowlands vulnerable to invasion.


For a Chinese Senior Center, the Big Problem is Popularity
Every weekday morning, Cheng Szi-yu spends about 30 minutes traveling by bus and subway from Rego Park to the Nan Shan Senior Center in Flushing.
The trip is a hassle, she says, but the activities at Nan Shan, the borough's only Chinese senior center, make it worthwhile.
At the center, Mrs.
Cheng, 64, and up to 200 others busy themselves with about a dozen programs that include Chinese calligraphy, Chinese opera, t'ai chi and physical fitness, but mostly Mrs.
Cheng volunteers in the office or leads karaoke classes.
Every now and then, she sits at a table to play a round of a mah-jongg game called the Great Wall.


A New Chapter For Book Kiosks At Central Park
The Strand Book Store's two distinctive red kiosks outside Central Park at 60th Street and Fifth Avenue, which have attracted browsers and buyers for more than 20 years, are living on borrowed time.
The Strand was outbid for the site by Annex Antiques, whose arrival has been delayed by construction of kiosks that are supposed to look like the current ones.
So the Strand and Albion Books, owner of the third stall at the site, have stayed through the summer on a month-by-month basis.


Businessman With Low Profile And Big Impact Enters Spotlight
His name is not a household word in the city, yet he is a general partner in what is arguably its best known skyscraper, the Empire State Building.
And he has helped change the ambiance of Manhattan by creating business improvement districts to rid the streets of graffiti, taxi hustlers, panhandlers, the homeless and petty criminals.
He does not live in the city.
Blending into crowds of suburban commuters, he rides the train from Greenwich, Conn., to Grand Central Terminal, where he may stoop and pick up a scrap of litter that offends his vision of a tidy midtown.
Meet Peter Laurence Malkin, who until recently had kept a low profile even as his corporate presence loomed large on the skyline -- a contrast to real-estate names like Helmsley, Rudin and Zeckendorf.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Why the Media Leave No Movie Deal Uncovered
EVEN those who haven't seen the film "Waterworld" probably know that it is the costliest movie ever made and has been widely pronounced a flop despite opening-weekend box-office receipts of $21 million.
Few Americans could say who runs General Motors, but no one needs a regular Monday night table at Morton's to be in on the feud between Michael Eisner, the chairman of the Walt Disney Company, and his once-trusted lieutenant, Jeffrey Katzenberg.
And who isn't aware that Michael Ovitz reportedly earned $30 million last year as the principal owner of the Creative Artists Agency and is now likely to make hundreds of millions more as the president of Disney, the job to which he was named last week?
The airwaves are flooded with shows revealing the machinations behind various movie deals.
Newspapers across the country, as well as CNN, routinely report the 10 highest-grossing movies of the weekend.


Manners in the Air
To the Editor: Oh, please.
All these business travelers should just get together and charter their own plane so that they wouldn't have to deal with the rest of the population.
If you told me that Janice Lee Maniatis is a parent, I would find it hard to believe.
Exactly where does she expect me to change my baby's diaper?
In the aisle?
Changing tables are not available on all planes.


Valerie Townsend, K. M. Hansen
Valerie Joyce Townsend, the daughter of Kathe Menick Townsend of Danbury, Conn., and Dr.
Gary L. Townsend of Brookfield, Conn., was married yesterday to Kristopher Martin Hansen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin R. Hansen of Lanoka Harbor, N.J.
The Rev.
Robert P. Morrissey performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Ridgefield, Conn.
The couple graduated from Fordham University, from which the bridegroom also received a law degree.


FRONTIERS OF SCIENCE: Bad Breath
For bad breath, go to Belgium.
The nature of halitosis, the fear of having it, the cause of it and the cure will all be discussed at the Second International Workshop on Oral Malodor in Louvain, Belgium, in October.
"As you can imagine, it's a difficult area to do research in," says one organizer of the conference, Mel Rosenberg of Tel Aviv University.
But more than 100 specialists from around the world will attend the meeting, among them microbiologists, psychophysicists and, of course, dentists.


A Role Model for Wayward Youths Finds Trouble of His Own
In Lefrak City, Russell Barnwell has long been revered as a hero and a model parent.
Parents there say they are grateful to him because he has extended his love beyond his family, talking to at-risk youths and handing out his home number to anyone needing counseling or simply wanting a sympathetic ear.
Mr.
Barnwell's words have carried weight because of his job, as a corrections officer at Rikers Island.
He warned youths that they could listen to him as a friend, or take his orders in jail.


Yael Septee, Donald O. Kane
Yael Septee, a daughter of Ruth and Moe Septee of Philadelphia, is to be married today to Donald Owen Kane, the son of Cynthia Smith of Boca Raton, Fla., and the late Elmer R. Kane.
Rabbi Sidney Schwarz is to perform the ceremony at the bride's parents' home in Deal, N.J.
The bride, 39, is the executive director of the Young Leadership Cabinet, a fund-raising arm of the UJA-Federation in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a master's degree in education from Harvard University.
Her father is an independent theatrical producer in Philadelphia.
Her mother is the owner of Philadelphia Select-a-Show Inc., a theatergoers' club in Philadelphia.


Marinated Bluefish, a Taste of Summer
ASK for snappers in a fish market and chances are the clerk will bring out silver-pink red snappers from Southern waters.
But a snapper is also what fishermen in this part of the country call a baby bluefish, usually weighing a pound or less.
The name distinguishes the small bluefish from the larger, full-grown Jack-the-Ripper blues known as choppers, voracious fish that slash their way sharklike through a school of prey.
The advantage of the babies is that they have a milder flavor than larger bluefish.
And when I find these snappers in the market, I love using them to make escabeche, a savory marinated cooked-fish dish.


Walther Schoeller, Susanne Tolmach
Susanne Gaye Tolmach, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ned Tolmach of Great Falls, Va., was married yesterday to Walther Schoeller, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rutger Schoeller of Duren, Germany.
The Rev.
Pfarrer J. Friedrich performed the ceremony at St.
Sixtus Church in Schliersee, Germany.
The couple received M.B.A.'s from Dartmouth College.


Christina Raskopf And Daniel Seale
Christina Helene Raskopf, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick J. Raskopf Jr. of Darien, Conn., was married there yesterday to Daniel Christian Seale, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathaniel C. Seale of Worcester, Mass.
The Rev.
Edward J. Howley performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas More Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Seale, 25, graduated cum laude from Middlebury College.
She is an associate in the structured finance division of Chemical Bank in New York.
Her father owns Raskopf Inc., a construction company in Greenwich, Conn.


Let's Give Full Credit Where Credits Are Done
LUCY POWELL HAS THE least glamorous job in the film business.
Her work is so poorly received, most moviegoers walk out before it begins.
"We agonize over the details," said Ms.
Powell, whose company, Pacific Title, makes the credits at the ends of many films.
"And we know that no one's going to stay for them."


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Caryn Urciuoli, R. J. Jacoby Jr.
Caryn Sloan Urciuoli, the daughter of Margaret and J. Arthur Urciuoli of Riverside, Conn., was married yesterday to Richard J. Jacoby Jr., the son of Mr.
Jacoby of New Rochelle, N.Y., and the late Gail Williams Jacoby.
The Rev.
Dr.
Thomas L. Steirs performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Old Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Jacoby, 26, graduated from Wheelock College.
She is a nursery school teacher at the Greenwich (Conn.) Country Day School.
Her father, who works in Princeton, N.J., is a senior vice president and the director of the private client marketing group at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
Her mother is a partner in Small Ideas Inc., a maker of custom reproductions of miniature furniture for doll houses, in Riverside.


The World; From 'Greater Serbia' to Lesser Serbs: A War Turns
IN 1989, as he orchestrated the unfurling of Serbian nationalism that was to destabilize Yugoslavia, President Slobodan Milosevic promised Serbs a glorious future but warned that "disunity and treason" had haunted his people "like an evil omen throughout their history." He was nothing if not prescient: incoherence and internal rivalries are now threatening to bring the Serbs to their knees.
The treason that Mr.
Milosevic had in mind six years ago was one that has passed into the fertile domain of Serbian legend: that of Vuk Brankovic, a Serbian knight who, during the Battle of Kosovo in 1389, fled with his followers rather than stand up to the ultimately victorious Turks.
But the treason perceived by many of the tens of thousands of weary Serbian refugees from the Krajina processing on tractors through Serbia this week was that of another man: Mr.
Milosevic himself.


Fern Hamer, Michael Fergus
FERN SMALLS HAMER, 29, is known among her friends as a clotheshorse whose monthly dry-cleaning bill far exceeds her grocery bill.
She is also known as a sentimentalist who has saved everything from old diaries and report cards to notes she got in the second grade and the remains of a corsage she wore to a high school dance.
She even saved the wine bottle from her first date with Michael Arthur Fergus 10 years ago, when they were both college students in Boston -- she at Simmons College, he at Northeastern University.


Peter Shaw, 58, Who Fought Political Correctness in Academe
Peter Shaw, an English professor who crossed academic disciplines to write a biography of John Adams in the 1970's and then became a leader of the neoconservative academic movement, died on Thursday at Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 58 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was heart disease, his family said.


After Soul-Searching, Cathedral Files Suit
The bonds between the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine and its across-the-street neighbor, the Amsterdam Nursing Home, are long and strong: The nursing home was founded in 1872 by an Episcopal priest; trustees have served on the boards of both institutions and the Very Rev.
James Parks Morton, the dean of the cathedral, used to visit the home every day when his mother lived there.
And so, Dean Morton said, it took some soul-searching before he and the cathedral's executive board filed a lawsuit against the home, seeking to block its plan to build a 13-story extension.
Church officials say the new wing would obstruct the views of and from the world's largest Gothic cathedral, destroy a historic garden and, more generally, degrade the splendor of a beautiful public monument.


Transactions
Football  National Football League JACKSONVILLE JAGUARS -- Released Andre Ware, quarterback; Ron Collins and Ricky Shaw, offensive linemen; Mark Tucker, center; Charles Davenport and John Morton, wide receivers; Carlos Etheridge, tight end; Markus Thomas, running back; Kendall Brown and Gonzalo Floyd, defensive ends; Chris Williams, defensive tackle; Hillary Butler and Jason Carthen, linebackers; and Rogerick Green, Tommy Johnson and Michael Davis, cornerbacks.
Placed John Duff, defensive end; Marcus Price, offensive tackle; Mazio Royster, running back; and Rod Smalley, linebacker, on injured reserve.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Released Mike Suarez, offensive lineman; Brian White, safety; linebacker Alcides Catanho, linebacker; Bucky Richardson, fullback; Jim Stayer, quarterback; and Leonard Ray and Daniel Adams, wide receivers.


Corrections
A caption in the theater listings on page 32 of the Arts &amp; Leisure section today omits the title of the play by Alan Bowne that is opening on Thursday at the Trocadero Cabaret Theater in Greenwich Village.
It is "Beirut."


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
DOWNTOWN BROOKLYN City as Textbook: Bridge Engineering
The boroughs of New York are linked by one of the world's most extensive networks of bridges, something most people take for granted in their daily journeys over them.
How do these marvels of engineering come to pass?
And what do all those cables and towers and other oddly shaped pieces have to do with it?
The New York Transit Museum wants us to know, so they're sponsoring "Bridge Game" on Saturday, a glimpse inside the bowels of the Manhattan Bridge (above) and the Williamsburg Bridge.
Dr.
Bojidar S. Yanev, the director of bridge inspection for the city Department of Transportation, will explain how the bridges were designed and built and the role mass transit played in their construction.
He hopes to untangle the intricate cabling systems inside their anchorages and explain how their underbellies work.
New York Transit Museum, 130 Livingston Street, Downtown Brooklyn. 11 A.M.; $15; $10 for museum members.
Reservations required.
Information, (718) 243-5839.
THE BRONX BEAT Free Concerts By Paquito D'Rivera
Hot, sticky city dwellers can cool to the sounds of the jazz great Paquito D'Rivera when he joins the Bronx Art Ensemble in "A Latin American Celebration" today.
Mr.
D'Rivera (below), a clarinetist and saxophonist acclaimed for his fusion of jazz, classical and Latin-Caribbean styles, will perform his own composition, "Aires Tropicales," at two free concerts, in Van Cortlandt Park and the McGinley Center at Fordham University.
The program will also feature Latin standards by the Uruguayan composer Luis Pasquet, Dizzy Gillespie and Ernesto Lecuona, performed by guest artists including Brenda Feliciano, a soprano with Manhattan's Repertorio Espagnol, the bass player Dean Crandall and the pianist Carlos Franzetti.
The concert is part of the Bronx Arts Ensemble's free Summermusic '95 series, which winds down next Sunday with a Bach festival.
At 2 P.M.: Van Cortlandt Park, (Rockwood Drive Circle, near Broadway and Mosholu Avenue,) the Bronx.
At 4 P.M.: McGinley Center, Southern Boulevard on Fordham University's Rose Hill campus.
In case of rain, the 2 P.M. concert will move to the Church of the Mediator, West 231st Street and Kingsbridge Avenue.
Both concerts are free.
Information and directions, (718) 601-7399.
TRIBECA 'Radical Jewish Roots Band' At the Knitting Factory
The Klezmatics (above) call themselves "the planet's only radical Jewish roots band." Their new album, "Jews With Horns," weaves merengue, hip hop, Brazilian jazz and experimental rock influences into the joyful music born in Eastern Europe's shtetls.
The group, an amalgam of clarinet, trumpet, accordian, violin, keyboard, bass and vocals, will play two sets Thursday at the Knitting Factory.
Knitting Factory, 74 Leonard Street, between Broadway and Church Street; 8 and 10 P.M.
Information, (212) 219-3055.
ALSO AROUND TOWN SINGLES HIKE A three-hour tour of Forest Park, 411 acres of oak forest.
Hike allows singles time to mingle while learning about the park's history.
Hikers should wear sturdy shoes and bring lunch.
Saturday, 10 A.M.; Woodhaven Boulevard and East Park Drive; registration, $5.
Information: (718) 235-4462.
FREE SHAKESPEARE "Twelfth Night" by the Kings County Shakespeare Company, the borough's only Shakespeare ensemble Bandshell in Prospect Park, beginning Thursday at 8 P.M. and running nightly through Sept. 3, except for Monday, Aug. 28.
Free, but the company says $2 donations are "gratefully accepted." Bandshell, Ninth Street and Prospect Park West in Park Slope.
Information: (718) 596-9685.
KATHRYN SHATTUCK


HAPPY ENDINGS
Whether it's a simple meal of grilled food or a cold buffet made hours in advance, summer cooking can leave both guest and cook hankering for a piece de resistance.
This truth about summer dining is well known to the nation's best chefs.
Having weathered many seasons, they know that diners, flush from steamy sidewalks, tend to think in terms of thermal antidotes -- a salad and grilled fish, say, that can be appreciated with a minimum of thought.
Thus fortified (or bored), they are ready to entertain something more complicated.
In other words, fulfilling one desire has whet another.


NOT SO FAST
"The most pragmatic realism," McKibben states, "rooted in the molecular structure of CO2, demands electric cars." But most electricity is now produced by burning fossil fuels.
Using electric cars in Los Angeles only shifts the generation of CO2 (and visible pollutants) to another location, like the Four Corners region.
ELIZABETH WALL RALSTON Los Angeles


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
DOWNTOWN BROOKLYN  City as Textbook: Bridge Engineering
The boroughs of New York are linked by one of the world's most extensive networks of bridges, something most people take for granted in their daily journeys over them.
How do these marvels of engineering come to pass?
And what do all those cables and towers and other oddly shaped pieces have to do with it?


I.B.M. Planning a Scaled-Down New Headquarters
I.B.M. is moving forward with plans to abandon its palatial headquarters in Armonk in favor of something next door that is smaller but more serviceable by contemporary standards.
Preliminary plans indicate that the building will be as high-tech as the company itself.
"Our current facility is simply no longer suited to serve as headquarters of the world's leading information technology company," said Louis V. Gerstner Jr., I.B.M.'s chairman and chief executive officer, in a letter to I.B.M. employees.
He went on to point out that the 30-year-old headquarters would have to be totally renovated and rewired to meet today's needs.
"The bottom line is that a new building would cost about the same as overhauling our current building."


The Last Loaves


Renee Leviton, Craig Alexander
Renee Karyn Leviton, the daughter of Ted Leviton of Hewlett, L.I., and Phyllis Leviton of Woodmere, L.I., was married last evening to Craig Whitney Alexander, the son of Leslie Mandelbaum of North Caldwell, N.J., and Dr.
Steven Alexander of Wayne, N.J.
Rabbi Norman Patz officiated at the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
Ms.
Leviton, 26, is keeping her name.
She is a staff attorney in the criminal defense division of the Legal Aid Society in New York.
She graduated from Hofstra University, and she and Mr.
Alexander received their law degrees from Yeshiva University.


INSIDE
Echoes of Bronx Shooting
The fatal shooting of two Bronx men in January has been kept alive by gnawing questions of why the police fired so many shots, particularly into the victims' backs.
Page 35.
How Much School Fat?
Mayor Giuliani wants less bureaucracy in New York City schools, but there may not be enough fat to produce reductions big enough to suit him.
A news analysis.
Page 35.
A Blues Shrine Threatened
A New Orleans music institution, Tipitina's, is up for sale, a casualty of more comfortable -- and commercial -- nightclubs.
Page 18.
Tyson Wins Quickly
In his first bout since his prison term for rape, Mike Tyson knocked out Peter McNeeley in the first round.
SportsSunday, section 8. (Some copies went to press before the fight.) A Rolling Window on America
The Golden Age of railroads is gone, but for some the allure remains.
Campbell Walker, 3, watched the switching of engines in Washington D.C.
A photo essay, page 20.


Mountain Story


Flood Puts Damper on Vietnamese Celebration


A Trip to Our 6th Borough (the Hamptons)
I DID not come here only for the waters; I wanted to sight Salman Rushdie, Michael Jackson, Marvin Davis's chair.
I wanted an authentic Hamptons experience of my own, perhaps in an air-conditioned limo on the way to a scorching beach, instead of just reading about it in the gossip columns while waiting for a refrigerated subway car on a microwaved platform.
"You really think Rushdie was here?" asked the best-connected person I know here.
This was on the phone.


Comedy's Underside, Crowd's Roar
FOR the Phoenix Theater Company's third play of an ambitious summer in Purchase, N.Y., reach is all.
Where comedy tonight is the season's catchall phrase, "Comedians" by Trevor Griffiths uncovers the underside of the form that is supposed to make people laugh, whatever the price.
In an adult education classroom, a motley crew of would-be funnymen in training for stand-up go through exercises, from improvisation to introspection, and get technical pointers -- on pacing, on detail, on attitude, on subtext and on dealing with coughers in the audience, which may be the play's most lasting contribution to the future of live performance.


New Allies Sing Their First Notes Together
DON'T judge the New Jersey State Opera by the season's opening night on Thursday, the bread-and-butter double bill popularly known as "Cav" and "Pag." And don't even call it an opening night, though the performance will be the first of the company's 30th season.
But then, is this really a season?
It's a time of purposeful transition and perhaps some confusion, but what's clear is that the company is making a big sound.
Working to restore opera to its glory days in the state, the New Jersey State Opera and Opera Music Theater International, a nine-year-old educational and performing organization, have forged an alliance that may yet become a merger.


A Former British P.O.W. Forgives Japanese Foe
For British veterans of World War II, few issues are likely to aggravate old wounds more severely than the treatment of prisoners of war by the Japanese.
Thousands of prisoners died in the prison and labor camps set up in the Far East; tens of thousands more returned home ill, emaciated and shattered by harsh conditions.
All this has created an enormous problem for Britain's still-bitter veterans during last week's commemorations of the 50th anniversary of V-J Day, when the Japanese surrendered to the Allied forces.
Hatred of the Japanese runs deep in Britain among the wartime generation.
And most veterans refused to soften their views when Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama of Japan on Tuesday expressed his "heartfelt apology" for the damage inflicted by his country, saying that Mr.
Murayama's statement had not gone far enough.


In Queens, Dairy Farms Continued Long After 1910
To the Editor:
The Aug. 6 Playing in the Neighborhood article "Down on the Farm in the Big City" contains the misleading statement that "there was active farm life in Queens until at least 1910." I should know: I married the farmer's son.


NEWS SUMMARY
There are doubts about his account. 6  Inquiry into shooting of Border Patrol officer runs into snags. 5  An effort to protect old manuscripts in Laos. 16  Reconciliation from a British former prisoner of war. 10.
But as a Connecticut trial prepares to expand its trial into several towns and cities, how soon the promise is delivered depends on technology that has not been perfected, regulators settling new rules for competition between the telephone and cable industries, and not least, consumers. 35  Fresh Air Fund 36  Obituaries 42  Honeychile Wilder, ex-showgirl and princess.


Natalie Hamilton, Robert Doyle Jr.
Natalie Sue Hamilton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lyle R. Hamilton of Reston, Va., was married yesterday to Robert Warren Doyle Jr., a son of Justice and Mrs.
Robert W. Doyle of Smithtown, L.I.
The Rev.
Donald J. Planty Jr. performed the ceremony at St.
John Neumann Roman Catholic Church in Reston.
The couple, both 28, graduated from the University of Virginia.


Summer in SoHo, The Global Kitchen
BAROLO ** (212) 226-1102; 398 West Broadway, near Spring Street; $ [ c) all major credit cards


So Long, Mick, It's Been Good to Know You
Mickey Mantle was convinced that because of the way he led his life on earth, he would spend his afterlife down under.
This might have been true up until a few years ago, when he humbly acknowledged his mortal shortcomings and used the bully pulpit of a megalegend to encourage youngsters not to emulate his behavior.
I truly believe that because of this, God looked at the videotape and, upon further review, welcomed Mickey into the kingdom of heaven.
Everyone there has praised God's decision.
Everyone, that is, except my mother.
Poor Mickey.
I imagine that by now my mother has cornered him and has given him an earful: "It's all your fault. My son could have been on the Supreme Court, or the first black President of the United States. He could have done great things for humanity. But he wasted his life trying to be you! And it's all your fault."


Andean Bears Get New Treetop Home
IT MAY NOT be an Andean cloud forest, but for Cisco and Poncho, the treetops in the Flushing Meadows-Corona Park zoo will have to do.
The 2-year-old brothers are spectacled bears, members of an endangered species indigenous to the Andes (and the only South American bear).
The name comes from the light-colored patch on the bear's face that makes it look as though it's wearing eyeglasses.


Movies This Week
Television is enriched this week by a marvelous cluster of vintage films, three English and one from Hollywood.
Through technically surpassed by his own remake, Alfred Hitchcock's original "MAN WHO KNEW TOO MUCH" (1934) remains a honey.
Two touches linger, one being the eerie presence of Peter Lorre (fresh from Germany's "M") as a deadly spy.
The other touch, at the climax, is the skill with a rifle of a desperate mother, Edna Best (in photograph with Leslie Banks), watching the rooftop pursuit of her abducted daughter (Nova Pilbeam).
Banks is briskly effective as the father who learns of a planned assassination- Thursday at 12:45 P.M. on Bravo.
All aboard for Carol Reed's "NIGHT TRAIN TO MUNICH" (1940) with Margaret Lockwood.
Rex Harrison and two minor players from "The Lady Vanishes." Indeed this tingling, atmospheric yarn often seems like a complement thriller to Hitchcock.
The villain here, a Nazi, is Paul Von Henreid (who shed the Von well before "Casablanca").
There's a nifty cable-car finale - Tuesday at 8 P.M. on Channel 31.


Reading the Hidden City
TO Hope Cooke, New York is a palimpsest.
The word, from the Greek, describes a parchment that has been inscribed and erased several times, still bearing hints of old, faded messages.
As the city builds and rebuilds itself, barely legible remnants of its past are left behind.
Those remnants -- the faded signs, anomalous buildings and crooked streets -- are the clues that Ms.
Cooke, a self-described urban historian, tries to decipher.
Ms.
Cooke herself is something of a palimpsest.
In her 55 years she has been a debutante, a princess, a queen, a mother, a walking tour guide, a teacher and an author.


The Pathmark Wars, Part Three
Starting last year, the battleground was 125th Street: local retailers fought tooth and nail -- without success -- to stop Pathmark from building a superstore.
Then the scene shifted to Springfield Gardens, Queens: last week the City Council approved a plan for a Pathmark store, but angry local store owners have not given up their fight.
Now Pathmark has returned to Harlem with a proposal to build a store on 145th Street between Bradhurst and Eighth Avenues -- and local supermarket owners are up in arms.
They have hired the same consultant who led the struggle against the 125th Street market, and they are trying to persuade city officials that one of their number should be allowed to put up a market on the site, not Pathmark.


Correction
An article on Aug. 6 about the decline of modern-dance companies referred incorrectly to the choreographer Bella Lewitzky's Los Angeles-based troupe.
It has not disbanded and is to perform until June 1997.


Korean Rice Aid Is Largely Feeding Tensions
Just a month or two ago, sacks of rice seemed to be achieving what spies, politicians and tanks could not: an easing of tensions and diminished risk of war on the Korean Peninsula.
But rice diplomacy, based on a donation of 150,000 tons of rice by South Korea to North Korea, has proven to be as much of a minefield as those that mark the tense border between the two countries.
Instead of creating trust and warmth, the gift has led to a climate in which both sides now seem more irritated with each other than ever.


Make-Up on the Subway Is No Occasion for Humor
To the Editor:
Barbara S. Goodwin typifies the arrogance and bad manners of the "Me" generation in her Aug. 13 Soapbox essay "Yeah, I Make Up on the Subway. So What?" Not only do we have to put up with homeless people sleeping and smelling like sweaty beasts, people playing noisy music, people carrying knapsacks and hitting everybody with them, but with women like Miss Goodwin who have decided that subways are perfect to apply make-up, apply polish to their nails, pluck their eyebrows, have breakfast -- you name it.
Has Miss Goodwin ever thought of getting up 15 minutes earlier to finish her make-up at home?
Or is that too much of a sacrifice?
It is very sad to see this essay published as if it were something cute and funny.
CARLOS MUNOZ  Upper West Side


Susan J. Stayn, Mark D. Selwyn
Susan Jennifer Stayn, a daughter of Patricia and Dr.
John Stayn of Lexington, Mass., is to be married there today to Mark Daniel Selwyn, a son of Drs.
Judith and Lee Selwyn of Chestnut Hill, Mass.
Rabbi Bernard Eisenman is to perform the ceremony at Temple Emunah.
The bride, 26, and the bridegroom, 27, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University and received law degrees from Columbia University.
The bride is a law clerk for Judge Levin H. Campbell of the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit in Boston.
The bridegroom is an associate at Hale &amp; Dorr, the Boston law firm.


Corrections
A listing of fishing camps on July 9 with an article about salmon fishing in Russia carried an outdated reference to a camp operator on the Kola Peninsula.
A camp run by the Kola Salmon Company was closed by local authorities on June 22, but the company's United States office said it did not learn of the closing until June 28, after it had been called by The Times to verify its prices.
The company later closed its two other camps on the Kola Peninsula.
Difficulty in reaching company officials delayed this correction.


Middle Class Works Overtime to Stay Afloat; For a Rainy Day
To the Editor:
David Frum's wonderfully well-written "Welcome, Nouveaux Riches" (Op-Ed, Aug. 14) supports a trend of increasing income and entry into the "upper class" I have informally identified over the last 10 years in working with unemployed individuals.
The increase in white-collar terminations has required that economic security replace job security as a goal in these single- and dual-earner families.


Correction
An article on Aug. 6 about living in Chappaqua misstated what Money magazine had said about the town's school district.
The magazine praised the district, but it did not assign it a national ranking.
The Gazetteer box with the article misstated the party affiliation of Polly M. Kuhn, Supervisor of the Town of New Castle.
She is a Democrat, not a Republican.


Fat Biographies
To the Editor:
Mr.
Teachout does not mention that the complete number of pages often includes index, acknowledgments, notes and illustrations, all of which are often important to readers and researchers.
For example, Fred Hobson's "Mencken: A Life" has 649 complete pages; 548 of text plus 101 extras). The more text, the more references.  WILLIAM S. FORSHAW  Baltimore


Work: The Sequel
Are you a coiled spring after work?
How do you unwind?
From the librarian who sings karaoke after a week of institutional silence to the deal maker who trades bottle caps off hours, we all renew ourselves somehow.
Send your tales of unusual restoratives to On the Job, Money and Business, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Or by E-mail to onthejob@nytimes.com.
Include your phone number.
All submissions become the property of The Times and may be republished in any medium.


More Stars Than in the Heavens? Maybe, in a State That's One Big Movie Set
The cameras are rolling again in New Jersey.
Go back to the birth of the film industry and you will find yourself in West Orange, where Thomas Edison and his team of scientists invented the movie camera and projector, and where the first movie studio was built, or in Fort Lee, where many of the first silent movies were shot.
Today, the industry has come full circle, and you could stumble across a movie set almost anywhere in the state.
Movies ranging from the forthcoming "Palookaville," the story of three Hudson County tough guys who look enviously across the river to the riches of Manhattan, to the upscale "I.Q.," last year's romantic comedy suggested by Albert Einstein's life in Princeton, have been made in the Garden State for authenticity.
Other films, like "City Hall" (opening on Oct. 6) and "I Shot Andy Warhol" (scheduled for March) are set in New York City.
But the magic of editing can make it easier and cheaper for film makers to work in New Jersey.


August 13-19; E-Mail
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review@nytimes.com


Middle Class Works Overtime to Stay Afloat; What the Song Means
To the Editor:
David Frum (Op-Ed, Aug. 14) offers as an example of 1950's "hostility to the new mass middle class" that "Pete Seeger complained in one of his songs that they lived in 'boxes made of ticky tacky,' and people who flew over them on their way to Europe emphatically agreed."


After 75 Years, Scholz Fizz Has Gone Flat
The vats that once churned liquid sugar and flavor extracts into syrups of cola, sarsaparilla and cocoa cream sit empty at the Scholz Brothers soda factory on 18th Avenue.
Carbon gas and water no longer rush through the pipes.
The rickety bottling machines are silent.
For more than 75 years, Scholz Brothers Beverages manufactured its own sodas and delivered them to homes all over northern Queens.
It was an old-style operation founded by two German-Hungarian immigrant brothers in the pre-supermarket era of ice cream parlors and counter drug stores.


Americans Despair Of Popular Culture
AMERICANS HAVE A STARKLY NEGATIVE VIEW of popular culture, and blame television more than any other single factor for teen-age sex and violence.
By a large margin, they favor measures like ratings that would give parents more information about what their children are watching and listening to.
But by almost as large a margin, they say they believe that such measures would not actually succeed in preventing children from viewing or hearing material that is inappropriate.
These are among the findings of a New York Times poll examining Americans' attitudes about the influence of popular culture.
The results of the poll suggest that Americans are deeply ambivalent about their own diversions.
Although the average adult in the United States watches television for more than four hours a day, a little more than half of the adults polled could not think of a single good thing to say about television, or about movies or popular music.
In contrast, 9 out of 10 of those polled could think of something bad to say about popular culture, with a large proportion mentioning too much sex, violence and vulgar language and a smaller percentage pointing to bias and just plain stupidity.


Patricia E. Dunn, Richard Earl Grey
Patricia Ellen Dunn, a former banker, and Richard Earl Grey, the chairman and chief executive of Tyco Toys in Mount Laurel, N.J., were married yesterday at the Four Seasons Hotel in Philadelphia.
Judge Barbara S. Gilbert of the First Judicial District of Pennsylvania, in Philadelphia, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Grey was until recently a vice president of the Bankers Trust Company in New York and of WM Company, the bank's international-securities research subsidiary.
She graduated from Wheaton College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
M.
Joseph Dunn of Falmouth, Mass.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of Yield House Inc., a retail and catalogue concern in North Conway, N.H.


Fat Biographies
To the Editor:
With respect to lengthy books: it may be that nowadays there is a certain innocence in describing book length by the number of pages.
Maybe a more dramatic device is needed to catch reader attention.
How about "Weighs four pounds; not recommended for readers with heart defects"?
Or maybe "Place only on reinforced coffee tables."
In extreme cases, especially in these days of endless lawsuits, a warning might read "Not responsible for structural damage if this book is dropped."  ERIC ADAMS  Toronto


Patricia Reynolds, C. P. DePhillips
Patricia Maura Reynolds, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Reynolds of Allendale, N.J., was married yesterday to Christopher Paul DePhillips, a son of Mrs. and Mrs.
F.
C.
DePhillips of Old Tappan, N.J.
The Rev.
Joseph Novak, the superior of the Jesuit Community at Fordham University, performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Elizabeth in Wyckoff, N.J.
Mrs.
DePhillips, 28, is an assistant treasurer in the investment management department of the Bankers Trust Company in New York.
She is a graduate of Boston College and a candidate for an M.B.A. at Fordham.
Her father is a management consultant with R. G. Quintero &amp; Company, business consultants in New York.


F.Y.I.
The Helpful Icy Blast Q.  I often see a kind of overgrown scuba tank, labeled liquid nitrogen and marked Nynex, on street curbs. (For instance, there was one the other day at Broadway and 41st Street.) Sometimes they have tubing running out of them, taped to the asphalt, which leads down under the sidewalk via manholes.
What's going on here?
A.
Dry-cleaning with chemistry!
But before you get images of Nynex workers freezing their fingers off while washing with supercold liquids, here are the facts.
Nynex has many, many three-inch cables running under the streets, each of which contains 3,600 pairs of copper wires (each pair carries a conversation).
Steam, created by subways and heating vents, sometimes gets inside these cables and causes crossed connections and corrosion of the copper wires, said Bob Varettoni, a spokesman for Nynex.
The tanks are actually more like glorified thermoses, keeping the nitrogen very, very cold.
Nitrogen boils (that is, starts turning to gas) at about minus 320 degrees Fahrenheit.
So when the nitrogen is pumped out of the tank into the tubing you see, it becomes a gas.
The gas is compressed and then blown into the three-inch cables, sopping up moisture without otherwise affecting the copper wires, before escaping through a venting hole to dissipate in the air, like steam.
Checkitout
Q.
I'm aware that Times Square is named after your paper.
But prior to that designation, the location was known as Longacre Square.
Whence that name?
A.
Like most of the place names in America, it was stolen.
Longacre Square's name was taken from a commercial street in central London called the Long Acre, according to "On Broadway: A Journey Uptown Over Time" (Rizzoli, 1990), by David W. Dunlap, a reporter for The New York Times.
The reason was this: Back in the second half of the 19th century, the principal businesses in the area were horse dealerships, carriage factories and stables. (The location made horse sense because Broadway was the city's major thoroughfare.) Long Acre in London had the same type of businesses.
So, the area came to be known as Longacre Square (Us 'Mericans had to crunch it all together, of course).
Revenge Is Sweet
Q.
Are bicyclists and in-line skaters subject to municipal traffic laws?
What are the penalties for violations?
You can guess why I want to know.
A.
Bicyclists, yes; in-line skaters, no.
Much to the chagrin of bikers, in-line skaters are pedestrians in the eyes of the law, said Sgt.
Steve Waters of the New York Police Department's Legal Bureau, and therefore don't have to obey the same traffic laws and speed limits that bikers (and drivers) do.
And unless the City Council or the State Legislature changes the laws, the worst a pedestrian can be charged with in non-injury cases is jaywalking.
Fines for jaywalking do not exceed $50.
By contrast, a biker running a red light can face a first-offense fine of at least $50 and up to $100.
Terra-Cotta Heyday
Q.
At the foot of the 59th Street Bridge in Long Island City sits a lonely, abandoned, reddish-brick building with a very steep, dark Dutch-style roof, and an unusual chimney topped with three small chimney stacks.
It is the only building of its style I have seen in the city, and it looks very out of place among the area's warehouses.
What is it?
A.
That little chalet at 42-16 Vernon Boulevard is the last piece of the once-elegant offices of the New York Architectural Terra-Cotta Company, which supplied the brown-red ceramic for many of the city's turn-of-the-century buildings.
Built in 1892 by Francis H. Kimball, the building itself has a terra-cotta trim, in addition to three antique chimney pots and a design that the A.I.A.
Guide to New York City calls "Sullivan-esque." The company went out of business in the 1920's, and after a series of commercial tenants, the building has been shuttered for about 10 years and is currently owned by Citibank.
A spokesman for the bank, Richard Howe, said there were currently no plans for the site.
And, oh yes, the building has been a New York City landmark since 1982. JESSE McKINLEY


Ideas &amp; Trends; More on the Wealth of Nations
WALK through the Freer Gallery on Washington's Mall these days and you will run across an exhibit showing the advances in Japanese art that came 400 years ago with the development of a merchant class.
Walk a little farther, and there is a remarkable exhibit of Whistler's century-old paintings, testimony to what wealthy patrons can give to society.
But while high concentrations of wealth may have served culture, a growing body of research suggests that big gulfs between the affluent and the poor tend to result in more social unrest, slower economic growth and investment and lower standards of living.


The Fine Edge Between a Role And Real Life
AMANDA DOLOR, THE emotionally taut comic heroine of Nicky Silver's play "The Food Chain," which opens Off Broadway on Thursday, is three weeks married and two weeks on her own.
Her writer-husband, Ford, left their New York apartment shortly after their honeymoon to work on one of his screenplays and never returned.
As the play begins, it is the middle of the night and an embarrassed and distraught Amanda dials a crisis hot line.
She spends most of the first scene in harried exegesis of her fragile state to a not terribly sympathetic counselor.
Hope Davis, the 31-year-old willowy blonde actress who plays Amanda, will be familiar to fans of Mr.
Silver.
Two seasons ago at the Vineyard Theater in "Pterodactyls," Mr.
Silver's bleak, abrasive comedy about the disintegration of a family, Ms.
Davis played another overwrought young woman.
The character, Emma Duncan -- hypochondriacal, impossibly nervous and forgetful to the point of near amnesia -- was probably closer to the brink of insanity than even Amanda.
As Emma, Ms.
Davis won praise ("a star-making performance," Ben Brantley wrote in The New York Times) and found a niche.


Disorder in the Court
THE CENTER HOLDS The Power Struggle Inside the Rehnquist Court.
By James F. Simon. 332 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.


Elizabeth Weir And Steven Kang
Elizabeth Ann Weir, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter F. Weir of New York, was married yesterday to Steven Chan-Ho Kang, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sang-Wook Kang of Livermore, Calif.
Bishop John S. Spong, the Episcopal Bishop of Newark, performed the ceremony at the Church at Point O'Woods on Fire Island, L.I.
Mrs.
Kang, 27, graduated from the University of Vermont and the Sierra Academy of Aeronautics in Oakland, Calif.
She is an aviation mechanic at California Radomes in Santa Clara, Calif.
Her father retired as a capital partner in Winston &amp; Strawn, the law firm, where he was the head of the New York real estate practice group.
He is now in private practice in New York.


R. B. Mandelbaum, Lianne Abrams
Lianne Abrams, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Archie Abrams of Great Neck, L.I., is to be married today to Richard Barry Mandelbaum, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David M. Mandelbaum of Livingston, N.J.
Rabbi Mordechai Waxman is to perform the ceremony at the Pierre Hotel in New York.
The bride, 25, is to be known as Lianne Abrams-Mandelbaum.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in physical therapy at Columbia University in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from the State University at Albany, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is the chief financial officer of Wascomat of America, distributors of commercial washing and drying machines in Inwood, L.I.


The Comfort Zones Of the Young, Black Professional
A STEPHANIE MILLS song washes over the room's exposed brick walls as clusters of denim-clad people strain to be heard over the din.
Every bar stool is occupied, every corner clogged, forcing people headed upstairs to the dining room to navigate the crush.
The Shark Bar on a typical Friday night.


Ideas &amp; Trends; For Cops, Untruths And Consequences
SHOCK and dismay were among the distressing sensations many Angelenos said they felt last week upon hearing about a series of taped interviews that former Detective Mark Fuhrman granted to an aspiring screenwriter.
But signs of racism and brutality in the Los Angeles Police Department were not news to just about anyone who had seen the videotape of Rodney G. King being thrashed by four police officers. .
And that, unfortunately for prosecutors who rely on the testimony of police officers, was just about everyone in Los Angeles.


Strange Tale Of Abduction By Governor From Mexico
The Governor of the state of Tabasco, a member of Mexico's governing party, says he was beaten and held hostage for seven hours by police agents who commandeered his car late Thursday night on a stretch of highway heading south from Mexico City.
The Governor, Roberto Madrazo Pintado, filed charges in Mexico City on Friday night demanding that the authorities investigate.


A Seemingly Invincible Seles Routs Sabatini to Reach Final
She was away for 27 months, she has played only four matches and Monica Seles is already back on her old terms with the competition.
She's invincible, they're not.
Seles continued to treat her competitive comeback like her own personal demolition derby this afternoon at the du Maurier Ltd.
Open, where she battered and then immobilized yet another supposedly qualified opponent.


FOR AN AMERICAN THAT LOVED FREAKS
BEFORE P. T. BARNUM BECAME KNOWN AS a shrewd operator of circuses, he ran the American Museum in New York.
Beginning in the 1840's, one of its biggest draws was his collection of "living curiosities": extreme examples of the human form, from giants and midgets to the very fat and the very thin.
"I want none except those who represent distinct and novel peculiarities in their appearance," Barnum insisted -- preferably individuals "with some skill to render their exhibition more attractive."
For almost two decades Barnum advertised chiefly through written ads, color lithographs and banners that could exaggerate the features of his exhibits.
But by the 1860's, the invention of mass-produced "carte-de-visite" photographs offered a new product for him to sell.
And so, one by one or in groups, Barnum's "curiosities" made their way to the photography studio of Mathew B. Brady, whose business had prospered partly from Barnum's patronage.
In 1863, Barnum helped Brady obtain the largest single order of his career: official pictures for Tom Thumb's wedding.
Weeks before the ceremony, Brady posed the couple in his studio in full attire; on the wedding day, tens of thousands of finished pictures were available for 25 cents apiece.


After 75 Years, Scholz Fizz Has Gone Flat
The vats that once churned liquid sugar and flavor extracts into syrups of cola, sarsaparilla and cocoa cream sit empty at the Scholz Brothers soda factory on 18th Avenue.
Carbon gas and water no longer rush through the pipes.
The rickety bottling machines are silent.
For more than 75 years, Scholz Brothers Beverages manufactured its own sodas and delivered them to homes all over northern Queens.
It was an old-style operation founded by two German-Hungarian immigrant brothers in the pre-supermarket era of ice cream parlors and counter drug stores.


Fiscal Cuts Deepen Cost Of Providing Child Aid
BUDGET cuts of $90 million this year in the state's child welfare programs included losses of $7 million in Suffolk County and $4.5 million in Nassau.
Since the programs are mandated by state law, both counties, now in the process of finalizing their budgets, are working to find ways to provide the services with less money.
In the past, local municipalities provided these services through county social services departments and private agencies, and were then reimbursed 25 percent from the state, 50 percent from the Federal Government.
This year, for the first time the state has changed its method of financing, providing a fixed block grant in services like day care, foster care, adoption, homemaking, institutional placement, those that enable handicap adults to live on their own and those that protect children who have been abused and are at risk of abuse.
It is now up to each county to decide how to allocate the money for each service.


Annete Doris And Evan Lubin
Annette Gail Doris, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leroy Doris of Aberdeen, N.J., is to be married today to Evan D. Lubin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Lubin of Albany.
Rabbi Neil Cooper is to perform the ceremony at Congregation B'nai Tikvah in North Brunswick, N.J.
The bride, 21, graduated in May from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y.
Her father is a vice president of the engineering and construction subsidiary of the Raytheon Corporation, in Lyndhurst, N.J.
Her mother, Risa Doris, teaches Jewish studies at the Solomon Schechter Day School in East Brunswick, N.J.


AMERICAN EXPRESS
I read with grim amusement Stephen D. Solomon's article on the effort of American Express to scramble back on top ("American Express Applies for a New Line of Credit," July 30).
Remember how American Express used to make such a big deal about one's status as a "member" rather than merely as a "card holder"?
Back then, I fell a month behind on my payments after having been a gold-card "member" for more than 20 years.
Do you think I could reason with the people at American Express?
Do you think they would attempt to work with me through a brief period of insolvency?
Noooo.


L.I. Vines
Main Road Red
Bedell Cellars, Main Road, Cutchogue, nonvintage. About $10.
Accidents can be a boon.
Years ago, cabernet sauvignon was pumped into a chardonnay tank in a Napa Valley winery.
The blend was tasty.
The winery labeled it Le Petit Faux Pas.
It sold like hot cakes.
People pestered the owner to make more.


In Music, Though, There Were No Victories
WHEN THOMAS MANN SET about writing the novel that would encompass the limitless catastrophe of World War II, he made a curious decision.
"Doktor Faustus," his apocalyptic narrative of Germany's spiritual collapse, would have as its central character no demagogue or commandant.
Instead, the protagonist would be a composer, a rather obscure composer of esoteric inclinations, a radical experimenter at the edges of musical possibility, a man outside the crowd.
When Hitler takes power, the fictional music of Adrian Leverkuhn is banned and forgotten; the composer dies insane as the war begins.
It is, however, this isolated artist who signs his soul to an ambiguous devil and comes to represent, in Mann's crushingly heavy allegory, the damnation of the German soul.
The argument is simplistic but impressive: German music, which had sought sublimity, transcendence, disengagement from the ordinary world, must bear responsibility for what happened down below as it roamed through higher realms.
Mann hinted further that this very "musicality of soul" was the key to Germany's fall; the esthetic had triumphed over the merely human.
In Nazi Germany, music became either a weapon of hate or an opiate of indifference.


Mitigate the Unfair Transit Subsidies
Seven New York City bridges and two tunnels yield an annual surplus of more than $500 million for the Triboro Bridge and Tunnel Authority, which operates them.
The surplus is used to help cover deficits in the city's bus and subway systems and suburban commuter rail lines.
The concept is good -- mass transit supported by tolls on automobiles.
But the formula needs revision to help repair an unfair distribution of subsidies between city and suburbs.
The issue arises now because the Metropolitan Transportation Authority has proposed the biggest hike in history for bus and subway fares -- up 25 cents, to $1.50.
Such a large increase would not be necessary with a more sensible distribution of the Triboro surpluses.
These surpluses are less than one-tenth of the transit system's subsidy needs, so a redistribution would not resolve the basic imbalance between the city and suburban subsidies -- but it would help.
Indeed, it could slice the proposed fare increase by as much as 10 cents.


Habitats/102 East 22d Street; Banker Finds That Buying Is Cheaper Than Renting
PHILIP LAWSON, a young English bond trader stationed in New York, had no intention of owning an apartment.
But after hunting for a rental he could afford, a decent one-bedroom for under $1,600, he found exactly what he wanted for a lot less money per month -- and bought it.
To the banker, the money made sense.
The owners were asking $150,000 for the pre-war one-bedroom with the fireplace on a side street off Gramercy Park.
But it needed work.


Baby Sitters Stick Together (Unless One Gets Snobby)
The Baby Sitters Club  Peter Horton, Ellen Burstyn, Brooke Adams, Bruce Davison Directed by Melanie Mayron PG 125 minutes


No Headline
"It's changed so much that I don't recognize any of it. But this kind of thing doesn't impress me, because there are still a lot of poor people." KIM SUN MYUNG, who served 43 years and 10 months as a political prisoner in South Korea.  [ 16:1 ]


Light, Shadow And the Music Of Silence
THANKS TO THE theatrical wizardry of Dana Reitz and Jennifer Tipton, light dances in surprising ways and silence has many songs to sing.
When Mikhail Baryshnikov's White Oak Dance Project appeared at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival earlier this summer, audiences were left virtually mesmerized by the world premiere of "Unspoken Territory," a 20-minute solo, without music, for Mr.
Baryshnikov.
It is the latest of several remarkable works with choreography by Ms.
Reitz and lighting by Ms.
Tipton.


Around Wildwood, the Hard Way
ON Wednesday evening, George Miller, an Atlantic City lawyer and the president of a cable television company, will leave his office and drive home to Margate, where he'll sit down to a big bowl of spaghetti in red clam sauce.
Around the same time, Dennis Funk, a Linwood home inspector and builder, will devour a similar bowl of pasta, without clams.
Mr.
Miller will conclude his dinner with a hot fudge sundae (no cherry, no whipped cream) at an ice cream parlor.
Mr.
Funk will have two light beers.
Then, their pre-race rituals complete, they will try to sleep.
On Thursday morning at 6:15, they'll drag their families down to the beach and team up to try to win the Around the Island Row in Wildwood.


Mount Kisco Is Astir Over the Fate of the 'Ragtime' Mansion
THE fate of a Victorian mansion that has twice achieved national celebrity and has long been a source of pride to this village has changed directions once again.
The stately gray home has over the last year become the center of a controversy that continues to rankle residents.
The Pleasant Company, a publishing company that produces a series of books, dolls, clothing and furniture called the American Girls Collection, had hoped to convert the home into a museum.
But the property was zoned for residential use, and the proposal deeply divided residents and the village government.
At one point during the nearly yearlong rancorous negotiations, Pleasant T. Rowland, the founder and president of the company, threatened to dismantle the house and haul it away in pieces.


Miss Poutasse, Dr. Korenman
Marianna Poutasse, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
J.
David Poutasse of Pittsfield, Mass., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Eric Stephen Korenman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gary Korenman of New York.
Justice Charles R. Alberti, a retired associate justice of the Massachusetts Superior Court in Pittsfield, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
The bride, 28, is a candidate for a master's degree in the history of decorative arts at the Bard Graduate Center for the Study of Decorative Arts in New York.
She graduated from Connecticut College.


Council Vote
The City Council voted Thursday to grant a zoning change to allow Pathmark Stores to build a 65,000-square-foot supermarket in Springfield Gardens, Queens and to require it to create a $400,000 fund to distribute to local businesses and community groups.
A yes vote was to approve the measure.
It passed by a 35-to-6 margin, with 3 absentions.
Manhattan  Freed (D-L) . . .
Abstain  Pagan (D-L) . . .
Yes  Duane (D-L) . . .
Yes  Eristoff (R-L) . . .
No  Millard (R-L) . . .
No  Eldridge (D-L) . . .
Abstain  Michels (D-L) . . .
Yes  Powell (D-L) . . .
No  Fields (D-L) . . .
Yes  Linares (D-L) . . .
Yes  Bronx  Eisland (D-L) . . .
Yes  Warden (D-L) . . .
Not Voting  DeMarco (D-C) . . .
No  Ruiz (D-L) . . .
Yes  Rivera (D-L) . . .
No  Foster (D-L) . . .
Yes  Rosado (D) . . .
Yes  Cruz (D) . . .
Not Voting  Queens  Abel (R-C) . . .
Yes  Harrison (D-L) . . .
Not Voting  Marshall (D-L) . . .
Yes  Vallone (D) . . .
Yes  Leffler (D-L) . . .
Yes  Povman (D) . . .
Yes  Sabini (D-L) . . .
Yes  McCaffrey (D-L) . . .
Yes  Spigner (D-L) . . .
Yes  White (D) . . .
Yes  Koslowitz (D) . . .
Yes  Ognibene (R-C) . . .
Yes  Watkins (D-L) . . .
Yes  Stabile (R-C) . . .
Yes  Brooklyn  Fisher (D-L) . . .
Yes  Robles (D-L) . . .
Yes  Pinkett (D-L) . . .
Yes  Robinson (D) . . .
Yes  Malave-Dilan (D) . . .
Yes  McCabe (D) . . .
Abstain  DiBrienza (D-L)
. . .
Not Voting  Clarke (D-L) . . .
Yes  Williams (D) . . .
Not Voting  Wooten (D) . . .
Not Voting  Albanese (D-L) . . .
Yes  Dear (D) . . .
Yes  Henry (D) . . .
Yes  Berman (D) . . .
Not Voting  Lasher (D) . . .
Yes  Weiner (D) . . .
Yes  Staten Island  O'Donovan (D-C) . . .
Yes  Fusco (R-C) . . .
No  Fossella (R-C) . . .
No


Sampling The New Season of Orchestras
EACH year at this time, readers are invited to look at the season ahead; today, orchestral attractions are the topic.
First off the mark, with a mid-September opening, is the Stamford Symphony under Roger Nierenberg.
The new season lists five paired concerts at the Palace Theater, at 8:30 P.M.
Saturdays and 3 the following Sunday afternoons, plus two events with chorus, a children's program and an Oct. 14 "Benefit Gala".


Asia Can't Be Grasped Between Chopsticks
To the Editor:
"Fortune Cookie: Your Ignorance Clouds Asian Joy" (Week in Review, Aug. 13) is a worthy reminder of common misperceptions.
For that reason it is disappointing to see you refer to "the chopstick belt."


Long Island Q&amp;A: Marlene Post; Leading Hadassah in Assisting Jewish and Non-Jewish Causes
THROUGHOUT its 83 years Hadassah has become the largest women's Zionist organization in the world and the largest women's volunteer organization in the United States.
Hadassah, Hebrew for Esther, was founded in New York in 1912 by Henrietta Szold to provide health care for people in Palestine.
The founders were looking for the name of a Jewish heroine who had done something important for her people.
The organization was named after Queen Esther, who saved the Jews in Persia.
Hadassah is now comprised of 385,000 volunteer women in 1,500 chapters in all 50 states and Puerto Rico, including 17,000 members on Long Island.


A Trip to Our 6th Borough (the Hamptons)
I DID not come here only for the waters; I wanted to sight Salman Rushdie, Michael Jackson, Marvin Davis's chair.
I wanted an authentic Hamptons experience of my own, perhaps in an air-conditioned limo on the way to a scorching beach, instead of just reading about it in the gossip columns while waiting for a refrigerated subway car on a microwaved platform.
"You really think Rushdie was here?" asked the best-connected person I know here.
This was on the phone.


Honeychile Wilder, 76, Ex-Showgirl and Princess
Honeychile Wilder is dead, and if the "21" Club is not in actual mourning, the venerable former speak-easy on West 52d Street was closed for vacation last week when word got around that one of its most memorable former patrons had died on Aug. 11 at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
Her original name was Patricia Wilder, and at her death at the age of 76, she was officially known as Princess Alexander Hohenlohe.
But from the moment she hit town in the 1930's and took New York by storm, the woman from Georgia who called everybody Honeychile was never called anything but that herself.


Andean Bears Get New Treetop Home
IT MAY NOT be an Andean cloud forest, but for Cisco and Poncho, the treetops in the Flushing Meadows-Corona Park zoo will have to do.
The 2-year-old brothers are spectacled bears, members of an endangered species indigenous to the Andes (and the only South American bear).
The name comes from the light-colored patch on the bear's face that makes it look as though it's wearing eyeglasses.


Karen Aserkoff, Michael Gordon
Karen Aserkoff and Michael Lawrence Gordon, candidates for M.B.A.'s at Harvard University, were married last evening in Cambridge, Mass.
Rabbi Bernard H. Mehlman performed the ceremony at the Royal Sonesta Hotel.
Mrs.
Gordon, 26, graduated cum laude from Yale University, where she was the publisher of The Yale Daily News.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Bernard Aserkoff of Boston.
Her father is an internist and gastroenterologist in Boston and a clinical instructor of medicine at the Harvard Medical School there.
Her mother, Janet F. Aserkoff, is a partner in Rappaport, Aserkoff &amp; Rappaport, a Boston law firm.


A Safe, Soothing Place To Escape From the Fun
The day has barely begun, but already the infirmary at Raquette Lake Girls Camp has its first patient.
Danielle Samuelson, 8, says she is sick, and refuses to get out of bed.
Michelle Starman, one of the summer's nurses, walks over to the Raquette bunkhouse, about 100 yards away, to get her.
Ms.
Starman returns, carrying Danielle and a large fuzzy ape named Milton.
"We have our first casualty," the nurse announces.


Accused of Stealing From Lindbergh Widow, Darien Woman Says Clients Back Her
Working from her home on Old King's Highway South, Susan Jones manages households for clients who are too busy or too incapacitated to keep track of their own daily affairs: paying the bills, making travel arrangements, calling in repair people.
The clients of Susan's Systems, as her business is called, are loyal, Ms.
Jones says; so loyal that they have stuck with her while she faces charges of embezzling $250,000 from a former client, Anne Morrow Lindbergh, the 89-year-old author and widow of Charles Lindbergh.


Q. &amp; A.
A Special Type of Mortgage Q What is a shared-appreciation mortgage?  . .
George Birntune, the Bronx.
A "It's just what the name implies," said Stanley R. Simon, a Manhattan lawyer who specializes in real estate.
"It means you get a mortgage on property on a certain date, and then, later on, when the property is sold and the mortgage is satisfied, the lender shares in the appreciated value of the property."


Who Are Those Women Embedded in the Sidewalk?
Melissa Goldstein, her hazel eyes cast downward, walks around SoHo, staring at the ground as if she expects to find something other than urban flotsam.
Suddenly, she stops at the northeast corner of Spring and Greene Streets.
"Here's one over here!" she says, her sandaled foot pointing to a slightly shiny object embedded in the sidewalk.
From afar, it looks like a stone, but upon closer inspection, one can see that it is a photograph of a woman, swathed only in a sheet, her body slightly curled in a quasi-fetal position.


WAR WITHOUT END
Over the past year, I noticed that you have returned documentary photography to the pages of the Magazine.
The most recent -- Sebastiao Salgado's "War Without End" (July 30) -- is beautifully done and conveys more than even a well-written story could.
BRIAN QUINBY Aurora, Ill.


Mets' Prospects Look Brighter After a Victory
Sometimes you get the feeling that the 1995 season has been one long, extended spring training for the Mets.
A season in which the idea of putting the best possible team on the field has long ago given way to a continuing experimentation with young players who may or may not have a future in the big leagues.
The latest example came Friday night when center fielder Brett Butler, the team's offensive catalyst and most consistent hitter, was traded to the Dodgers for two outfielders still at the Class A level.
On the same night, Butch Huskey, called up from Class AAA Norfolk, made his first start at third base.


Finally, Jets Do More than Just Talk About Offense
Years ago, in pre-Woody Hayes days, an Ohio State football team had just played badly and lost.
As an old woman was walking away, the Ohio State coach inadvertently bumped into her.
"I'm sorry," he said. "No offense."


G.O.P. Revises A Budget Rule To Help Banks
After complaints from banks that have seen their share of student loans drop sharply, Republicans have changed the accounting rules to make it easier for Congress to kill off the banks' competition -- a Federal program that makes direct loans from the Treasury.
The Republican-led House of Representatives has also voted to reduce the amount the Department of Education can spend supervising the system of Federal guarantees for banks that make student loans -- a program that has frequently had management problems.
The Senate has yet to act on the House proposal.


Debt Trap
To the Editor:
The example of Providian Bancorp makes a most effective case for reimposition of usury restrictions in the credit card market ("Merchants of Debt," Spending It, July 2).


At the Casinos
What's happening on stage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.


Metcalf Wants to Carry Falcon Offense (in More Ways Than One)
The thought that he was nearly traded to San Francisco brings a wistful smile to Eric Metcalf's face.
Imagine a player with the kick-return skills of David Meggett, the quick feet of Barry Sanders and the sure hands of Michael Irvin lining up all over the field in the 49ers' high-octane offense.
"I would have loved that, because for one thing they are the 49ers," Metcalf said.
"But one of the biggest reasons I wanted to go there is because it's right down the street from Seattle. Four years in college, six years in Cleveland, I haven't played at home yet."


Heroes and Villains
Most heroes never survived the decline of the epic: their legends could not withstand the sharp scrutiny of new forms, especially the keen eye of historical criticism.
In self-conscious response to this loss of the heroic, the English historian C. V. Wedgwood offers MONTROSE (St. Martin's, $35), a biography of the Marquess of Montrose, a 17th-century Scottish aristocrat chosen by King Charles I of England to quell a rebellion in Scotland.
The author claims that Montrose qualifies as a true hero, one who still exhibits the luster of Achilles, Lancelot and Roland even after his story is told in simple prose.
And she is persuasive; her writing ably captures Montrose's unflagging resolve in the face of battles, intrigue and execution.
Each speech Montrose delivers to rally his outnumbered troops, each march he leads across the desolate highlands, becomes a fascinating illustration of his skill and spirit.
His actions allow his biographer to catalogue a full store of chivalric traits.
C.
One suspects, though, that the situation is more complicated, and the turbid political and religious currents of this struggle do not make her classifications of hero and villain easy to maintain.
Even so, it is difficult to remain aloof to the tragedy that descends on this charismatic figure, and one finds oneself rooting for him almost as strongly as C. V. Wedgwood does.
DOUGLAS A. SYLVA


Mother and Newborn: How Long in the Hospital?
MARY JO SADOSKY'S twin daughters were born on the evening of May 31.
Ms.
Sadosky, who lives in Ledyard, said she had had a difficult pregnancy and was exhausted and in pain after delivery.
Nevertheless, her insurance company wanted her discharged from the hospital the next day.
On that day, Ms.
Sadosky received a visit at about 11 A.M. from a woman acting as liaison between the hospital and the insurance company.
She was to be discharged.
"It was incredibly bad timing," Ms.
Sadosky said.
"That's not something a patient should be hit with right off the bat; they wanted to kick me out."


Farm Visit Thrills Urban Children
Vincent Jenkins could not hear Rosemary the pig snorting or Harriet and Gretchen the sheep bleating, but that did not dampen his enthusiasm: he gave Rosemary a kiss to wake her from a lazy summer sleep, and got one of his friends to feel her stomach.
Vincent was one of a group of 36 boys between the ages of 8 and 12, both disabled and able-bodied, from the Fresh Air Fund's Camp Hidden Valley who admired Rosemary while spending an hour at the fund's model farm here.


Where Serious Food and Whimsy Meet
THE Kitchen off Pine Street in Long Beach is a delightful restaurant with a delicious sense of humor and food to match.
Whimsy begins with the name.
Once known as the Kitchen on Pine Street, the restaurant changed one word when it moved to new quarters a few months ago, enabling it to keep the Tkops logo.
First-time diners should remember Tkops, for that is all they will see on the restaurant's sign on Long Beach Boulevard.
Drivers with slow reaction times will miss it and find themselves halfway across the bridge to Island Park.


Betrayed by the Noble Savage
GREEN By Frances Sherwood. 402 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $23.


Mary Teresa Morgan, R. J. McCarthy Jr.
Mary Teresa Morgan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul V. Morgan of North Greenbush, N.Y., was married yesterday to Richard Joseph McCarthy Jr., the son of Mr.
McCarthy of Albany and the late Marie M. McCarthy.
The Rev.
James L. Lefebvre performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Albany.
Mrs.
McCarthy is a music instructor at Voorheesville (N.Y.) Elementary School.
She graduated from the College of St.
Rose in Albany, and she received a master's degree in music history from the C. W. Post campus of Long Island University and a master's degree in educational psychology from the State University at Albany, where she is a candidate for a Ph.D. in curriculum and instruction.


Red Sox Run Streak To 15-2
Red Sox 4, Mariners 3
Erik Hanson won his fourth straight decision and John Valentin hit his 21st home run as the Boston Red Sox beat Andy Benes and the Seattle Mariners, 4-3, last night in the Kingdome.
The American League East leaders bounced back for their 15th victory in 17 games a day after the Mariners defeated the knuckleball ace Tim Wakefield.
Boston's 64 wins are 10 more than it had last season.


Clarity Meets Reality in Trio's 'By the Sea'
TO the inexplicable paradoxes of the cosmos, add the duality of Joe Pintauro.
The playwright who put the imprint of perfunctory haste upon "Murder by Chocolate," a sketchy exercise in triviality that is supposed to be a full-length play, is the very same Joe Pintauro who wrote a thoroughly realized play of perhaps one-third the length when a sketch would have sufficed.
It is the first of three 30-minute or so, three-character beach plays by three playwrights at the Bay Street Theater in Sag Harbor.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
DOWNTOWN BROOKLYN City as Textbook: Bridge Engineering
The boroughs of New York are linked by one of the world's most extensive networks of bridges, something most people take for granted in their daily journeys over them.
How do these marvels of engineering come to pass?
And what do all those cables and towers and other oddly shaped pieces have to do with it?
The New York Transit Museum wants us to know, so they're sponsoring "Bridge Game" on Saturday, a glimpse inside the bowels of the Manhattan Bridge (above) and the Williamsburg Bridge.
Dr.
Bojidar S. Yanev, the director of bridge inspection for the city Department of Transportation, will explain how the bridges were designed and built and the role mass transit played in their construction.
He hopes to untangle the intricate cabling systems inside their anchorages and explain how their underbellies work.
New York Transit Museum, 130 Livingston Street, Downtown Brooklyn. 11 A.M.; $15; $10 for museum members.
Reservations required.
Information, (718) 243-5839.
THE BRONX BEAT Free Concerts By Paquito D'Rivera
Hot, sticky city dwellers can cool to the sounds of the jazz great Paquito D'Rivera when he joins the Bronx Art Ensemble in "A Latin American Celebration" today.
Mr.
D'Rivera (below), a clarinetist and saxophonist acclaimed for his fusion of jazz, classical and Latin-Caribbean styles, will perform his own composition, "Aires Tropicales," at two free concerts, in Van Cortlandt Park and the McGinley Center at Fordham University.
The program will also feature Latin standards by the Uruguayan composer Luis Pasquet, Dizzy Gillespie and Ernesto Lecuona, performed by guest artists including Brenda Feliciano, a soprano with Manhattan's Repertorio Espagnol, the bass player Dean Crandall and the pianist Carlos Franzetti.
The concert is part of the Bronx Arts Ensemble's free Summermusic '95 series, which winds down next Sunday with a Bach festival.
At 2 P.M.: Van Cortlandt Park, (Rockwood Drive Circle, near Broadway and Mosholu Avenue,) the Bronx.
At 4 P.M.: McGinley Center, Southern Boulevard on Fordham University's Rose Hill campus.
In case of rain, the 2 P.M. concert will move to the Church of the Mediator, West 231st Street and Kingsbridge Avenue.
Both concerts are free.
Information and directions, (718) 601-7399.
TRIBECA 'Radical Jewish Roots Band' At the Knitting Factory
The Klezmatics (above) call themselves "the planet's only radical Jewish roots band." Their new album, "Jews With Horns," weaves merengue, hip hop, Brazilian jazz and experimental rock influences into the joyful music born in Eastern Europe's shtetls.
The group, an amalgam of clarinet, trumpet, accordian, violin, keyboard, bass and vocals, will play two sets Thursday at the Knitting Factory.
Knitting Factory, 74 Leonard Street, between Broadway and Church Street; 8 and 10 P.M.
Information, (212) 219-3055.
ALSO AROUND TOWN SINGLES HIKE A three-hour tour of Forest Park, 411 acres of oak forest.
Hike allows singles time to mingle while learning about the park's history.
Hikers should wear sturdy shoes and bring lunch.
Saturday, 10 A.M.; Woodhaven Boulevard and East Park Drive; registration, $5.
Information: (718) 235-4462.
FREE SHAKESPEARE "Twelfth Night" by the Kings County Shakespeare Company, the borough's only Shakespeare ensemble Bandshell in Prospect Park, beginning Thursday at 8 P.M. and running nightly through Sept. 3, except for Monday, Aug. 28.
Free, but the company says $2 donations are "gratefully accepted." Bandshell, Ninth Street and Prospect Park West in Park Slope.
Information: (718) 596-9685.
KATHRYN SHATTUCK


Why a Delicatessen Closed: Not-So-Friendly Neighbors
To the Editor:
There is more to the story of why the Flushing Delight closed than you told in your Aug. 6 article "Knishes or Kimchi: Last Kosher Deli Closes on Union Street."


NOT SO FAST
McKibben's piece struck me as a sobering wake-up call.
In contemplating how difficult it is to alter ingrained overconsumption and waste, I thought of my mother's admonition "Does your father work for the electric company?" (he did not) to encourage my sister and me to turn off unnecessary lights in the house.
I still hear her every time I flip a switch.
The most profound change will come as a result of our individual efforts.
OLGA MARIA TOLSCIK Landsdale, Pa.


Decline and Conquer
WOULD YOU LIKE TO WARD off the effects of aging with just a pill or an injection?
At least three different hormone treatments are said by their advocates to reverse the symptoms of senescence, each with a plausible rationale.
Alas, it's improbable that all three treatments will work, and quite likely that none will.
One of these proposed youth elixirs is the body's own growth hormone, a product of the pituitary gland.
Once thought to determine only stature, growth hormone is now known to influence the body's tissues throughout life.
But its production mysteriously starts to taper off in most people after age 30.


Allison Spivak, Andrew Friedman
Allison Thomas Spivak, a daughter of Leonard A. Spivak of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Debbie A. Spivak of Cranston, R.I., was married last evening to Andrew Douglas Friedman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Friedman of Rye, N.Y.
Rabbi Robert A. Rothman performed the ceremony at the Astors' Beechwood Mansion in Newport, R.I.
The couple both graduated magna cum laude from Brown University, where both were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
The bride, 23, is a manager of an Au Bon Pain bakery in Boston.
The bridegroom, 24, is to begin his second year at Harvard Law School next month.


The Doubts About Japan's New Surge
TO hear some describe it, Japan's stock market may have turned a corner this week.
But many analysts say the signs are in no way conclusive.
For five long years, ever since the Nikkei began its descent from 38,916 as the real estate bubble burst, bank loans went bad and the Liberal Democratic Party was ousted from power, American investors have hoped for a turnaround in that nation's huge stock market.
But no luck.


400 Jobless as Bakery Closes
The Pechter family entered the business in 1888.
The Field family did the same in 1928.
Their companies merged in 1973, becoming Pechter Field's Bakery -- the largest independent bakery in the metropolitan area.
But diminishing prices for baked goods, high labor costs and greater competition took their toll over the last few years.
In January, Pechter Field's filed for bankruptcy.
Still, the bakery's 400 workers reported to work each day, hoping that a competitor would buy the bakery, or at least salvage some jobs by purchasing profitable delivery routes.


MARKET TIMING
Monday Federal District Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson, who is reviewing Microsoft's antitrust settlement with the Justice Department, meets with parties in the case.
The board of Turner Broadcasting System is expected to hold a special meeting to discuss a bid for King World Productions.
Analysts said the board was also likely to discuss joining with Microsoft on a possible bid for CBS.
Tuesday The Federal Open Market Committee meets, and all signs point to the committee's leaving interest rates unchanged.
The committee is the policy-making arm of the Federal Reserve.
Economic reports continue to show signs of economic health and officials at the Fed indicated last week that they were pleased with the current economic outlook.
A committee of the California Senate holds an emergency hearing to develop a compromise recovery plan for bankrupt Orange County, Calif.
Jiangling Motors in China is expected to announce an alliance with Ford.
American Stores is expected to report second-quarter earnings of 51 cents a share.
Wednesday The Mortgage Bankers Association of America releases its weekly report on mortgage applications.
Thursday Windows 95, Microsoft's new operating system for personal computers, goes on sale.
Analysts said the company could sell as many as 30 million copies by the end of the year.
The policy-making committee of the Bundesbank meets.
The Bundesbank, Germany's central bank, allowed money-market rates to fall last week, leading analysts to predict that it might cut the discount rate.
The Commerce Department releases durable goods orders for July.
Forecast: up 1.4 percent, after an increase of one-tenth of 1 percent in June.
Friday The National Association of Realtors reports existing-home sales for July.
Forecast: up 1.6 percent, to 3.84 million units.
Home sales rose 6.5 percent, to 3.78 million units, in June.


Mixing Technology With Matchmaking
TO grow, high-technology companies need to find qualified people.
Recognizing that need turned two computer experts into entrepreneurs.
Eighteen months ago, Richard F. Harmon Jr., 39, and Mordecai Levine, 37, who speak the language of their clients, started Team Alliance Technology Partners, a software development and placement company.
Their goal, they said, was to become the most comprehensive technology-resource company in the world.
Judging from its growth, Team Alliance may meet that goal.


Businessman With Low Profile And Big Impact Enters Spotlight
His name is not a household word in the city, yet he is a general partner in what is arguably its best known skyscraper, the Empire State Building.
And he has helped change the ambiance of Manhattan by creating business improvement districts to rid the streets of graffiti, taxi hustlers, panhandlers, the homeless and petty criminals.
He does not live in the city.
Blending into crowds of suburban commuters, he rides the train from Greenwich, Conn., to Grand Central Terminal, where he may stoop and pick up a scrap of litter that offends his vision of a tidy midtown.


An Older, Wiser, Humbler Wunderkind
In December, Leonard Bernstein's old apartment in the Dakota on Central Park West was buzzing with familiar voices -- famous music and theater friends and former members of his professional entourage.
After Champagne and hors d'oeuvres, the hosts, Alexander, Jamie and Nina Bernstein, invited the 200 guests into a living room filled with their father's memorabilia and dominated by portraits of their mother, Felicia Bernstein.
It was time for the musical portion of the evening, which began with the glittering overture to Bernstein's "Candide," performed as a piano duet by Michael Barrett and John Musto.
A stranger would have been forgiven for thinking that some sort of Bernstein commemoration was under way.
But the guest of honor, crowded between loving friends on a couch and smiling broadly, was the conductor Michael Tilson Thomas, who had just turned 50 and who, since his brilliant debut 25 years ago, has been Bernstein's heir apparent.


Remembrance of Things Fast
AS my father and I neared Lee U.S.A.
Speedway ("New Hampshire's Center of Speed"), I rolled my window down, shut my eyes, leaned forward and listened.
The noise started as distant thunder, but as we closed in on the race track, the sound became a steady roar as stock cars boomed.
This din was the heady overture to a weekend of stock car racing.
On this blustery Friday night in May, my father and I were embarking on a racing pilgrimage that would take us to three New Hampshire tracks in three days -- Lee U.S.A.
Speedway, New Hampshire International Speedway in Loudon and Hudson Speedway in Hudson -- to see stock cars, American passenger cars modified for racing.


After Soul-Searching, Cathedral Files Suit
The bonds between the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine and its across-the-street neighbor, the Amsterdam Nursing Home, are long and strong: The nursing home was founded in 1872 by an Episcopal priest; trustees have served on the boards of both institutions and the Very Rev.
James Parks Morton, the dean of the cathedral, used to visit the home every day when his mother lived there.
And so, Dean Morton said, it took some soul-searching before he and the cathedral's executive board filed a lawsuit against the home, seeking to block its plan to build a 13-story extension.
Church officials say the new wing would obstruct the views of and from the world's largest Gothic cathedral, destroy a historic garden and, more generally, degrade the splendor of a beautiful public monument.


DR. OZ
For the alternative medical methods described in Chip Brown's article to be meaningful, a control group must receive a simulation of these methods by untrained personnel ("The Experiments of Dr. Oz," July 30).
Elimination of the placebo effect is fundamental to the reliability of any therapeutic trial.


Marinated Bluefish, a Taste of Summer
ASK for snappers in a fish market and chances are the clerk will bring out silver-pink red snappers from Southern waters.
But a snapper is also what fishermen in this part of the country call a baby bluefish, usually weighing a pound or less.
The name distinguishes the small bluefish from the larger, full-grown Jack-the-Ripper blues known as choppers, voracious fish that slash their way sharklike through a school of prey.
The advantage of the babies is that they have a milder flavor than larger bluefish.
And when I find these snappers in the market, I love using them to make escabeche, a savory marinated cooked-fish dish.


Trevino, Despite the Pain, Is Lurking Near the Leaders
Lee Trevino's eyes said more than his lips about the pain in his right shoulder.
The pain stemmed from surgery to replace a ruptured disk in his back 10 months ago.
The loquacious Trevino has endured the pain, which evidently has affected his play: he hasn't won on the Senior PGA Tour this season after notching 24 victories in his senior career, including 6 last year.
But Trevino has looked like the Trevino of last year in the first two rounds of the Northville Long Island Classic, where he is defending his title.
After a five-under 67 on opening day, Trevino shot three-under 69 today and is in a group of four that is two shots off the lead.


Jennifer Wechsler, Jeffrey Kaufman
Jennifer Lea Wechsler, a daughter of Alan and Ellen Weschler of Roseland, N.J., was married last evening to Jeffrey Lewis Kaufman, a son of Arthur and Susan Kaufman of Melville, L.I.
Rabbi Marc Gellman officiated at the Chanticler, a catering hall in Short Hills, N.J.


The Artful Elegance of Plants That Weep
ARCHITECTURAL style is usually considered an art form for structures of brick, stone and steel.
But certain plants have architectural features, too, and they can make a great deal of difference in landscape design.
All kinds of plants can be selected for artful dimension.
Some have spectacular bloom.
Others have stately style, while still others have diminutive cunning.


Payroll May Not Buy Coveted Wild Card
Now that the Yankees have begun to face reality and realize the wild-card route is the one that will have to get them to the playoffs, they may want to ask themselves a question: What is a bunch of low-revenue, small-market teams doing in a race with a high-revenue, big-market team?
The Yankees, in fact, may become the answer to a trivia question if they don't win the wild-card slot: What team spent the most money for nothing?


Modern Gershwins! Brothers Write Musical
ONE crackles with nervous energy.
The other simmers with existential angst.
The two were at odds as teen-agers -- not so very long ago -- but now tread the same path of feverish inspiration.
The brothers Daniel and Jacob Seligmann became artistic collaborators, co-workaholics and soul mates.
They stayed home together for 14 months in the house they grew up in here, writing a musical comedy called "The Big Bank." Daniel, 23, wrote the book and most of the lyrics; Jacob, 20, composed the music and helped with the words.


Giants Land Final Blow With Last-Minute Drive
So the players say they don't care about Giants-Jets?
So what were all the fights about tonight?
Center John Bock -- a backup, for goodness' sake -- went after linebacker Mike Croel and caused a scuffle with bodies flying everywhere.
When Giants cornerback Phillippi Sparks broke up a pass and receiver Tyrone Davis landed on him, Davis added a little smack to Sparks's face.
Meaningless game, maybe.
But tempers flared early, and tempers flared late.
Things got completely out of control.
A fight late in the game was so wild that the umpire, Bob Boylston, was knocked to the ground and carted off with a shoulder injury.
After that melee, Croel was thrown out of the game.
It was an embarrassing and ugly scene.


Stephanie Cogen And Jeffrey Kopf
Stephanie Joy Cogen, a daughter of Barbara Cogen and Morton Cogen, both of Teaneck, N.J., is to be married today to Jeffrey Steven Kopf, the son of Hedda and Dr.
Gary Kopf of Woodbridge, Conn.
Cantor Gerald Cohen is to perform the ceremony at the Madison Hotel in Morristown, N.J.
Ms.
Cogen, 25, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Amherst College and received a law degree from Northeastern University in May.
She is the vice president for public relations of the Greater Boston Chapter of the National Organization for Women.


The World; A Global Guage of Greased Palms
A German engineer sent to eastern India to help set up a factory a few years ago was honored when officials visited his home and admired his stereo and other imported items.
But what they wanted to talk about was money: illegal "commissions" to insure that the project would start.
He turned them down and went home to Europe to report to his company.
In his absence, his house was stripped of valuables worth about what he had refused to pony up in bribes.
At the World Bank and in boardrooms everywhere, such stories are legion.
Several years ago, Peter Eigen, a former World Bank director in Africa and Latin America, decided enough was enough.
He united business leaders, politicians and academics from different countries around a common purpose: curbing the increasingly rampant corruption stunting the development of poor countries.


Simpson Jury Won't See Homes Of Victim and Accused at Night
Prosecutors in the O. J. Simpson murder trial have dropped their request for jurors to take a late-night tour on Sunday of 875 South Bundy, where Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman were killed 14 months ago, and of Mr.
Simpson's home at 360 North Rockingham, a five-minute drive away.
Jurors have already visited both sites during daylight hours, but prosecutors had asked that they be allowed to see the scene of the crime at night, when conditions would more closely approximate those at the time of the killings.


Detroit Plans Some Grand Openings for '96 Pickups
BOTH General Motors and the Ford Motor Company will soon offer pickups with a significant change in their architecture: an extra door will be available on extended-cab versions of some models that will provide unobstructed access to the area behind the front seats.
G.M. will be first to market the feature, which it calls a side-access panel, as an option on the 1996 extended-cab Chevrolet C/K and GMC Sierra full-size pickups that it will introduce in November.
Extended-cab versions of G.M.'s compact pickups, the Chevrolet S-series and GMC Sonoma, will offer the feature starting in December.
G.M. is expected to price the option for less than air-conditioning, which costs about $800.


Middle Class Works Overtime to Stay Afloat; Income Gap Children
To the Editor:
I was happy to see "Rich Nation, Poor Children" (editorial, Aug. 15), on the plight of poor children in America, a plight worse than that in 15 of 17 other industrial countries.


A Most Different Tourney Is All Set for a Mad Dash
What is shaping up here in the land of the 400-yard drive -- at the quirky, rarefied tournament where high numbers are good, low numbers are bad and calculators are the 15th club in the bag -- is the most appropriately named event in golf.
It's called the Sprint International, and going into the final round on Sunday at Castle Pines Golf Club, that's exactly what it is going to be, a sprint to the finish by an international field, a roiling, broiling shootout where just about any of the 24 players who made the cut has a chance to win.


The Contract, Partly Fulfilled
By the most common yardstick -- legislation passed -- the Republican takeover of Congress has not yet amounted to much.
Only two parts of the Contract With America have been signed into law.
No tax has been cut.
Government spending continues to rise.
But the impact of Newt Gingrich and friends goes well beyond a litany of votes.
They have turned political debate around on nearly every important issue.
Before November, Congress debated how much more it would spend to put welfare enrollees to work.
Now it debates how much less it will spend.
Before November, politicians debated whether to cut off public services to illegal aliens.
Now they debate whether to cut off legal immigrants as well.
Congress used to debate which technology and national service programs to create.
Now liberals declare victory if they keep existing programs alive.
The Republicans' cramped vision of limited government has won, for now.


Michelle S. Scotti, Robert Mattaliano
Michelle Sharon Scotti, a daughter of Frances L. Scotti of Valley Stream, L.I., and the late Julius A. Scotti, was married yesterday to Robert Mattaliano, a son of Louise F. Mattaliano of Hamilton Township, N.J., and the late Frank A. Mattaliano Sr.
The Rev.
Jeffrey O. White, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony in St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University in New York.


A Cannoli, Please, for a Tough Call: Let Rizzuto Retire
If Phil Rizzuto truly wants to resign, he should.
He will turn 77 next month, he has called Yankee games half that time, he has arthritis, and he just lost his good friend Mickey Mantle to cancer at the age of 63.
You can't blame him for quitting after getting a jolt of mortality watching Mantle's funeral on television.
Maybe he felt a similar spasm of fear two years ago when Don Drysdale, a Los Angeles Dodgers announcer, died of a heart attack in a hotel room.


August 13-19; Cowabunga!


Who Saved Kyoto? Some Say Stimson; Japan Credits Scholar
To the Editor:
James F. McManus (letter, Aug. 10) credits Edwin O. Reischauer with intervening with American officials to spare Nara and Kyoto from American bombardment.
The honor belongs to Langdon Warner, a scholar and enthusiast of Japanese art.
It was his intervention that spared Japan's two ancient capitals.
A grateful Japanese nation erected a memorial in his honor.
UMBERTO LA PAGLIA  Philadelphia, Aug. 10, 1995


How an Economic Miracle Can Ruin New Jersey
To the Editor:
Your July 23 article ("The Day the Jobs Got Up and Moved Away") discusses the loss of employment in Mercer County and elsewhere in the state.
But in fact a kind of economic miracle is happening in New Jersey.
According to a recent Rutgers University study, the state will recover all the jobs it has lost in the 1990 recession within two years.
What makes this more remarkable is that it happens as the state throws off the yoke of manufacturing, mining and construction.
Service-sector jobs have climbed 17 percent in the first five months of this year alone.


Pleasing Food, Prices and Esthetics, in a Diner
RESTAURANTS with low-down prices often are burdened with low-down atmosphere as well.
Even when they have talented chefs in the kitchen, greasy spoons fail to attract customers who want good foodand an esthetically pleasing experience.
Although such diners do not expect elegance at penny-wise prices, they do seek charm and style.
The combination of noteworthy food, prices and atmosphere exists, but is rare.
That is why the lovely, largely undiscovered Casanova Restaurant, across from the Glen Head railroad station, is a find.


Baby Sitters Stick Together (Unless One Gets Snobby)
Dangerous Minds  Michelle Pfeiffer, George Dzundza, Renoly Santiago, Wade Dominguez, Bruklin Harris Directed by John N. Smith R 94 minutes


Businessman With Low Profile And Big Impact Enters Spotlight
His name is not a household word in the city, yet he is a general partner in what is arguably its best known skyscraper, the Empire State Building.
And he has helped change the ambiance of Manhattan by creating business improvement districts to rid the streets of graffiti, taxi hustlers, panhandlers, the homeless and petty criminals.
He does not live in the city.
Blending into crowds of suburban commuters, he rides the train from Greenwich, Conn., to Grand Central Terminal, where he may stoop and pick up a scrap of litter that offends his vision of a tidy midtown.
Meet Peter Laurence Malkin, who until recently had kept a low profile even as his corporate presence loomed large on the skyline -- a contrast to real-estate names like Helmsley, Rudin and Zeckendorf.


Philadelphia Lawyer
HOSTILE WITNESS  By William Lashner. 501 pp.
New York:  Regan Books/ HarperCollins Publishers.


Brigitte Holmen, Peter Schattenfield
Brigitte Anne Holmen, a daughter of Barbara J. Holmen of Vero Beach, Fla., and the late G. Robert Holmen, was married yesterday to Peter Allan Schattenfield, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Schattenfield of Potomac, Md.
The Rev.
Charles Kavanagh performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Bedford, N.Y.
Mrs.
Schattenfield, 30, graduated from Kenyon College and from the Culinary Institute of America.
Her father was the chairman of Backer &amp; Spielvogel, the advertising agency in New York.
Her mother is the vice mayor of Indian River Shores, Fla.


Make-Up on the Subway Is No Occasion for Humor
To the Editor:
Barbara S. Goodwin typifies the arrogance and bad manners of the "Me" generation in her Aug. 13 Soapbox essay "Yeah, I Make Up on the Subway. So What?" Not only do we have to put up with homeless people sleeping and smelling like sweaty beasts, people playing noisy music, people carrying knapsacks and hitting everybody with them, but with women like Miss Goodwin who have decided that subways are perfect to apply make-up, apply polish to their nails, pluck their eyebrows, have breakfast -- you name it.
Has Miss Goodwin ever thought of getting up 15 minutes earlier to finish her make-up at home?
Or is that too much of a sacrifice?
It is very sad to see this essay published as if it were something cute and funny.
CARLOS MUNOZ  Upper West Side


A Tribute to the Dead
Hundreds of Grateful Dead followers played cat-and-mouse with the police across Central Park yesterday in defiance of a ban on a gathering in memory of the band's leader, Jerry Garcia.
The fans, who were denied a permit for the observance, converged on the Great Lawn near the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Article, page 37.


Council Vote
The City Council voted Thursday to grant a zoning change to allow Pathmark Stores to build a 65,000-square-foot supermarket in Springfield Gardens, Queens and to require it to create a $400,000 fund to distribute to local businesses and community groups.
A yes vote was to approve the measure.
It passed by a 35-to-6 margin, with 3 absentions.
Manhattan Freed (D-L) . . .
Abstain Pagan (D-L) . . .
Yes Duane (D-L) . . .
Yes Eristoff (R-L) . . .
No Millard (R-L) . . .
No Eldridge (D-L) . . .
Abstain Michels (D-L) . . .
Yes Powell (D-L) . . .
No Fields (D-L) . . .
Yes Linares (D-L) . . .
Yes Bronx Eisland (D-L) . . .
Yes Warden (D-L) . . .
Not Voting DeMarco (D-C) . . .
No Ruiz (D-L) . . .
Yes Rivera (D-L) . . .
No Foster (D-L) . . .
Yes Rosado (D) . . .
Yes Cruz (D) . . .
Not Voting Queens Abel (R-C) . . .
Yes Harrison (D-L) . . .
Not Voting Marshall (D-L) . . .
Yes Vallone (D) . . .
Yes Leffler (D-L) . . .
Yes Povman (D) . . .
Yes Sabini (D-L) . . .
Yes McCaffrey (D-L) . . .
Yes Spigner (D-L) . . .
Yes White (D) . . .
Yes Koslowitz (D) . . .
Yes Ognibene (R-C) . . .
Yes Watkins (D-L) . . .
Yes Stabile (R-C) . . .
Yes  Brooklyn Fisher (D-L) . . .
Yes Robles (D-L) . . .
Yes Pinkett (D-L) . . .
Yes Robinson (D) . . .
Yes Malave-Dilan (D) . . .
Yes McCabe (D) . . .
Abstain DiBrienza (D-L). . .
Not Voting Clarke (D-L) . . .
Yes Williams (D) . . .
Not Voting Wooten (D) . . .
Not Voting Albanese (D-L) . . .
Yes Dear (D) . . .
Yes Henry (D) . . .
Yes Berman (D) . . .
Not Voting Lasher (D) . . .
Yes Weiner (D) . . .
Yes Staten Island O'Donovan (D-C) . . .
Yes Fusco (R-C) . . .
No Fossella (R-C) . . .
No


Crime
Some writers, you worry they won't be able to top themselves.
Not James Lee Burke.
In BURNING ANGEL (Hyperion, $22.95), the ninth adventure for Dave Robicheaux, his broody cop from the Louisiana bayou, Mr.
Burke trots out a whole chorus line of singular characters and bizarre situations -- not one of them a retread.
It takes great elan to write a scene like the one in which a pimp named Sweet Pea Chaisson digs up his mother's coffin and hauls it off in the trunk of his Cadillac, or to create a character as flamboyant as Sonny Boy Marsallus, a finger-popping killer with the spooky reputation of being a ghost.
According to one witness, "Sonny seemed painted with magic."


Fresh Produce to Go
TURN off any highway, go a few miles down the road and you're sure to see the hand-painted signs that announce a New Jersey summer: "Sweet Corn," "Tomatoes," "Cukes," "Our Own Peaches," "U-Pick." There's still a lot of farmland out there, not as much as there used to be, but enough between the housing developments, strip malls, golf courses and retirement communities to support hundreds of farm stands.
In the last 25 years, many farms, particularly those in the northern half of the state, have converted from dairy, livestock or grain operations to vegetables and fruits.
In Central Jersey, where the potato once reigned, there are now fields of vegetables and their attending stands.
As consumers seek out the freshest produce, many farmers have given up on the wholesale market, in part because the wholesale price they can fetch for, say, apples hasn't changed much in 10 years.


Acne Help? Don't Look in Subway
For years, subway riders vexed by torn ear lobes or hemorrhoids have never had to go far for relief.
All they had to do was glance up.
But New York subway advertisements, once a repository of advice on everything from AIDS transmission risks to cosmetic surgery, have recently undergone a facelift of their own.
And Dr.
Jonathan Zizmor, the dermatologist whose ubiquitous subway ads have made him something of a celebrity, has not been called upon to remove the blemishes.


Brooke Picotte, Scott Corrigan
Brooke Ann Picotte, a daughter of Margaret Brennan Hassett of New York and John D. Picotte of Loudonville, N.Y., was married on Friday to Scott David Corrigan, the son of Judith Corrigan of Smithtown, L.I., and James F. Corrigan of Belleville, N.J.
The Rev.
Dennis Murphy performed the ceremony at St.
Dominic Roman Catholic Church in Oyster Bay, L.I.
The bride, 26, is keeping her name.
She is a graduate of Boston College and received a master's degree in organizational psychology from Columbia University.
Later this month she is to begin studies for a master's degree in general psychology at Yeshiva University.
The bride is a stepdaughter of William D. Hassett.


Cleveland
When a housewarming party is a decade in the making, it has to be pretty spectacular to live up to the hype.
But the festivities surrounding the opening of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum in Cleveland over Labor Day weekend may just be equal to the task.
For one thing, the party music will be provided by the likes of Bruce Springsteen and Martha and the Vandellas.
And the museum that's being celebrated dramatically transforms Cleveland's skyline.


After 20 Years, a Long Goodbye to Strand's Book Kiosks
The Strand Book Store's two distinctive red kiosks outside Central Park at 60th Street and Fifth Avenue, which have attracted browsers and buyers for more than 20 years, are living on borrowed time.
The Strand was outbid for the site by Annex Antiques, whose arrival has been delayed by construction of kiosks that are supposed to look like the current ones.
So the Strand and Albion Books, owner of the third stall at the site, have stayed through the summer on a month-by-month basis.


Summer in SoHo, The Global Kitchen
BAROLO **  (212) 226-1102; 398 West Broadway, near Spring Street; $$$; all major credit cards
This northern Italian restaurant is colorful, warm and stylish and features an enchanting garden with trees, a terra-cotta floor and dining balcony.
To begin, try the creamy veal tonnato, grilled calamari and couscous salad with lemon vinaigrette, grilled quail with portobellos and lentils seasoned with a cassis vinaigrette, and prosciutto di Parma with sweet melon.
Pastas include squid-ink farfalle tossed with salmon and asparagus and rigatoni combined with eggplant, dried ricotta, tomato and basil.
Among the main courses, grilled sirloin with rosemary is served sliced over arugula, breaded veal chop is topped with diced tomatoes and ribbons of arugula, and fillet of red snapper with fennel and romaine lettuce is steamed in clam juice.  (Review: 1/14/94)  CALA DI VOLPE *  (212) 431-4411; 430 Broome Street, at Crosby Street; $$$; all major credit cards
This Sardinian newcomer requires a casual attitude and a robust appetite.
A perfect introduction to the cuisine is pane carasau, the local bread, crisp sheets brushed with oil and sprinkled with rosemary and salt, as is pane frattau, the same bread slathered with tomato sauce and topped with poached quail eggs and shaved pecorino cheese.
Other starters include grilled mushrooms over broccoli rape and grilled calamari seasoned with lemon, olive oil and parsley.
A salad topped with fresh slices of Sardinian pecorino or the grilled vegetable plate of charred peppers, mushrooms, squash and eggplant are good, too.
Bottarga (also known as poor man's caviar) is served shaved over arugula and cannellini beans.
Spaghettini comes with lobster, tomatoes, tarragon and garlic.
Rabbit stew is made with artichokes, fennel and carrots. (Review: 3/24/95)  JEAN-CLAUDE ++  (212) 475-9232; 137 Sullivan Street, at Prince Street; $; no credit cards
This bright, red-trimmed little French bistro offers compelling au courant fare that is sophisticated without being fussy.
On a recent evening, seared sea scallops on a glistening roasted beet round were well matched with a tart mizuna salad and dressed with a walnut vinaigrette, and grilled foie gras came with a Sauternes sauce, sprinkled with fleshy little cubes of glazed sweet potato and topped with fried leeks.
Entrees were no less alluring, whether the seared monkfish medallions over a smooth puree of potatoes, ringed by parsley sauce and lemon-shellfish emulsion; or the pan-roasted skate in a light coat of crushed Arborio served over a ragout of artichoke slices, roasted tomatoes, enhanced by a balsamic-citrus sauce. ($25 and Under: 4/3/ 92; revisited: 7/26/95)  L'ECOLE


Julie D. Ellis, Peter R. Vaughan
Julie Diane Ellis, a daughter of Verlie J. Ellis of Overland Park, Kan., and the late Jerry L. Ellis, was married yesterday to Peter R. Vaughan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Vaughan of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
William Murphy officiated at the Rolling Hills Presbyterian Church in Overland Park.
Mrs.
Vaughan, 28, is a product manager in New York for the Gap Inc., the clothing company.
She graduated from Kansas State University.
Her father was a distributor of computer hardware in Lenexa, Kan.
Her mother is an administrative assistant in the headquarters of ERA Realty in Overland Park.


Stylish Books and Koobs
THE SUMMER IS RAPIDLY drawing to a close, and you haven't done the reading you were planning to do during the "dog days" to make you a better reader and writer. (That expression is rooted in the summertime rise of Sirius, the Dog Star.)
In these dog days, then, has your reader's eye been seduced by the easy thought-bite layout of news magazines and the colorful bezazz of active matrix computer screens?
Do you now expect even your most solid tomes to be enlivened by charts and graphs, quotations set off in banks of type, every double-truck spread a red-light district of sidebars?


An Irish Institution Makes Its Way in America
IN THE YEAR OF THE FRAGILE peace and the hardy potato -- the one a glimmer on the green Irish horizon, the other coinciding with the 150th anniversary of the Great Hunger -- it is fitting that the most popular prime-time soap opera in Ireland has more spuds than suds.
"Glenroe" is a half-hour drama series chronicling life in a fictional rural village.
Its moral and comic tension derives from the relationship of a good-hearted but naive farmer, Miley Byrne, and his countermarching widowed father, Dinny.


The People Speak: Fund Risk Is Unclear
MILLIONS of Americans count calories.
Not many could define exactly what they are. (Strictly speaking, a calorie is the amount of energy needed to raise the temperature of a gram of water by a degree centigrade.)
But a lack of scientific understanding does not keep consumers from grasping the significance of the calorie content plastered on the back of a bag of chips.


August 13-19: Male Bastions; The Citadel's Hell Week Ends With Faulkner's Exit
For more than two years, Shannon Faulkner, the poised and super-confident product of the public schools of Anderson County, South Carolina, lived a dual life.
By turns lauded as a paragon of courage -- for fighting to gain admission to The Citadel, an all-male public college in Charleston -- and condemned as a cyclone-strength force wrecking all things quintessentially American, she was spun up as more an icon than an individual, lost in the ozone of pop culture.


Where Did She Go Wrong?
THE DISENCHANTED ISLE Mrs.
Thatcher's Capitalist Revolution.
By Charles Dellheim. 416 pp.
New York: W.W.
Norton &amp; Company.


Robert C. Frasure, 53, Envoy On Bosnia Mission, Is Killed
Robert C. Frasure, the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European and Canadian Affairs, died today when the vehicle he was in riding in plunged down a hillside outside Sarajevo in Bosnia.
He was 53.
Mr.
Frasure was part of a team of American diplomats who were traveling to Sarajevo to talk with the Bosnian Government about a new peace plan being pursued by the Clinton Administration.


It's Construction Versus Street Fair On Columbus
For months the beleaguered merchants of Columbus Avenue have looked forward to their annual street fair on Sept. 17, confident that the city would cover up the open construction pits that litter the avenue and that, at least for the day, the street would look inviting to shoppers.
Stephen Hanson, the owner of Isabella's restaurant, on Columbus Avenue at 77th Street, plans to sell food from a booth in front of his restaurant.
"There's a provision in the construction contract that they will make sure the pits are closed up to the best of their ability," he said.


Restaurant Explains Satisfactory Rating
Being one of the chefs and restaurant co-owners of the Original Pine Tree Restaurant, which recently opened in New Rochelle, I probably read the July 9 Dining Out review in the Westchester Weekly more closely than most people.
As I read the review, which had only a satisfactory rating, my mind played back the first few weeks of our opening in May.
It was like watching a video of the past -- not representative of the present.
Having the reputation we had for 30 years on the Post Road in the Bronx, we were inundated with old friends and newcomers who heard about us reopening in New Rochelle.


Knowing When to Say 'Sell'
THERE are theories galore about the best time to buy a stock -- when earnings are growing rapidly or the stock is trading below book value, even one that relates to which team wins the Super Bowl.
And you can't pick up a personal-finance magazine these days without being bombarded with the 10 -- or 15, or 20 -- mutual funds that are absolutely, positively hot, right now!
But wait a second.
When it comes to selling -- which goes hand in hand with buying -- there is almost total silence.
For all sorts of reasons, investors don't like to think about selling, and many on Wall Street are more than happy to oblige by ignoring it, too.
Often, the best the financial pundits have to offer is vague and contradictory conventional wisdom: Don't sell winning investments, but be sure to take profits.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A FACE By Lucy Grealy.
Harper Perennial, $12.
When the author was a child, physicians removed a rare cancer from her jaw -- and half the bone with it.
She explains how she reconstructed her shattered sense of self in the years before plastic surgery could restore her face.
"It's a young woman's first book, the story of her own life, and both book and life are unforgettable," A. G. Mojtabai said here last year.


GALLERY: Disasters
Visitors to the National Transportation Safety Board in Washington are often disconcerted by the art in the reception area.
There aren't any happy-face pictures of agency bigwigs shaking hands with the President.
Instead, the walls are hung with images of terrible accidents.
The idea is not to shock or titillate, but rather to reflect the nature of the agency's work.
It investigates air, rail, marine, pipeline and major-highway accidents.
Some of the images are familiar to most Americans -- like ones of the Challenger explosion and the Exxon Valdez oil spill.
But there are pictures of less well-known disasters -- obscure bus roll-overs, sinking ships and train wrecks.
One image above that may be familiar is that of USAir flight 5050, which plunged into the East River after an aborted takeoff at La Guardia Airport on Sept. 20, 1989.
The cause: pilot error.
Michael Benson, a spokesman, concedes that some people find the picture gallery rather "bizarre." "But it's a reminder of the important work we do -- finding the causes of accidents and preventing similar accidents in the future."


SHH!
There is a simple solution to the car-alarm noise problem.
Instead of placing the alarm's noisemaker on the car itself, attach it to the owner's key ring.
JOHN WELLS New York


August 13-19; Congeniality, New York Style
Barbara Ricci, the winner of New York State's Mrs.
Congeniality contest this year, was acquitted last week of having committed a most uncongenial act -- trying to run down her neighbor's 11-year-old daughter with a car.
But the acquittal doesn't exactly make Mrs.
Ricci the most agreeable woman in the state, as 24 of her fellow contestants judged her to be during the pageant.
In 1993, Mrs.
Ricci pleaded guilty to a charge of harassment after being arrested for punching, kicking and pushing a police officer in Mount Vernon, where she lives.


In Lieu Of Cartoons
To the Editor:
William McDonald's speculation that Saturday-morning home-improvement shows have a large and rapt audience among relatively chore-free urban viewers was a delightful and probably accurate inspiration  [ "Raise High the Roof Beam, City Dweller," July 30 ] .


The Artful Elegance of Plants That Weep
ARCHITECTURAL style is usually considered an art form for structures of brick, stone and steel.
But certain plants have architectural features, too, and they can make a great deal of difference in landscape design.
All kinds of plants can be selected for artful dimension.
Some have spectacular bloom.
Others have stately style, while still others have diminutive cunning.


Felicia S. Altman, Scott F. Rosen
Felicia Sue Altman, the daughter of Marcia and Melvin Altman of Upper Saddle River, N.J., is to be married today to Scott Farrell Rosen, a son of Bonnie Rosen of West Nyack, N.Y., and Martin Rosen of Pound Ridge, N.Y.
Rabbi H. Philip Berkowitz is to perform the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 26, teaches Spanish at the Leonia (N.J.) Middle School.
She graduated from Emory University and received a master's degree in Spanish from Columbia University.
Her father is a lawyer at the Aetna Life and Casualty Company in Hartford.
Her mother is the human resources manager at Financial Services Inc. in Glen Rock, N.J., a distributor of computer software to banks.


Discounts Target Young and Old
YOUNG and old travelers can now get special money-saving deals on transportation.
Trans World Airlines and Amtrak, both looking for new niches, have student discounts.
Seniors' coupon books provide cash up front to hard-pressed airlines.
Some rules on these have been modified.
The T.W.A.
Youth Travel Pak, for students aged 14 to 24, can cut the price of trips to school in the approaching academic year.
It consists of four coupons for domestic travel costing $548, valid for a year.
So each round trip is $274, a good deal if a student attends school on the opposite coast, and similarly useful for long-haul vacations.
Of importance for winter holidays, these coupons have no blackout periods.


TABLE HOPPING
Just what New York needs! New places to eat out, and new clothes to do it in.


A Bit of a Brain-Teaser In 'Murder by Chocolate'
MURDER BY CHOCOLATE" is a vain attempt by Joe Pintauro to reconstruct a once favored genre, the heterosexual romantic comedy. For incidental novelty, the playwright adds a bit of a brain-teaser, touched with contemporary urban paranoia. While audiences tend to feel short-changed by a full-length play that clocks in at a mere 70 minutes, the brevity of this one is its best reward.
Which is to say that the insufficiencies of the play at the John Drew in East Hampton do not cry out for expansion.
Mr.
Pintauro's conceit magnifies the spooky possibilities of a blind date on Halloween -- note the numbers on the apartment door: 1313 -- into a sparring match between two editors.
It all lapses into the tag line of a bathroom joke.


Why a Delicatessen Closed: Not-So-Friendly Neighbors
To the Editor:
There is more to the story of why the Flushing Delight closed than you told in your Aug. 6 article "Knishes or Kimchi: Last Kosher Deli Closes on Union Street."


Will Japan's Surplus Disappear?
The Japanese trade surplus has been one of the wonders of the modern world.
Now it may be coming to an end.
The persistent surplus has been supported by two pillars, both now crumbling.
On the export side, there was the determination of Japanese manufacturers to keep production in the home country.
If it was moved, what would be done with all those workers who were supposed to get lifetime employment?
And on the import side, there were all those informal barriers that American companies like to complain about.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Rear Adm. Richard A. Buchanan; The Submarine Fleet, After the Closures
SUBMARINE GROUP TWO, two squadrons comprising some two dozen nuclear attack submarines and headquartered at the Naval Submarine Base in Groton, was spared by the Federal Defense Base Closure and Realignment Commission this year.
As a result, Rear Adm.
Richard A. Buchanan, its commander, has found himself in charge of all Navy affairs north of Virginia, as one of the few flag officers assigned to the region.


Baby Sitters Stick Together (Unless One Gets Snobby)
A Kid in King Arthur's Court  Thomas Ian Nicholas, Joss Ackland Directed by Michael Gottlieb PG 91 minutes, plus "Runaway Brain," a seven-minute short.


Foreign Affairs; Fruit Of the Loom
When Henry Kissinger and China's Zhou Enlai were first meeting in the 1970's to forge the strategic alignment between their two countries, Mr.
Kissinger used to joke that he was constantly being badgered by U.S. businessmen who had dreams of selling "one billion pairs of underwear" to the Chinese.
Ha, ha, ha, the two grand strategists would laugh in those big overstuffed chairs.
What a joke!
America selling things to Communist China, or, funnier yet, Communist China selling things to America.
What a knee-slapper!
It's worth recalling how funny this seemed at the time to remind ourselves what the original U.S.-China relationship was about.
It was about one thing: the Soviet Union.
It was about the U.S. and China forging a strategic partnership to counterbalance the dangerous Russian Bear.
It was not about one billion pairs of underwear.


Tammara L. Flax, Alan M. Langlieb
Tammara Lynn Flax, the daughter of Irvin and Nannette Flax of Baltimore, is to be married today to Dr.
Alan Mark Langlieb, the son of Muriel and Martin Langlieb of Hackensack, N.J.
Rabbi Joel Zaiman is to perform the ceremony at the Lloyd Street Synagogue in Baltimore.
The bride, 25, graduated summa cum laude from the University of Maryland, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
In September she is to join the Baltimore office of Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the New York accounting firm, as an associate in the tax department.


Commercial Property/CDL Hotels International; Buyer of Major Hotels Remains a Bit of an Unknown
IN Singapore, where members of the Kwek family have been prominent real estate magnates for decades, or in Hong Kong, where their companies are traded on the stock exchange, or among investment bankers anywhere, CDL Hotels International is a well-known entity.
But in the New York hotel community, it has been generating Lone Ranger-style "who was that masked man?" double takes.
In less than two years, this group of Singaporeans galloped in and whoosh, they swooped up the Millenium Hotel, the Hotel Macklowe and most recently, the Plaza Hotel.
If the Sultan of Brunei had not bid $202 million for the Helmsley Palace in 1993, CDL would have had that one too -- its bid of $180 million was the fallback bid.


As the Snows Melt, So the Boats Rise
A record snowpack in the Sierra this year is filling Lake Tahoe, on the California-Nevada border, for the first time since 1986 -- good news for boaters, bathers and tourist businesses.
The lake rose six feet between Nov. 1 and July 31, a record increase, according to Garry Stone, Federal watermaster in Reno.
Since early spring, he said, water has been spilling over the Tahoe Dam, which feeds into the Truckee River, a boon for fishermen downstream after eight years of drought.


POSTINGS: Project Leaves the Exterior Unchanged; Whitney Planning $13.5 Million Expansion
Although the Whitney Museum of American Art often embraces controversy, most notably in its Biennial exhibitions, it backed away a decade ago from a proposed addition by the architect Michael Graves after an outcry from a range of civic forces.
Now, with approval from the Landmarks Preservation Commission in hand, the Whitney is proceeding with an alternative, $13.5 million expansion plan that does not change or add to the building's exterior.


In Queens, Dairy Farms Continued Long After 1910
To the Editor:
The Aug. 6 Playing in the Neighborhood article "Down on the Farm in the Big City" contains the misleading statement that "there was active farm life in Queens until at least 1910." I should know: I married the farmer's son.


Ocracoke Journal; Spitting in the Eye of the Hurricane
As fair-weather coast dwellers tacked plywood over their windows and fled inland this week, locals on this isolated island defied the "mandatory" evacuation order by throwing raucous hurricane parties and huddling on the blustery beach to face down Felix.
"Nothing to do but batten down the hatches and drink," said Valerie Gokturk, a 26-year-old waitress and graduate student in literature who has lived here each summer since she was 2.


Italian Again, in Congenial Surroundings
ANOTHER Italian restaurant evokes no surprise in Fairfield County nowadays, but the arrival of Bacio, right around the corner from the Community movie theater in Fairfield, makes it convenient for dinner before the movies.
Not that Bacio is just a pre-movie stop.
The handsome new restaurant can be a destination in itself (and considering the slow service, it may be better not to plan on movie-going after dinner).
The spacious dining room, enhanced by cream-colored stuccoed walls with brick trim, has an open-to-view kitchen in the rear.
This would be a more appealing tactic if the cooking area weren't cluttered with boxes, jars, tools and bottles.


A Tiny Piece of Rhode Island, Adopted by the Neighbors
I LOVE this place," said Henry Blansfield. "My Mom and Dad brought me here when I was 5 years old in 1929 and I've passed on a love for it.
My kids come back, from New York, Connecticut, California, with their families in the summer.
We've got herons nesting on the pond in our front yard and beach roses and privet and bayberry, and the twitter of birds.
This is part of my being, my essence."
It is homage to Block Island, a journey into the lyrical from a man who normally is more pragmatic than poetic.
Back home in Danbury, Henry Blansfield is a semi-retired surgeon and an advocate for people with addictions.
But now he is at his summer place in Rhode Island, one of the many Connecticut people who feel that if the island isn't heaven, it's close enough.


Andean Bears Get New Treetop Home
IT MAY NOT be an Andean cloud forest, but for Cisco and Poncho, the treetops in the Flushing Meadows-Corona Park zoo will have to do.
The 2-year-old brothers are spectacled bears, members of an endangered species indigenous to the Andes (and the only South American bear).
The name comes from the light-colored patch on the bear's face that makes it look as though it's wearing eyeglasses.


Who Are Those Women Embedded in the Sidewalk?
Melissa Goldstein, her hazel eyes cast downward, walks around SoHo, staring at the ground as if she expects to find something other than urban flotsam.
Suddenly, she stops at the northeast corner of Spring and Greene Streets.
"Here's one over here!" she says, her sandaled foot pointing to a slightly shiny object embedded in the sidewalk.
From afar, it looks like a stone, but upon closer inspection, one can see that it is a photograph of a woman, swathed only in a sheet, her body slightly curled in a quasi-fetal position.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
INTENSIVE CARE  We Must Save Medicare  and Medicaid Now.
By Ross Perot.
HarperPerennial, paper, $7.99.


Anthony Radin and Erika Lipsky
Erika Shelley Lipsky, the daughter of Carol and Burton G. Lipsky of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Anthony Bruce Radin, a son of Nancy Tarnoff of New York and the late Ivan E. Radin.
Rabbi Richard Jacobs performed the ceremony at the Essex House in New York.
The bride, 25, graduated from the University of Vermont and is a candidate for a master's degree in educational theater at New York University.
Her father is a partner in Lipsky &amp; Stout, a law firm in New York.
Her mother is a real estate broker at Houlihan Lawrence, a real estate agency in Scarsdale.


A Push for Faster Highways Gains Momentum
On Aug. 1, New York became the 45th state to change some of its highway signs to read "Speed Limit 65." New Jersey may become No. 46.
Last week, the North Jersey Transportation Planning Authority, a regional planning agency, recommended that the state increase the 55 mile-an-hour speed limit on non-urban highways because most drivers ignored the law anyway.


Alice June Kang, OhSang Kwon
Alice June Kang, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Chang-Wuk Kang of Stevenson, Md., was married yesterday to OhSang Kwon, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Young Sei Kwon of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Drew Derreth performed the ceremony at the Central Presbyterian Church in Baltimore.
Ms.
Kang, 26, is keeping her name.
She is an art director in the marketing department of Bergdorf Goodman in New York.
She graduated from the Rhode Island School of Design.
Her father is the chief of psychiatry at St.
Agnes Hospital in Baltimore and a former president of the Greater Baltimore Association of General Hospital Psychiatry.


Travers Victory Sets Up Thunder Gulch
Thunder Gulch took a mighty stride toward the 3-year-old championship today and even the title of Horse of the Year when he won the $750,000 Travers Stakes at Saratoga Race Course by four and a half lengths over Pyramid Peak.
The star of the D. Wayne Lukas barn, who began the year in exile in Florida, added the "summertime Derby" to his victories in the Fountain of Youth Stakes, the Florida Derby, the Kentucky Derby, the Belmont Stakes and the Swaps.
It is a record that he achieved after opening the season as second-string to his stablemate Timber County and as the blue-collar horse of the deepest string in the country.
Now, he is rich and famous and ready to challenge the renowned 5-year-old Cigar for Horse of the Year.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Sampras Stunned by Karbacher  Pete Sampras's serve deserted him in the second set yesterday, opening the door for Bernd Karbacher to defeat the top-seeded player, 4-6, 6-4, 6-1, in the semifinals of the RCA Championships at Indianapolis.
In today's final, Karbacher will meet Thomas Enqvist, who defeated second-seeded Goran Ivanisevic for the fourth straight week.
The fourth-seeded Swede won this time by 6-1, 1-6, 6-3.
Karbacher won the second set by breaking Sampras's serve, the first time the second-ranked American had lost his serve in the tournament.
Sampras said he was shaken by losing the second set "and just didn't really regain my composure in the beginning of the third."
"He just really hit some good returns, and I was just stuck flat-footed," he said.
"I was kind of digging myself in a bigger and bigger hole. That was it."
Karbacher said his opponent was unbeatable early.
"There was no weakness at all," Karbacher said.
"I just tried to keep my confidence up, go for every return you can make, and maybe he will have a lack of concentration." (AP)
GEORGIA SENIOR TAKES 3 TITLES: Tina Samara won three titles at the United States National Amateur championships in Kiamesha Lake, N.Y.
The third-seeded Samara, 21, a senior at the University of Georgia, used an aggressive game and accurate shot-making to beat unseeded Patty Murren of Newtown, Conn., a Wake Forest senior, 3-6, 6-3, 6-1.
The Laurel Hollow.
N.Y., player also won the women's doubles with Bonnie Bleeker of Indianapolis and the mixed doubles with Jared Jacobs of Oyster Bay, L.I.
Third-seeded Marty Engel of Glen Ellyn, Ill., rallied to win the men's singles title.
Engel, 22, a graduate of Northern Illinois, rallied from a set and a break down for a 3-6, 6-4, 6-0 victory over second-seeded Eric Elek of Pittsburgh, a Texas A&amp;M sophomore.
Justin Smith of Franklin Lakes, N.J., and Brian Gill of Austin, Tex., won the men's doubles title.
MOROCCAN ADVANCES: Heicham Arazi of Morocco reached the GHI Bronx Tennis Classic final with a 6-4, 6-4 victory over Eyal Ran of Israel.
Today, he will face seventh-seeded Tamer el-Sawy of Egypt, who defeated the Texan Steve Bryan, 6-1, 7-6 (7-2). (AP) GOLF  Australian Leads Women's British Open  Karrie Webb, a 20-year-old Australian who turned pro just 10 months ago, eagled the final hole for a four-under-par 69 and a one-stroke lead yesterday after three rounds of the Women's British Open in Woburn, England.
Webb has a 27-hole total of 208, one better than Val Skinner, an American who had a 67--209 yesterday.
Lotta Neumann, the defending champion from Sweden, and England's Caroline Pierce and Suzanne Strudwick were tied at 212.
Webb rolled in a 40-foot putt on the 18th, pushing her past Skinner -- who had the day's best round, with seven birdies -- and keeping her in the lead she took in the second round. (AP) HARNESS RACING  His Majesty Takes International  His Majesty, drive Stefan Melander, swept three wide on the final turn last night to capture the $300,000 36th International Trot at Yonkers Raceway by two lengths over the favored S J Photo.
His Majesty, who covered the mile in 2:262/5 , returned $26.40 for $2 to win, $6.20 and $4.40.
S J Photo paid $3.10 and $2.70 and Panifesto returned $3.80.
C R Kay Suzie, the highly regarded filly who dominated the Northeast before breaking stride and failing to qualify for the Hambletonian final, led for most of the race after starting from the second tier but faded down the stretch and finished fourth in the eight-horse field.


On Sunday; Blacks' Dollars Seem Scarce In AIDS Fight
THE telephone call, with crisp business tones traded for dulcet endearments, symbolized the delicate juggling act that is Linda Stewart Campbell's professional life.
Ms.
Campbell, the executive director of the Minority Task Force on AIDS, was chatting with her 18-year-old daughter, Catherine Lindsay.
The young woman was preparing to leave New York City for Hampton University in Virginia, one of the nation's premier historically black colleges.


Brooke Ackerly, William Zinke
Brooke Ann Ackerly, the daughter of Katherine Stevenson of Shelburne, Vt., and Richard Ackerly of Oakland, Calif., was married yesterday to William Stanford Zinke, a son of Barbara R. Zinke of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., and William K. Zinke of Boulder, Colo.
The Rev.
L.
Murdock Smith performed the ceremony at St.
James Episcopal Church in Keene, N.H.
Ms.
Ackerly, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Williams College and received a master's degree in political science from Stanford University, where she is a candidate for a doctorate in political science.
Her father is the headmaster of St.
Paul's Episcopal School in Oakland.


Elizabeth Barr, William Farriss
Elizabeth Joan Barr, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald J. Barr of Old Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to William Webster Farriss, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald V. Farriss of Glasgow, Va.
The Rev.
John Smyth performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Catherine of Siena in Riverside, Conn.
Mrs.
Farriss, 26, teaches the first grade at the Nightingale-Bamford School in New York.
She graduated from Vanderbilt University.
Her father, a former publisher of Sports Illustrated magazine, is an executive vice president at Time Inc., in New York.


Mary Ann Bosack, David Wyshner
Mary Ann Kathleen Bosack, an associate at the New York law firm Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett, was married yesterday to David Brendan Wyshner, an associate in the corporate finance group at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
The Rev.
Frank Butler, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Hotchkiss School chapel in Lakeville, Conn.
Mrs.
Wyshner, 28, graduated cum laude from Yale University and received her law degree from New York University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Bosack of Carmel, N.Y.
The bride's father is the English department coordinator at the Fox Lane High School and Middle School in Bedford, N.Y.
Her mother, Claudia D. Bosack, teaches English at the Mahopac Middle School in Mahopac, N.Y.


Marinated Bluefish, a Taste of Summer
ASK for snappers in a fish market and chances are the clerk will bring out silver-pink red snappers from Southern waters.
But a snapper is also what fishermen in this part of the country call a baby bluefish, usually weighing a pound or less.
The name distinguishes the small bluefish from the larger, full-grown Jack-the-Ripper blues known as choppers, voracious fish that slash their way sharklike through a school of prey.
The advantage of the babies is that they have a milder flavor than larger bluefish.
And when I find these snappers in the market, I love using them to make escabeche, a savory marinated cooked-fish dish.


August 13-19: Crime Survey; Rape Was Underreported Because No One Asked
Of all crimes, rape is the most underreported because women are afraid of facing their attackers in court and putting their integrity on trial.
Indeed, even in surveys, women are apt to underreport rape.
Last week the Department of Justice released a report that doubled the annual national estimates of rapes and attempted rapes to 310,000.
Justice Department officials said the increase was not due to a rise in the number of rapes, but in the way the interviewers asked their questions.
In its annual crime survey of 100,000 Americans interviewers asked women for the first time directly whether or not they were the victim of a rape.


With Henri Cartier-Bresson, Surrounded by His Peers
FRANCE'S PRE-EMINENT artist is sharp, amusing, affectionate, generous and mischievous.
Henri Cartier-Bresson turns 87 on Tuesday.
A bum knee hobbles him, but otherwise he remains a live wire who likes to say his approach to life has been shaped by Buddhism.
More to the point, his wife, the photographer Martine Franck, once described him to the Dalai Lama as "a Buddhist in turbulence."
The view from his apartment, overlooking the Tuileries, takes in the Louvre to the east and the Musee d'Orsay to the south.
A century ago Monet and Pissarro painted the scene from the apartment below.
These days Cartier-Bresson sometimes draws it from his balcony.
"No one would care about my drawings if I weren't a famous photographer," he says.
"I'm not gifted; I'm an imposter."


Alison Iselin and Daniel Russell
Alison Jay Iselin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Jay Iselin of New York, was married yesterday at her parents' farm in Ghent, N.Y., to Daniel Jonathan Russell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony Russell of Brooklyn.
Town Justice George Lee of Ghent performed the outdoor ceremony.
The couple graduated from Macalester College.
The bride, 26, is a sales manager at Fulcircle Recyclers in the Bronx.
Her father is the president of the Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art and a former president of WNET/Channel 13, the public television station, both in New York.
Her mother, Josephine Lea Iselin, is a partner in Lankenau, Kovner &amp; Kurtz, a New York law firm.


Betsy Street, Drew A. Graham
Elizabeth Ann Street, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David H. Street of Cincinnati, was married yesterday to Drew Alan Graham, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul A. Graham of Vero Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Paul L. Couch performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Greenwich, Conn.
The couple graduated from Princeton University, were they were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.


He Let His Music Do the Talking
Jerry Garcia never spoke much during Grateful Dead concerts.
The Dead's lead guitarist, singer and main songwriter was a voluble, articulate man offstage, as his many interviews reveal.
But he worried that any words he spoke to the Dead's audiences in sold-out arenas might be taken far too seriously by fans, who seemed willing to consider him an oracle.
Garcia, whose death on Aug. 9 led to spontaneous, tearful vigils across the United States, never strove to be a rock icon.
Bearded, bespectacled and usually portly, he did not trade on conventional sex appeal or any kind of self-aggrandizement.
At concerts, Garcia received a star's ovations whenever he started to sing, and often at the first glimmer of his lead guitar.
But he wanted fans to treat him as a musician -- to listen above all -- and throughout the Dead's 30-year career he made sure that they did.


Theresa Berrios and Mark Santiago
Theresa Marie Berrios, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis C. Berrios of Laurence Harbor, N.J., was married yesterday to Mark Christopher Santiago, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis R. Santiago of Whitestone, Queens.
The Rev.
Raymond Attanasio performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Lawrence in Laurence Harbor.
Mrs.
Santiago, 24, teaches special education at the Edward J. Patten School in Perth Amboy, N.J.
She graduated from St.
John's University in Staten Island, where she is a candidate for a master's degree in special education.


The Quiet Life as Pursued by David Hartman
AS THE HOST OF ABC'S "GOOD Morning America" for more than 11 years, David Hartman interviewed Presidents, kings and movie stars, guided his program as it developed from brash upstart into top-rated morning show, had a daily audience of more than seven million viewers and pocketed a $2 million annual salary.
Then he simply walked away.
Such voluntary departures from television's equivalent of the catbird seat are rare, particularly at the height of one's career.
And for Mr.
Hartman, who arrived at ABC in 1975 as a journeyman actor and left in 1987 as a household name, the move was conspicuously bold.


Popularity Strains Senior Center
Every weekday morning, Cheng Szi-yu spends about 30 minutes traveling by bus and subway from Rego Park to the Nan Shan Senior Center in Flushing.
The trip is a hassle, she says, but the activities at Nan Shan, the borough's only Chinese senior center, make it worthwhile.
At the center, Mrs.
Cheng, 64, and up to 200 others busy themselves with about a dozen programs that include Chinese calligraphy, Chinese opera, t'ai chi and physical fitness, but mostly Mrs.
Cheng volunteers in the office or leads karaoke classes.
Every now and then, she sits at a table to play a round of a mah-jongg game called the Great Wall.


Comedy's Underside, and Duality
FOR the Phoenix Theater Company's third play of an ambitious summer, reach is all.
Where comedy tonight is the season's catchall phrase, "Comedians" by Trevor Griffiths uncovers the underside of the form that is supposed to make people laugh, whatever the price.
In an adult-ed classroom, a motley crew of would-be funnymen in training for stand-up go through exercises, from improvisation to introspection, and get technical pointers -- on pacing, on detail, on attitude, on subtext and on dealing with coughers in the audience, which may be the play's most lasting contribution to the future of live performance.


Arlene Speranza, Walter D. Karle
Arlene Christina Speranza, a daughter of Diana and Emil Speranza of Bayside, Queens, was married yesterday to Walter Desmond Karle, a son of Amy and Walter Karle of Little Neck, Queens.
The Rev.
Jack Maloney performed the ceremony at St.
Robert Bellarmine Roman Catholic Church in Bayside.
Mrs.
Karle, 28, graduated from Queensborough Community College.
She is an administrative assistant at Nouveau Elevator Industries, a repair company in Brooklyn.


Divide Flowering Plants, Conquer Pests
Start a strawberry bed with container-grown plants, or better yet, plants from a friend's garden.
Make sure the bed is deeply dug with plenty of compost and aged manure.
Divide phloxes, Japanese and Siberian irises, as well as crowded spring-blooming perennials and ground covers.
Trade with your friends.
Water the transplants thoroughly, and continue to water if the weather stays dry and hot.


A New Trail Through the Wilderness (Both Public and Private)
Blazing a path through virgin forest is one thing.
Threading a new 100-mile hiking trail around developments and highways in a scenic but not quite uninhabited part of New Jersey is another undertaking altogether.
But when the state's longest hiking trail is completed, its architects say, it will have been worth all the planning headaches.
The route, called the Highlands Trail, will run from the Delaware River near Phillipsburg to Storm King Mountain on the Hudson River in New York State, crossing some of the region's most rugged terrain.
Of the trail's 150 miles, 100 are in New Jersey.


Citadel Marches On, Without Female Cadet
Recruits to The Citadel's Regimental Band drilled today without a flute player, a position that would have been filled by Shannon Faulkner, the 20-year-old woman who quit the all-male state military college a week after winning a two-and-a-half-year court battle for the right to enroll.
Unlike many of the men who would have been Ms.
Faulkner's fellow cadets, Maj.
Herbert Day, the band director, took no pleasure in her abrupt departure on Friday.


The Lure of an Irish Time Warp
I WAS never a believer in Ireland.
The blarney about peat bogs, misty mountains and smiling Irish eyes did not convince.
But during a recent visit, I realized that this country has a much more specific appeal than cliches about the Emerald Isle.
Its landscapes, villages and coastlines have somehow avoided the corrosive ugliness brought on by modern civilization, and in particular by tourism.
Nowhere is this more true than in West Cork.
Its difficulty of access and uncertainty of weather have preserved its beauty in a magical time warp.
Not that the area is maintained like America's "historic" towns -- in aspic, with costumes.
Drive from Bantry to Skibbereen, the two towns that anchor the west-east borders of this part of County Cork, and you will see scrubby fields dotted with sheep and goats, donkey carts carrying families to market, crumbling Georgian houses, ruined barns, and the usual flotsam and jetsam of a small rural area trying to make ends meet.
But thanks to generous subsidies from the European Union (Ireland, like Greece and Portugal, other less economically successful nations, has been a major beneficiary of this otherwise contentious alliance), life is on an upswing in West Cork.
The stucco facades of the village houses are freshly painted in their traditional bright purple, pink, yellow and blue, colors you would expect to see around the Mediterranean or Caribbean rather than the moody Atlantic.
The food shops are filled with a wide range of fresh produce, and the coves are punctuated with fancy sailing yachts as well as thriving fishing boats.
An occasional Mercedes or BMW glides through town; the restaurants are crowded.
West Cork has become a mecca for artists and artisans, and the West Cork Arts Center in Skibbereen is a showcase for local talent.
Enhancing this sense of well-being is one of nature's many gifts to the region.
Although roughly on the latitude of Goose Bay, Labrador, West Cork is caressed by the warm air of the Gulf Stream throughout the year.
It rarely snows here and rains often, causing the gardens to flourish with unseemly abandon.
Semitropical plants such as palms, calla lilies, rosemary and abutilon jockey for position along the country roads, with wild fuchsia tumbling down the hedges in a rosy cascade, causing as much distraction to the unwary motorist as the flock of sheep moseying its way home after a day's grazing.
This priceless quirk of climate, combined with the fickle northern light, make the region as affecting visually as the landscapes of Corot.
It is not surprising that a few shrewd seekers after paradise have settled here, including such movie people as Jeremy Irons and David Puttnam, whose houses eye each other warily across Roaring Water Bay.
As one drives southwest from Cork airport, the small town of Rosscarbery is the first landmark of the West Cork region.
A nearby site of druidic standing stones at Drombeg, a miniature Stonehenge, indicates that an ancient population once lived here.
The road continues on into Glandore, the Cannes of West Cork.
Charmingly situated on a cliff overlooking the harbor, Glandore's pubs and color-washed houses exude a serene glow in the soft Irish light.
Sitting with a pint at the Glandore Inn, with a view of the church to our right, and in front of us running down to the water a public garden planted with lavender, petunias, salvia and flowering shrubs, my friend and I could understand why the Irish have always had a season ticket to Parnassus.
Glandore is on one side of a long fjord, and facing it on the other side is a town called Union Hall (named for the Act of Union between Britain and Ireland in 1801), less glamorous than Glandore, more a serious fishing harbor.
It is worth driving over the fjord on the one-lane bridge from one town to the other.
We enjoyed a little detour north to Leap (pronounced lepp), where the water winds gently between small mountains like a child of the Rhine.
Skibbereen, like its name, is a cheerful Irish jig of a place and the heart of West Cork, with more bright-painted houses, bustling streets, and several antique and pottery shops.
Six miles south of Skibbereen is the village of Casletownshend, which my companion had visited as a schoolboy 35 years earlier.
Nothing had changed.
Like many villages in Cornwall, England, it slopes steeply down to the sea.
Castletownshend was given to the Townshend family by Charles II in the late 17th century, and one wall of the Episcopal Church of St.
Barrahane's has an inscription that invites competition with the Lord Himself in its detailing of the saintliness of this powerful Protestant family.
Castletownshend is also famous as the home of Edith Somerville and her cousin Violet Martin, the two women who chronicled the hilarious adventures of "The Irish R.M." (an Englishman who served as resident magistrate) in their turn-of-the-century novels under the gender-free names Somerville and Ross.
After visiting here on an unusually hot day, we drove to a sandy cove off the road between Castletownshend and Tregumna, where we swam (the water was Maine-cold) and explored the excellent climbing rocks.
A few minutes south of Skibbereen on Lake Abisdealy is one of the more unusual gardens to find in this undeveloped spot.
The Liss Ard project is the brainchild of Claudia and Veith Meister-Turske (she is Swiss, he is German), who moved here a few years ago.
Claudia told us of their New Age dream of creating a public wildlife garden, with park land, waterfalls, hills, sounds of water, arboretums and three sculptured "experiences" (the Crater, the Pyramid and the Sky Garden), designed by the California artist James Turrell and not yet completed.
Local observers have remarked that this part of Ireland is already in effect a public park, with waterfalls, hills, wildlife and so forth, so why make the tremendous effort of time and money (they planted 10,000 trees and shrubs in six weeks) in an attempt to recreate what is already there?
Bizarre in conception (Ireland was the only place in western Europe where the couple could acquire enough land) and wildly difficult to pull off, the Liss Ard Experience is at the moment a garden in progress.
Four miles southwest of Skibbereen is Lough (pronounced Loch, as in Loch Lomond) Hyne, the only inland sea lake in northern Europe.
Surrounded by spectacular undulating hills, this lake is a marine biologist's playpen, owing to the unusual organisms that haunt its salty waters. (We found we would need scuba equipment, however, to share in the fun.) Among its curiosities is an asymmetrical tidal cycle; it takes four hours to rise and eight and a half to fall.
A short hop from Lough Hyne is Baltimore, another ravishing coastal town, eight miles from Skibbereen.
Baltimore, with picturesque cottages, and hanging baskets of fuchsia, geraniums and daisies ornamenting its narrow streets, is the home of a French sailing school, thus ensuring a wonderful anomaly: authentic French cooking in the heart of a remote Irish fishing village.
On the road from Skibbereen to Baltimore are Creagh (pronounced kree) Gardens, created by Gwendoline and Peter Harold-Barry earlier this century on the grounds of their Georgian house, and now kept up by their heirs.
The gardens would have pleased the great English 18th-century garden designer Capability Brown, whose penchant for "natural" landscapes is faithfully reproduced here.
Reflecting the wild beauty of the estuary on which they are situated, the extensive gardens rise, Nereid-like, from the water toward the more formal (and less successful) plantings close to the house.
From Baltimore to Bantry we caught other breathtaking views, in particular around the little hill town of Ballydehob, with its 12-arch viaduct overlooking Roaring Water Bay, and on down to Mizen Head and Fastnet Rock.
As a child in England I used to hear on the radio daily weather forecasts from Fastnet, and imagined "Fastnet" as some mysterious web of divination.
How thrilled I was finally to find its source, the Fastnet Lighthouse, which has been giving its soulful warnings to ships navigating the stormy Atlantic since the middle of the 19th century.
Bantry, the final destination of our tour, cast a different kind of spell upon us.
About 25 minutes by car from Skibbereen, the town sits on a hill above a huge deep-water bay surrounded by a frieze of mountains, rocks and meadows.
Dominating the town is Bantry House, which gazes down at this lush Irish panorama with a ramshackle serenity.
One of Ireland's most famous stately homes, it combines the majesty of the best 18th-century architecture and landscaping with a spirited touch of Irish eccentricity.
Bantry House has witnessed much history.
In December 1795, a French fleet of roughly 50 warships, carrying almost 15,000 French troops, sailed from Brest to Bantry to support the United Irish leader Wolfe Tone in his fight to free Ireland from British rule.
The French got as far as Bere Island, at the mouth of Bantry Bay, before terrible storms and inefficient communications caused the fleet to turn back.
In the Bantry House stableblock there is an exhibition about this failed invasion, with ships' models and printed extracts from Wolfe Tone's journals.
Richard White, then owner of Bantry House and a prominent member of the Protestant Ascendancy (English who were given land grants in Ireland) was named Earl of Bantry for his loyalty to the crown during this uprising.
His heirs have lived at the house ever since.
The entrance is guarded by several poetical characters who speak Irish amongst themselves.
The front hall is a dazzling space with large black and white tiles on the floor, leading to a staircase and various rooms, some on different levels, all oddly decorated with family furniture and paintings, including a portrait of the present owner blowing his own horn (literally).
The main drawing room has vast floor-to-ceiling windows framed brilliantly in long panels of mirror, reflecting the views of the balustraded park and bay and mountains beyond.
The dining room has two gigantic built-in sideboards, the like of which I have never seen even in the grandest English stately homes.
Through the long windows is a view of a columned portico and a sunken rose garden.
The library has French doors that look out on the Italian garden, which consists of a central tree-encircled fountain with shells stuck onto its sides, and a stone staircase that rises up as far as the eye can see.
In the library is a grand piano with the following notice on it: "If you are an experienced pianist and would like to play please tell us at the desk. Piano is tuned to concert pitch (440)."
Upstairs the atmosphere gets increasingly peculiar.
In the East Bow Bedroom a closet door swings open to reveal a past owner's party dresses, a collection of Regency velvet jackets and silk chemises, all falling apart.
The upstairs landing is strangely touching, with ancient peeling leather doors and dusty mementos.
But the overall feeling of the house is not so much elegant decay as wild romanticism.
What one remembers are the astonishing colors of the rooms -- a sensuous rose for the drawing room, an exuberant blue for the dining room -- and the huge mirrored windows that pay lyrical obeisance to the natural wonders of the land and seascape outside.
Mostly unrestored both inside and out (although work is now proceeding with funds wheedled out of the Irish Government), Bantry House is a perfect metaphor for the bafflingly beautiful and original character of this part of Ireland.
Making your way among the villages Getting There
The nearest airports are Cork (about an hour and a quarter from Skibbereen) and Shannon (over two and a half hours away).
The main roads are fairly good, but when you travel between the small coastal villages, banish any thought of speed.
The dialing code for Ireland is 353.
Prices are calculated at the rate of 1.6 Irish pounds to the dollar.
Where to Stay
Rates are per person in a double room, and all include breakfast.
Liss Ard Lake Lodge, on a lake just outside Skibbereen, like its gardens, is an unexpected hotel to find in Ireland, in that it is designed in a kind of Zen minimalist style much favored in California.
The 10 lakefront bedrooms are stunningly luxurious but austere, with all-white linens and furnishings, meditation lofts, video players, stereo equipment, spa bathrooms, and nothing else to detract from the natural beauty of the surroundings.
Rates range from $80 to $192.
Telephone 28-22365; fax 28-22839.
Ballylickey Manor House, overlooking Bantry Bay, 27-50071, fax 27-50124, is a splendid former shooting lodge with cottages, a pool and gardens, in a park with private trout and salmon fishing.
Rates: from $72 to $131.
The 42-room West Cork Hotel on Ilen Road in Skibbereen, 28-21277, fax 28-22333, is well situated on the river at the edge of town, but it is less elegant and less comfortable than the two already mentioned.
Rates: $48.
If you prefer a more "authentic" Irish experience, there are many bed-and-breakfasts throughout West Cork, and they are clean and cheap.
The Skibbereen Tourist Office will book one for a fee of $1.60 locally and $3.20 for the rest of Ireland. (By the way, in Ireland, if you see a sign advertising a bedroom "ensuite" it means it comes with a private bathroom.) Where to Eat
Two musts for all visitors to West Cork (or any part of Ireland): Irish soda bread (basically flour, milk, baking soda and salt), which is sometimes light and fluffy, sometimes as rich and nutty as a carrot cake; and at least one half-pint of Guinness, a meal in itself, which tastes entirely different in its home country from the weakened stuff (even on draft) sent abroad.
Blair's Cove Restaurant, Durrus, seven miles south of Bantry, 27-61127, is in the stable of a restored Georgian house and serves (dinner only) good fish and shellfish, as do most of the restaurants and pubs in West Cork.
Prices range from $16 to $40.
Liss Ard Lake Lodge has a restaurant suited to its owners' ecologically conscious vision, with food that is entirely free of cholesterol.
They offer an impressive but light and healthy six-course dinner.
An example: consomme, warm oysters with cucumber sauce, a vegetable tempura, fresh duck, sorbets and fruits flavored with anise and rosewater.
All ingredients are fresh, pasta is home made, and the meticulously planned menu changes daily.
A six-course dinner costs $53 a person.
Mary Ann's Restaurant, Castletownshend, 28-36146, has delicious crabmeat, scallops and mussels, and won the Egon Ronay award last year for the best Irish soda bread.
Eat in the simple outside cafe if weather permits.
Prices start at around 8 Irish pounds a person.
Five-course dinner: $32.
The Rectory, Glandore, is in a Georgian country house, with lovely views over the harbor.
Local produce is available daily.
Dinner ranges from $32 to $48.
Chez Youen, on the quai in Baltimore, is a genuine French bistro with French chefs cooking French food.
After a diet of crabmeat salads, this is the place for a change of pace.
It even promises to have fresh lobster all year round (not Maine lobster, needless to say; what Americans would probably call crayfish).
Prices range from $20 for lunch to $50 for dinner.
Many restaurants and pubs offer traditional Irish music on weekends.


It's Construction Versus Street Fair On Columbus
For months the beleaguered merchants of Columbus Avenue have looked forward to their annual street fair on Sept. 17, confident that the city would cover up the open construction pits that litter the avenue and that, at least for the day, the street would look inviting to shoppers.
Stephen Hanson, the owner of Isabella's restaurant, on Columbus Avenue at 77th Street, plans to sell food from a booth in front of his restaurant.
"There's a provision in the construction contract that they will make sure the pits are closed up to the best of their ability," he said.


Dial M for Movies: Phone Company Tests New Service
A year after Margrete Olsen gave her cable-television company the boot and switched to a trial video service started by her local phone company, Southern New England Telephone, she is one of SNET's biggest fans.
She gets more television channels, with a sharper picture.
She and her daughters, Amanda and Tori, use a remote control to order any of 1,800 movies and videos any time they want.
And SNET's employees are as solicitous as waiters in a four-star restaurant.


Council Vote
The City Council voted Thursday to grant a zoning change to allow Pathmark Stores to build a 65,000-square-foot supermarket in Springfield Gardens, Queens and to require it to create a $400,000 fund to distribute to local businesses and community groups.
A yes vote was to approve the measure.
It passed by a 35-to-6 margin, with 3 absentions.
Manhattan Freed (D-L) . . .
Abstain Pagan (D-L) . . .
Yes Duane (D-L) . . .
Yes Eristoff (R-L) . . .
No Millard (R-L) . . .
No Eldridge (D-L) . . .
Abstain Michels (D-L) . . .
Yes Powell (D-L) . . .
No Fields (D-L) . . .
Yes Linares (D-L) . . .
Yes Bronx Eisland (D-L) . . .
Yes Warden (D-L) . . .
Not Voting DeMarco (D-C) . . .
No Ruiz (D-L) . . .
Yes Rivera (D-L) . . .
No Foster (D-L) . . .
Yes Rosado (D) . . .
Yes Cruz (D) . . .
Not Voting Queens Abel (R-C) . . .
Yes Harrison (D-L) . . .
Not Voting Marshall (D-L) . . .
Yes Vallone (D) . . .
Yes Leffler (D-L) . . .
Yes Povman (D) . . .
Yes Sabini (D-L) . . .
Yes McCaffrey (D-L) . . .
Yes Spigner (D-L) . . .
Yes White (D) . . .
Yes Koslowitz (D) . . .
Yes Ognibene (R-C) . . .
Yes Watkins (D-L) . . .
Yes Stabile (R-C) . . .
Yes  Brooklyn Fisher (D-L) . . .
Yes Robles (D-L) . . .
Yes Pinkett (D-L) . . .
Yes Robinson (D) . . .
Yes Malave-Dilan (D) . . .
Yes McCabe (D) . . .
Abstain DiBrienza (D-L). . .
Not Voting Clarke (D-L) . . .
Yes Williams (D) . . .
Not Voting Wooten (D) . . .
Not Voting Albanese (D-L) . . .
Yes Dear (D) . . .
Yes Henry (D) . . .
Yes Berman (D) . . .
Not Voting Lasher (D) . . .
Yes Weiner (D) . . .
Yes Staten Island O'Donovan (D-C) . . .
Yes Fusco (R-C) . . .
No Fossella (R-C) . . .
No


Movies This Week
Television is enriched this week by a marvelous cluster of vintage films, three English and one from Hollywood.
Through technically surpassed by his own remake, Alfred Hitchcock's original "MAN WHO KNEW TOO MUCH" (1934) remains a honey.
Two touches linger, one being the eerie presence of Peter Lorre (fresh from Germany's "M") as a deadly spy.
The other touch, at the climax, is the skill with a rifle of a desperate mother, Edna Best (in photograph with Leslie Banks), watching the rooftop pursuit of her abducted daughter (Nova Pilbeam).
Banks is briskly effective as the father who learns of a planned assassination- Thursday at 12:45 P.M. on Bravo.
All aboard for Carol Reed's "NIGHT TRAIN TO MUNICH" (1940) with Margaret Lockwood.
Rex Harrison and two minor players from "The Lady Vanishes." Indeed this tingling, atmospheric yarn often seems like a complement thriller to Hitchcock.
The villain here, a Nazi, is Paul Von Henreid (who shed the Von well before "Casablanca").
There's a nifty cable-car finale - Tuesday at 8 P.M. on Channel 31.


Middle Class Works Overtime to Stay Afloat
To the Editor:
"Welcome, Nouveaux Riches" by David Frum of the Manhattan Institute (Op-Ed, Aug. 14) relies on a distorted interpretation of economic data.
Citing household income data, Mr.
Frum contends there has been no growth in the share of the population below the middle class ($25,000); the only change has been the shift of proportion of the population from the middle class to the wealthy.


An Inventive 'I Do'
From the moment Angel Luis Marin and Yosleydis Ramos decided to marry, the couple knew they would need a very imaginative wedding plan to cope with Cuba's stringent rationing system.
Article, page 3.


Mexico Said to Balk at Border Shooting Inquiry
The shooting of a United States Border Patrol officer, apparently by local policemen from the Mexican city of Nogales, has brought complaints by some American officials that the Mexican authorities are failing to cooperate in the case.
United States officials said the wounded American officer, Arthur G. Lopez, was on patrol on the United States side of the border on Aug. 10 when he was hit in the back by a bullet fired by one of two Nogales police officers whom Mr.
Lopez and his partner had observed arresting two suspected bandits just inside Mexico.
Why the Mexican policemen fired at the American officers is unclear, the officials said.


Assault on Environmental Laws Is Bad Politics
To the Editor:
Of all the questionable components of the new Congressional agenda, the one that makes the least sense is its environmental policy.
The new leadership is about to dismantle a 25-year, bipartisan policy structure that has been tremendously successful in cleaning up the environment.


Saying 'I Do' in Havana: It Helps to Be Inventive
From the blissful moment when Angel Luis Marin asked Yosleydis Ramos to marry him and she said yes, the young couple knew they would need a plan.
He was a label-cutter in a Havana cigar factory, taking home about $6 a month to a tenement apartment near the port.
She was still living with her parents, just out of junior high school and not yet 15.


Flying in the Face of Discrimination
During World War II, a group of black Army Air Forces pilots valiantly fought two enemies - Nazism and racism - to become one of the most decorated squadrons in American military history.
They were known as the Tuskegee airmen, after the segregated military complex near Tuskegee, Ala., where they were trained.
They were idealistic, college-educated men, boys really, willing to fight and die for a country that denied them the rights and privileges of first-class citizenship.
Their actions and determination helped remove racial barriers and push the military toward full integration; their heroism helped vindicate a race accused of lacking the courage, skill or intelligence to fight a war.


A Seasoned Cigar Waits For the Young Upstart
The matchup between a champion 3-year-old and a dominant older horse has always been one of racing's most intriguing confrontations.
Way back, there was Man o' War and Sir Barton.
Much later, there was Jaipur and Kelso, Buckpasser and Damascus, Affirmed and Seattle Slew, Spectacular Bid and Affirmed.


Officer Who Wouldn't Fly With Women in Combat Is Retained
A Navy helicopter commander who faced a discharge after his refusal to fly combat missions with women has been allowed to stay on active duty.
Just before his unit, with its two female pilots, was to depart for the invasion of Haiti last summer, Lieut.
Comdr.
Kenneth A. Carkhuff, a 13-year Navy veteran, told his commanding officer that he would not go to sea because his religious and moral beliefs prevented him from going into combat with women.


Saratoga at Full Gallop
Races by day and the National Museum of Racing ball by night, Saratoga Springs, N.Y., Aug; 11;


Penelope Kilburn, Edward Shapiro
Penelope Allen Kilburn and Edward Jay Shapiro, lawyers in Washington, are to be married there today.
Rabbi M. Bruce Lustig is to perform the ceremony at the Washington Hebrew Congregation.
Ms.
Kilburn, 30, and Mr.
Shapiro, 38, work at the firm of Latham &amp; Watkins, where she is an associate and he is a partner.
The bride graduated cum laude from Wellesley College and received her law degree from Northwestern University.
The bridegroom graduated from Princeton University and received his law degree from Harvard University.


CLICHE WATCH: Secrets
Professional athletes are behaving like spies or gangsters these days, subscribing to a deadly code of silence, at least when they talk to reporters.
"I could tell you, but then I'd have to kill you." -- Kerry Collins, a Carolina Panther, on which rookie he hired to take the brunt of his own hazing (July 20, 1995).


A New Chapter For Book Kiosks At Central Park
The Strand Book Store's two distinctive red kiosks outside Central Park at 60th Street and Fifth Avenue, which have attracted browsers and buyers for more than 20 years, are living on borrowed time.
The Strand was outbid for the site by Annex Antiques, whose arrival has been delayed by construction of kiosks that are supposed to look like the current ones.
So the Strand and Albion Books, owner of the third stall at the site, have stayed through the summer on a month-by-month basis.


Eric B. Fisher, Rachel L. Mesch
Rachel L. Mesch, a daughter of Caryl and Barry Mesch of Newton Centre, Mass., is to be married today to Eric B. Fisher, a son of Sylvia and Norman Fisher of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Dale Polakoff is to perform the ceremony at the Hyatt Regency in Cambridge, Mass.
The couple, both 24, graduated from Yale University, she cum laude and he magna cum laude.
The bride is a candidate for a Ph.D. in French and comparative literature at Columbia University, from which the bridegroom received a law degree.
In October they are to go to Jerusalem, where the bride is to be an interuniversity fellow in the Hebrew literature department of Hebrew University and the bridegroom is to be a clerk to Justice Mishael Cheshin of the Supreme Court of Israel.


The Artful Elegance of Plants That Weep
ARCHITECTURAL style is usually considered an art form for structures of brick, stone and steel.
But certain plants have architectural features, too, and they can make a great deal of difference in landscape design.
All kinds of plants can be selected for artful dimension.
Some have spectacular bloom.
Others have stately style, while still others have diminutive cunning.


Reading the Hidden City
TO Hope Cooke, New York is a palimpsest.
The word, from the Greek, describes a parchment that has been inscribed and erased several times, still bearing hints of old, faded messages.
As the city builds and rebuilds itself, barely legible remnants of its past are left behind.
Those remnants -- the faded signs, anomalous buildings and crooked streets -- are the clues that Ms.
Cooke, a self-described urban historian, tries to decipher.
Ms.
Cooke herself is something of a palimpsest.
In her 55 years she has been a debutante, a princess, a queen, a mother, a walking tour guide, a teacher and an author.


Tyson Makes Quick Work of His Return to Ring
Mike Tyson's return to the ring tonight lasted less than a round as he halted the enthusiastic and inexperienced Peter McNeeley on a compassionate disqualification.
The end came after only 1 minute 29 seconds and followed his second knockdown, when McNeeley's manager, Vinny Vecchione, jumped into the ring to halt the bout.
The confused McNeeley got up and started to run around the ring, not believing this madcap week of fun was over.


Of Misplaced Soccer Fields And a World War II Pact
To the Editor:
An Aug. 13 letter, "The Real Starlight Park," talks about a soccer field there.
In fact, there was none.
The nearest soccer field was in Crotona Park and wasted away most of the time until Monroe High School used it.
Toward wartime, many Hungarian, Greek and Italian soccer teams took over on weekends.


Why a Delicatessen Closed: Not-So-Friendly Neighbors
To the Editor:
There is more to the story of why the Flushing Delight closed than you told in your Aug. 6 article "Knishes or Kimchi: Last Kosher Deli Closes on Union Street."


In England, All's Sunny, Except the Dispositions
In usually damp, gray England, where complaining about the weather is a national pastime, the sky is blue, it's warm, and it hasn't really rained all summer.
Naturally, everyone is miserable.


A Squeeze In Junk Bonds
JUNK bonds are generally not attractive, with the exception of emerging-market debt, Susan Belden wrote recently in the No-Load Fund Analyst, a newsletter published in Orinda, Calif.
The yield for unrated -- hence, junk -- bonds has been running three to four percentage points above that for 10-year Treasury notes, to account for their greater risk.
Junk-bond yields now average about 10 percent, and 10-year Treasury yields are about 6.5 percent.


Manners in the Air
To the Editor: Two complaints to add to "Minding Your Manners at 32,000 Feet" by Adam Bryant (June 25).
A passenger who talks loudly while an airline attendant is giving the required talk on exits, emergency procedures.
Some of us may be new to this type of plane and want to hear.


A New Fragrance Worthy of a Party
Tiffany's opens its doors to introduce Trueste while honoring four cultural institutions, Aug. 16.


Reverence for van Gogh, a Way With Light
IF Jacques Kaplan sequestered himself in Kent with the hope of sitting on his hands, the last decade must have been quite a letdown.
Not a season has gone by without schedules of high grade shows at Mr.
Kaplan's Paris-New York-Kent Gallery.
The present season is made special by two exhibitions running through Aug. 27, one by Herve Guilleux, at PNYK headquarters, better known as The Caboose, the other by Joan Griswold, at PNYK's satellite in the town's railroad station.


If You're Looking for Day Care, Look Closely
ALTHOUGH many working parents who can afford it choose to hire full- or part-time babysitters to care for their children at home, the number of children enrolled in day care programs in New Jersey in the last 20 years has quadrupled.
In 1975, 800 licensed centers provided care for 45,600 children.
Today, 2,759 centers are licensed to serve 171,058 children.


The Comfort Zones Of the Young, Black Professional
A STEPHANIE MILLS song washes over the room's exposed brick walls as clusters of denim-clad people strain to be heard over the din.
Every bar stool is occupied, every corner clogged, forcing people headed upstairs to the dining room to navigate the crush.
The Shark Bar on a typical Friday night.


Ordering Off the Menu, at a Place Like Home
Everything about Pat's Kitchen &amp; Deli evokes family.
The intimate, casual setting where there are more counter tools (11) than tables (4).
The sign outside which says "Where Montgomery Meets to Eat." The fact that Pat Benke, the original owner, sold the luncheonette to her two daughters, Stephanie and Lorin, a couple of years ago.
But most of all, the food.
Pat's is a place where the most popular dishes are the ones not on the menu: the daily specials, the personal requests.
One day, the Benkes will recommend their grilled Cajun roast beef and swiss on rye; another day, they'll say the chicken almondine is tangy.
What's more, the Benkes can cater to individual taste: Anyone want a sardine and canned salmon sandwich?
How about apple cinnamon oatmeal with scrambled egg whites topped with ketchup?
These are actual standing orders from long-time customers.
In this two-sister operation, the Benkes have plenty of experience, even though they are just a few years out of college.
They practically grew up in the luncheonette, which Pat opened in 1986.
Two years ago, Pat moved to North Caroline with her husband and turned the business over to them.
For many customers, the experience is akin to visiting old friends and asking them to cook up something hearty and simple.
Everyhing is cooked to order, and everything is quite inexpensive.
Sandwiches are about $3.50 or so; the daily specials less than $5; desserts up to $2.
As for the apple cinnamon egg whites dish -- well, you'll have to check with them.
Pat's Kitchen &amp; Deli, Route 296 and Harlingen Road, Belle Mead (908) 874-4290.
Monday through Friday, 6:30 A.M. to 2:30 P.M. and Saturday, 7:00 A.M. to 2:00 P.M.
DAVID W. CHEN


Fat Biographies
To the Editor:
I was enjoying Terry Teachout's lighthearted summer essay on overlong biographies (July 30) until -- leafing through "novel substitutes" at his neighborhood bookstore -- he got around to noticing my new book, "The American Journey of Eric Sevareid."


Eurocars: On the Road Again
TO understand the fall and rise of the European car in America, consider the case of Volvo and the cup holder.
The year was 1990.
With its American sales plunging, Volvo, the Swedish auto maker, was developing a new, make-or-break model, the 850.
It asked eight dealers in the United States to confect a "no apologies car," with all the equipment their customers would want.
The dealers demanded a sleeker look and splashier colors inside and out, and, they declared, they simply had to have cup holders.


BEST SELLERS: August 20, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
4
MEMNOCH THE DEVIL, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The vampire Lestat is snatched from the world by a mysterious adversary who claims to be the Devil.
2
1
6
BEACH MUSIC, by Pat Conroy. (Talese/Doubleday, $27.50.) An American living in Rome returns to South Carolina and tries to cope with his troubled past.
3
3
4
LIGHTNING, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $24.95.) The happy marriage of a lawyer and her husband is suddenly changed after she gets a routine checkup.
4
1
FROM POTTER'S FIELD, by Patricia Cornwell. (Scribner, $24.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta on the trail of a serial killer in New York's Central Park.
5
4
17
THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's multibillion-dollar scam.
6
6
77
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
7
7
8
ROSE MADDER, by Stephen King. (Viking, $25.95.) Fleeing an abusive husband, a woman seeks happiness in a strange city by creating her own myth.
8
5
158
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) An Iowa romance.
9
9
4
DANGEROUS TO KNOW, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (HarperCollins, $24.) A journalist investigates the death of her former husband, a philanthropist.
10
8
8
THE WITNESS, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $21.95.) A public defender who seems happy in her work and her marriage is plunged into a morass of bigotry and hate.
11
1
BELGARATH THE SORCERER, by David and Leigh Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $25.95.) A fantasy about the start of a 7,000-year-long global conflict.
12
11
61
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
13
10
6
DISNEY'S POCAHONTAS. (Mouse Works, $6.98.) The romance of an American Indian princess and an Englishman, told in words and pictures.
14
12
15
LET ME CALL YOU SWEETHEART, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) An unusual murder case haunts a prosecutor's career and her private life.
15
1
BURNING ANGEL, by James Lee Burke. (Hyperion, $22.95.) When a long-missing, notorious gangster reappears in New Orleans, a detective undertakes to bring him to justice.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
6
TO RENEW AMERICA, by Newt Gingrich. (HarperCollins, $24.) The Speaker of the House describes his solutions to the country's problems. (+)
2
6
2
BEYOND ALL REASON, by David Smith with Carol Calef. (Kensington, $18.95.) The former husband of Susan Smith, the woman convicted of killing their two sons, tells of their life together.
3
2
9
NEW PASSAGES, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $25.) How changing social conditions and longer life expectancies are affecting our lives.
4
3
76
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
5
7
4
SLEEPERS, by Lorenzo Carcaterra. (Ballantine, $23.) The true story, the narrator claims, of four boys in a reformatory and the revenge they later take.
6
4
9
A GOOD WALK SPOILED, by John Feinstein. (Little, Brown, $23.95.) A sportswriter reports on the P.G.A.
Tour in 1993 and 1994. (+)
7
5
12
SPONTANEOUS HEALING, by Andrew Weil. (Knopf, $23.) Ways in which the body heals itself. (+)
8
8
34
SISTERS.
Essays by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters.
9
10
27
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the lives of all Americans.
10
9
12
DAVE BARRY'S COMPLETE GUIDE TO GUYS, by Dave Barry. (Random House, $21.) Humor.
11
15
2
MY OLD MAN AND THE SEA, by David Hays and Daniel Hays. (Algonquin, $19.95.) A sailing yarn about a father-and-son voyage from Connecticut around Cape Horn.
12
11
6
WHEN ELEPHANTS WEEP, by Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson and Susan McCarthy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The emotional lives of animals.
13
12
4
THE EAGLE AND THE ROSE, by Rosemary Altea. (Warner, $19.95.) An English psychic's story.
14
9
SLEEPING AT THE STARLITE MOTEL, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley, $20.) A schoolteacher's adventures.
15
13
87
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories.
16*
2
THE LIARS' CLUB, by Mary Karr. (Viking, $22.95.) A poet recalls her childhood as a member of a troubled family in East Texas during the early 1960's.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
117
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Relationships. (+)
2
2
22
THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra. (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $14.) How to "generate wealth in all its forms." (+)
3
4
14
HOW TO ARGUE AND WIN EVERY TIME, by Gerry Spence. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) A lawyer describes ways to win arguments at home and at work. (+)
4
3
2
STOP AGING NOW! by Jean Carper. (HarperCollins, $24.) Ways to combat aging and resist disease. (+)
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 5, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
A dagger (+) indicates that some bookstores report receiving bulk orders for a book.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) BEHIND THE WHEEL AT CHRYSLER: The Iacocca Legacy, by Doron P. Levin. (Harcourt Brace, $25.) A Detroit reporter interprets Chrysler under Lee Iacocca's management as a company far better at making sales and deals than cars.
DARK SUN: The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb, by Richard Rhodes. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $32.50.) Mr.
Rhodes's lucid exposition of technical issues combines fruitfully with his sharp eye for character, anecdote and political context.
GALATEA 2.2, by Richard Powers. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $23.) Ingenious, ambitious and cerebral, this novel concerns a novelist (same name as the author's) who works to perfect a machine intelligence that can learn literature and sustain belief in purpose and meaning.
HANGING UP, by Delia Ephron. (Putnam, $23.95.) A compassionate, funny, satisfying first novel whose heroine and narrator can cope with anything but her awful father, who's an alcoholic, a manic-depressive and not very nice besides.
AN ITALIAN EDUCATION: The Further Adventures of an Expatriate in Verona, by Tim Parks. (Grove, $22.) By sending his children to school in Italy and thoughtfully watching them become Italians, Mr.
Parks studies the rules that govern a society other than his native England.
LOST IN PLACE: Growing Up Absurd in Suburbia, by Mark Salzman. (Random House, $22.) A refreshing memoir of a teen-ager's search for happiness through kung fu in the 1970's; the jokes are mostly on the author, who is remarkably free from the customarily licensed resentments.
MOVING VIOLATIONS: War Zones, Wheelchairs, and Declarations of Independence, by John Hockenberry. (Hyperion, $24.95.) Swaggering in a wheelchair isn't easy, but this candidly aggressive radio and television correspondent is up to the job (or any other).
THE NIGHTINGALE'S SONG, by Robert Timberg. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Mr.
Timberg, a graduate of the United States Naval Academy, examines some of his fellow alumni in government service (overrepresented in the Iran-contra affair) and finds that their conduct was influenced by fear of a second Vietnam.
THE RICHER, THE POORER: Stories, Sketches and Reminiscences, by Dorothy West. (Doubleday, $22.) Unsentimental, clear, crisp pieces about black middle-class life by a unique writer, at 87 the last survivor of the Harlem Renaissance.
RL'S DREAM, by Walter Mosley. (Norton, $22.) This emphatic modern-day fable of nurturance and dying is a Deep South tale set in New York, inhabited by a black musician, his white lover and the ghost of a mythic blues singer.
TRUST: The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity, by Francis Fukuyama. (Free Press, $25.) A fascinating argument -- that institutions between the family and the state (like Rotary or the Boy Scouts) are good for civility and good for capitalism too -- and dazzling case studies of industrial nations that have such groups or don't.


Pamela Stearns, Peter N. DeVito
Pamela Odiorne Stearns, an advertising executive, was married yesterday to Peter Nicholas DeVito, an insurance executive.
Richard Lee Price, an acting justice of the State Supreme Court, officiated at the Water Club in New York.
The bride, 34, is a vice president and the director of benefits administration at Ogilvy &amp; Mather, the advertising agency, in New York.
She graduated from Dickinson College.
She is a daughter of Warren A. Stearns of Elkins Park, Pa., and the late Mary S. Stearns.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Final Stats: Mantle's Last Medical Bills
NOBODY can place a monetary value on human life, but the costs of keeping Mickey Mantle alive for the two and a half months until he died last Sunday probably exceeded $300,000.
That's typical of how America apportions health care.
Almost 30 percent of the nation's entire Medicare budget is spent during patients' last year of life.
Most medical cost-cutters target the high cost of dying.
But anyone following the trail from the statistics to a specific, and special, case like Mantle's might wonder where to aim.


America and the Arms Bazaar
France has surpassed the United States as the world's leading exporter of conventional weapons, with $11.4 billion in Government-supported sales last year.
That is fine.
Let the French have this dubious distinction, and let the United States find other sources of export income.
The Clinton Administration has taken the wrong tack on this issue.
In February, the White House announced a policy that explicitly encouraged the sale of arms to promote foreign policy goals.
The policy ignores the realities of the post-cold war world and in some cases works directly against the interests of the United States.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


A Matter Of Pride
To the Editor:
As the author of the liner notes for BMG's "Out Classics" disk, I am in a reasonable position to clarify the recording's spirit and intent.
Anthony Tommasini, in his review of the album  [ " 'Outing' Some 'In' Composers," Aug. 6 ] , misrepresents both.


Liberties; Our True Lies
A redhead in a gray suit sits down at the bar next to a cute guy.
"All men are liars," she declares, with a strange little smile.
"They say they love you, but they don't. They say they love kids, but they forget to mention that they already have two. They tell you that the bandage on their ring finger's from a fishing accident. Yeah."
She grabs his drink, takes a gulp and asks him what it is.


SHH!
After reading Tierney's article, I can now see where Kitty Genovese's neighbors might have all moved.


August 13-19; Let's Boot Up the Trash-80 and Play Some Oldies
IN the late 1920's and early 30's, when the first "electric" radios appeared with their plugs and cords, the outmoded, battery-powered sets were relegated by the thousands to attics and basements.
As an advertising stunt, some sellers offered a trade-in allowance for the old radios and then destroyed them in a bonfire.
But many of these antiques survived destruction.
With their handmade wooden cases and finely etched knobs and dials, they are avidly collected by those entranced with the oddities of ancient technology.
It is hard to imagine that the same fate awaits Microsoft's rickety Windows operating system -- a quaint piece of virtual machinery that will become a has-been this week with the release of the new, improved Windows 95.
In digital bonfires across the country, millions of copies of the old software will be wiped from hard disks to make way for the new.
One by one, all those carefully crafted bits -- the 1's and 0's that form the gears and pulleys of Microsoft's contraption -- will disappear in infinitesimal puffs of heat.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Global Arches
JIHAD VS.
McWORLD  By Benjamin R. Barber. 381 pp.
New York: Times Books/Random House. $25.


F.Y.I.
The Helpful Icy Blast Q.  I often see a kind of overgrown scuba tank, labeled liquid nitrogen and marked Nynex, on street curbs. (For instance, there was one the other day at Broadway and 41st Street.) Sometimes they have tubing running out of them, taped to the asphalt, which leads down under the sidewalk via manholes.
What's going on here?
A.
Dry-cleaning with chemistry!


Listings on the Internet: An Ever-Widening Web
WHEN Dino De Angelis and Micol Negrin began their search earlier this year for a Manhattan apartment from their home in Montreal, they were guided by the three traditional criteria of location, location and location.
In their case, however, one of the locations was http://www.nyrealty.com/
That seemingly abstruse string of characters specifies the location on the Internet of the "Real Estate On-Line" guide to metropolitan New York, one of several such services, including "HIA Virtual Village," "Homebuyer's Fair," "HomeNet" and "Internet Real Estate Directory."


Baby Sitters Stick Together (Unless One Gets Snobby)
The Brothers McMullen  Edward Burns, Mike McGlone, Jack Mulcahy, Maxine Bahns, Connie Britton, Jennifer Jostyn, Elizabeth P. McKay Directed by Edward Burns R 97 minutes


3 U.S. DIPLOMATS KILLED IN BOSNIA
Three American diplomats promoting a Balkan peace plan were killed today while driving on a narrow, winding mountain road to Sarajevo when their vehicle plunged down a ravine before catching fire and exploding.
American officials, who described the deaths as accidental, said the diplomats were Robert C. Frasure, 53, President Clinton's special envoy to the former Yugoslavia; Joseph Kruzel, 50, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for European and NATO affairs; and S. Nelson Drew, 47, an Air Force Colonel and National Security Council aide.  [ Obituaries, page 42. ]


Of Misplaced Soccer Fields And a World War II Pact
To the Editor:
An Aug. 13 letter, "The Real Starlight Park," talks about a soccer field there.
In fact, there was none.
The nearest soccer field was in Crotona Park and wasted away most of the time until Monroe High School used it.
Toward wartime, many Hungarian, Greek and Italian soccer teams took over on weekends.


Backyard Visionaries
GARDENS OF REVELATION Environments by Visionary Artists.
By John Beardsley.
Illustrated. 223 pp.
New York: Abbeville Press. $60.


Manners in the Air
To the Editor: "Minding Manners at 32,000 Feet" brought to mind a flight some years ago, via Western Air, from Denver to Calgary.
The flight attendant was harried by passengers offering $20 bills in payment for their drinks.
It was obvious that the strain of remembering who was owed change was getting to him.


UNNECESSARY OBJECTS: Drinks For Pets
Giving a dog unhealthy water, even tap water, that you don't drink yourself could be considered a form of animal abuse -- your children would drink pond water, too, if you let them," says Marc Duke, who founded the Original Pet Drink Company, which bottles lightly carbonated beverages for dogs and cats.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
TRIBECA  $555,000
CLASON POINT  $133,000
1225 Harding Park Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 55-year-old, detached house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, large driveway; taxes $700, listed at $135,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Heritage First Realty/Better Homes and Gardens)  RIVERDALE  $101,000
3777 Independence Avenue  (Hudson Towers)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 950-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doormen, dining area, eat-in kitchen, terrace, pool; maintenance $580, including utilities, 40% tax-deductible, listed at $119,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Stein Perry)  BROOKLYN
COBBLE HILL  $162,000
10 Strong Place  2-bedroom, 1-bath co-op in a brownstone; fireplace, hardwood floors, common garden; maintenance $424, 43% tax-deductible, listed at $187,000, 3 weeks on market (Broker: Cobble Heights)  MIDWOOD  $160,000
1036 East 28th Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 70-year-old, detached brick-and-shingle house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,312, listed at $185,000, 40 weeks on market (Brokers: Mary Kay Gallagher: York Real Estate)  PARK SLOPE  $211,000
749 President Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; dining room, fireplace, skylight, parquet floors, private roof deck; maintenance $570, 60% tax-deductible, listed at $220,000, 13 weeks on market (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  QUEENS
FOREST HILLS GARDENS  $67,500
6 Burns Street  (Tennis View)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 625-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar co-op; remodeled kitchen and bath, garden view; maintenance $349, 50% tax-deductible, listed at $70,000, 13 weeks on market (Broker: Don Goldman)  STATEN ISLAND  ST.
GEORGE  $39,000
350 Richmond Terrace  (Skyline)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 814-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; eat-in kitchen, 3 walk-in closets, Manhattan skyline view; maintenance $491 including electricity, 30% tax-deductible, listed at $42,500, 13 weeks on market (Broker: Gateway Arms)  TODT HILL  $403,000
5 Portsmouth Place  3-bedroom, 2 full- and 1-half-bath, 40-year-old Victorian-style house; dining room, fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $2,500, listed at $429,500, 12 weeks on market (Brokers: Vitali-Sunshine; Volpe)  WESTCHESTER
BRONXVILLE  $85,000
3 Alden Place  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old co-op; entry hall, modern kitchen; maintenance $470, 60% tax deductible, listed at $111,000, 5 years, 28 weeks on market (Broker: Bronxville/Ley)  MOUNT VERNON  $315,000
35 Stuyvesant Plaza  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 69-year-old colonial; screened porch, Jacuzzi, fireplace; taxes $10,900, listed at $324,000, 24 weeks on market (Brokers: Lindsey; Regency Homes)  NEW ROCHELLE  $460,000
64 Vaneck Drive  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 24-year-old wood-frame house; library, eat-in kitchen, deck, wet bar, pool; taxes $15,433, listed at $489,000, 31 weeks on market (Broker: Merritt Associates)  RYE  $280,000
305 Sterling Avenue  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 46-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, vaulted ceiling, patio, heated pool, fireplace, in-law apartment; taxes $6,700, listed at $325,000, 27 weeks on market (Broker: Houghton &amp; Banks)  CONNECTICUT
COS COB  $845,000
286 Cognewaugh Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 14-year-old colonial; dining room, family room, heated solarium, 2-car garage, 2.17-acre lot adjoining conservation land; taxes $6,369, listed at $859,000, 5 weeks on market (Broker: Coldwell Banker/Schlott)  MIDDLETOWN  $120,500
107 Phedon Parkway  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 27-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, h/w floors, 1-car garage; taxes $1,814, listed at $132,900, 20 weeks on market (Brokers: Beazley Co.; McLaughlin)  OLD GREENWICH  $465,000
51 Forest Avenue  (Old Greenwich Gables)  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2,071-sq.-ft. condo in a 44 year-old Georgian colonial; entry foyer, private elevator, fitness center and pool; common charge $397; taxes $5,087, listed at $485,000, 3 weeks on market (Broker: Coldwell Banker/Schlott)  RIVERSIDE  $655,000
7 Nearwater Lane  5-bedroom, 4-bath, 22-year-old, brick-and-shingle colonial; rear patio, 2-car garage, Mianus River view and beach rights; taxes $5,101, listed at $689,000, 3 weeks on market (Brokers: Coldwell Banker/Schlott; William Pitt)  NEW JERSEY
MAYVILLE  $66,400
303 Third Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 55-year-old ranch; w/w carpeting,eat-in-kitchen, needs work; taxes $1,394, listed at $69,900, 13 weeks on market (Broker: DeMusz)  MIDDLETOWN  $154,000
634 Monmouth Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 6-year--old colonial; deck, 1-car garage, dining room, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,500, listed at $158,900, 4 weeks on market (Broker: The Prudential New Jersey)  OCEAN CITY  $70,900
1752 Simpson Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 18-year-old condominium apartment; eat-in-kitchen, w/w carpeting, assigned parking space; monthly maintenance $95, taxes $1,109, listed at $70,900, 1 week on market (Broker: Orchid)  PARK RIDGE  $280,000
6 Johnvale Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 24-year-old split level; c/a, security system, full basement; taxes $5,573, listed at $299,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential Higgins)  LONG ISLAND
KENSINGTON  $647,000
43 North Drive  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 45-year-old colonial; dining room, new eat-in kitchen, den, finished basement, maid's room, fireplace, h/w floors, 2-car garage; taxes $13,200, listed at $725,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Great Neck Realty Better Homes and Gardens)  RIDGE  $132,500
4 Conservation Circle  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, barn, 2.9 acres; taxes $2,500, listed at $139,000, 7 weeks on market (Brokers: ERA Albo Agency; Peluso) SAYVILLE  $147,000
91 Cliff Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, attic, pool, 2-car garage; taxes $4,400, listed at $155,000, 29 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential Long Island)  SEA CLIFF  $407,000
70 Eighth Avenue, 4-bedroom, 2-bath, 92-year-old Victorian; dining room, eat-in kitchen, parlor, attic, basement, 2-car garage; taxes $3,200, listed at $449,000, 3 weeks on market (Brokers: Coldwell Banker Sammis; Richard B. Arnold)


Same Old Wine Appears in a New Bottle
WITH October just around the bend, Worth magazine cannot be faulted for focusing on the specter of a market crash on the cover of its latest issue.
After all, the crashes of 1929 and 1987 both came in that shadowy month, and in this year's bull market, investors may be nervous.


Survey Says
Thank you for calling style survey.
If you'd like to listen to the soundtrack of "Ready to Wear" after ripping the movie to shreds, please stay on the line.
To cancel the Miss America swimsuit competition, press 1 now.
To interrupt Hugh Grant's relationship with Elizabeth Hurley or to change our national colors, press 2.
If you'd like to make an observation about Marcia Clark's makeover, press 3.
To make a character analysis based on the length of her skirts, press 4.
To do the same in reference to President Clinton's jogging shorts, press 5, but please be nice about it.


South of the Border


Free in Seoul After 44 Years, and Still Defiant
It was in the middle of a war in an impoverished peasant country that Prisoner No. 3597 was first arrested, tortured and locked up in a closet-sized cell.
This week Prisoner No. 3597 was finally freed, exactly 43 years and 10 months from the day he was imprisoned, after earning the unhappy status of the world's longest-serving known political prisoner.
He recovered his old name, Kim Sun Myung, and faced a changed world.


Ruth Allen and Jonathan Cox
Ruth Barnett Allen, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas E. Allen of Baltimore, was married yesterday to Jonathan William Cox, the son of Lynn Kirsch of Westport, Conn., and G. William Cox of Hebron, Conn.
The Rev.
Richard Leonard, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the St.
Regis Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Cox, 28, is the assistant director of development at the Lincoln Center Theater in New York.
She graduated from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y.
Her father is a psychoanalyst in Baltimore.
Her mother, Carol I. Allen, is the executive director of Historic Towson, a historic preservation organization in Towson, Md.


Grateful Dead Fans Hold Memorial, Despite a Ban
Hundreds of Grateful Dead followers played cat-and-mouse with the police across Central Park yesterday, defying a ban on a memorial gathering for the band's leader, Jerry Garcia.
Denied a permit for the observance, the fans, many in tie-dyed shirts and dresses, converged on the Great Lawn near the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
They were confronted by parks enforcement officers who told them they could not play their bongos, drums and guitars unless they moved to another part of the park.


Futuristic Catamaran to Set Sail
The first hint that something nautical was going on at Point Farm here recently was the road sign.
It was painted on the centerboard of a 420 sailing dinghy.
Down past the fields of pumpkins, eggplants and peppers, and beyond the giant tree where children played in a rope hammock, came the whine of power tools and the scraping of sandpaper.


Deals and Discounts
TASTE OF MOROCCO General Tours has a six-night Pricebuster Morocco escorted tour priced at $1,229 in September and $1,299 in October.
The program includes round-trip trans-Atlantic air fare on Royal Air Maroc, air-conditioned bus transportation, six nights at a hotel, daily Continental breakfast and five dinners, tax and service charge.
There is sightseeing in Casablanca, Rabat, Meknes, Fez and Marrakesh.
Packages to Morocco for independent travelers are also available.
Information: (800) 221-2216.
CARIBBEAN BOUND An early booking bonus cuts the price at Superclubs resorts by as much as $405 for a couple staying six nights.
The company operates five properties in Jamaica; a sixth, Breezes Montego Bay, is scheduled to open Sept. 1, and Breezes Bahamas in Nassau is scheduled to open on Aug. 28.
Reservations must be made by Oct. 31 for arrivals from Jan. 1 to May 31 in order to qualify.
The saving is $305 a couple on a six-night stay at Boscobel Beach, a family resort near Ocho Rios, where regular rates start at $1,410 a person, based on two sharing a room, from Dec. 16 to April 12. (Rates are higher around Christmas.) At the Sans Souci Lido, a spa resort, the discount is $405 a couple on a six-night stay, which starts at $1,800 a person during the same period.
Rates include accommodations, meals, cocktails, sports equipment and instruction, entertainment, hotel taxes and transfers.
Information and reservations: Superclubs, (800) 859-7873.
BRITISH BARGAIN British Airways has a fare sale to numerous cities in Europe for travel on Monday through Thursday between Sept. 17 and Oct. 31.
Reservations and ticketing must be completed by Aug. 28.
Some of the round-trip fares from New York are: Amsterdam, Barcelona or Brussels, $516; Geneva, Milan, or Prague, $561; London, Manchester or Glasgow, $478 from Sept. 17 to Sept. 30, $388 during October.
Destinations in Continental Europe require a connecting flight.
Fares are nonrefundable.
Information and reservations: (800) 247-9297.
WINDSTAR SAVINGS Several Caribbean sailings of Windstar ships this fall offer cruise-only fares that are nearly half price.
Departures of the Wind Spirit from Nov. 12 to Dec. 3 and the Wind Star on Nov. 18 and 25 and Dec. 9 will cost $1,548 to $1,598 a person, depending on the date.
The Wind Spirit, based in St.
Thomas, visits St.
Croix, St.
John, St.
Barthelemy, Tortola, Virgin Gorda and Jost van Dyke.
The Wind Star has two different seven-day itineraries from Barbados, southbound to Tobago Cays, Bequia, Martinique, Iles des Saintes, St.
Lucia and Carriacou or northbound to St.
Lucia, Dominica, St.
Martin, St.
Barthelemy and St.
Kitts.
Information: (800) 258-7245.
Reservations are available only through travel agents.
MONTREAL RITZ The Ritz-Carlton Kempinski Montreal on Sherbrooke Street offers a rate of $109 (in United States dollars) for a single or double room through Oct. 31.
The hotel has 226 rooms and suites.
As of mid-August, rooms at the special rate were heavily booked for the rest of this month, but available for September and October.
Reservations: (514) 842-4212 or (800) 426-3135.
JANET PIORKO


BEHIND THE WHEEL/GMC Sierra SLT, Chevy K1500 Silverado, Chevy C3500 Big Dooley; An Antique Hauler (And Antiques Haulers)
AT first blush, the rosy-red truck was underwhelming.
I couldn't say so, though, because my son, Jay, had been searching for just such an example for a year or more, and the requisite $3,800 was burning yet another hole in his jeans.
We were there to buy.
The object of these mixed affections was a 1950 GMC pickup, and we managed to get it to Long Island from upstate New York without event, perhaps because it was so well rested.
In fact, the truck's 45-year life in a firehouse had been remarkably sheltered, and there are just 15,000 miles on the odometer.


Truman, Anyone? Wonton? Some Jewels, Maybe?
For the screening of "Truman" on Aug. 12, Home Box Office covered the poetically dingy, old-fashioned Sag Harbor Cinema with flags and bunting.
It was supposed to look very small town, very whistle-stop tour.
And it did.
The guests, however, did not.
Lee Radziwill, Herb Ross, Martha Stewart, Regis Philbin, Jean Harris, Nora Ephron and so many others who live in the little fishing village called society poured out of the theater and strolled past a star-struck crowd of onlookers.


Compromise Collapses for Italian Festival
A proposed compromise over a controversial street festival on Fresh Pond Road has fallen apart amid protests from community board members who say the festival would be a public safety hazard.
After a bitter community meeting last month that generated charges of anti-Italian bias, the Community Assistance Unit of the Mayor's office recommended reducing a festival in honor of Madonna Santa Maria di Trapani, the patron saint of the Trapani province in Sicily, to three days, from five.


IN SHORT: FICTION
TOTAL ECLIPSE  By Liz Rigbey. Pocket Books, $22.


Rethinking Plans For Those Trains To the Planes
Plans for a rail system linking the two Queens airports and Manhattan have been dead since May.
Now, as the Port Authority presses forward with plans for a 7.5 mile monorail connecting the terminals at Kennedy International Airport to the Howard Beach station on the A subway line, community leaders are rethinking their positions.
Like many Howard Beach residents, Betty Braton, the chairwoman of Community Board 10, lives under the scream of jet airplanes.
People in her neighborhood are more concerned with getting away from the airport than getting to it.


2 Held in Rape of Woman, 81
Two teen-agers, arrested moments after the police spotted a man being robbed on a Queens street, have been charged in the rape, beating and robbery of an 81-year-old woman in her Richmond Hill home three months ago, the Queens District Attorney, Richard A. Brown, said yesterday.
The three-hour attack on the woman occurred on the night of May 28.
But last Tuesday, prosecutors said, the two 16-year-olds returned to the woman's home and when they did not find her there, set a fire.


The Comfort Zones Of the Young, Black Professional
A STEPHANIE MILLS song washes over the room's exposed brick walls as clusters of denim-clad people strain to be heard over the din.
Every bar stool is occupied, every corner clogged, forcing people headed upstairs to the dining room to navigate the crush.
The Shark Bar on a typical Friday night.


Police Barrage Still Resounds; Investigators Feud Over Bronx Killings
The shooting inside the cramped Bronx apartment on the night of Jan. 12 was fast and furious.
Two detectives, staking out the Morris Heights apartment after a tip that a robbery would take place, unleashed a fusillade of 28 bullets at three armed men, killing two of them, Anthony Rosario, 18, and Hilton Vega, 21, and wounding the third.


For Couch Potato, It's Like Having a Video Store at Home
The Holy Grail for cable television seems simple enough in its appeal: video on demand, the ability to order a movie and play it as though the video was in your VCR, pausing, rewinding, fast-forwarding.
It is the most popular feature of Southern New England's market trial.
But there is one catch to video on demand. It does not exist yet.


August 13-19: Internet Gospel; Scientology's Expensive Wisdom Now Comes Free
To reach what the Church of Scientology calls the seventh level of spirituality, the church's scriptures instruct followers to go to zoos and parks to communicate with plants and animals and go to train stations to put thoughts in the minds of strangers.
Advice like that doesn't come cheap.
Scientologists pay tens of thousands of dollars for such spiritual teachings.
Now, to the church's dismay, they're free with an Internet account.


Hamlet Tournament Turning to Steffi Graf
IN its 15th year, the Hamlet Tennis Tournament in Commack, a sort of tuneup for top-ranking male players a week before the U.S.
Open, is turning to a new leaf -- and her name is Steffi Graf.
The weeklong tournament, which opens tomorrow and is played before several thousand closely watching Long Islanders, is exclusively male, with leading singles and doubles players competing for $328,000 in prize money and, in recent years, points on the computer system ranking the players.


The Nation; Misunderstanding Social Security
PAYING out $15,000 in benefits every second, America's Social Security system is not only the biggest Federal budget item, but probably the most misunderstood.
Now, even the American Association of Retired Persons seems to sense that the myths and shibboleths surrounding Social Security, a program signed into law 60 years ago last week, need to be scrutinized.
In a recent survey, the association found that confidence in Social Security had fallen to 36 percent from 45 percent a decade ago -- indicating, the association said, the need for Americans to begin "to wrestle with the question of what serves their long-term economic security best."


A Role Model for Wayward Youths Finds Trouble of His Own
In Lefrak City, Russell Barnwell has long been revered as a hero and a model parent.
Parents there say they are grateful to him because he has extended his love beyond his family, talking to at-risk youths and handing out his home number to anyone needing counseling or simply wanting a sympathetic ear.
Mr.
Barnwell's words have carried weight because of his job, as a corrections officer at Rikers Island.
He warned youths that they could listen to him as a friend, or take his orders in jail.


SHH!
Having (somewhat) survived the three-year, ear-shattering, river-to-river reconstruction of 14th Street recently, the ubiquitous car alarms that John Tierney complains about in "SHH!" (The Big City, July 30) seem almost quaint.
The noise pollution, along with sidewalk bicyclists and Rollerbladers, have caused the rapid deterioration of any semblance of pleasant street life in the city.
Do cabdrivers (or any drivers, for that matter) know that it is against the law to honk one's horn in a nonemergency?
Perhaps horn batteries should have to be recharged, at a cost, when they run out of power.


A Bow to Age for a Show House with '95 Accents
FACED with the challenge of keeping the historic flavor of the St.
James estate Deepwells intact for the Long Island Historic Estates Show House '95, interior designers have used some new twists on old ideas as they expressed 1995 imaginations in rooms planned in 1845.
Built with the classic symmetry of the Greek Revival style, on the foundation of a 19th century Colonial farmhouse, Deepwells had once been the home of an ancestor of Smithtown's founder, the summer retreat of a New York City mayor and the home of a founder of the Village of Head-of-the-Harbor before being sold to Suffolk County, where it will be used for interpretive programs and events once the exhibition ends.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
ORGANIC PRODUCE
Titicus Farm Produce in North Salem practices organic growing methods, using no synthetic pesticides or fertilizers, and it is one of five farms in the county on the Cornell Cooperative Extension's list of farms that sell directly to the public.
So, from now until late September or early October, depending on the weather, a variety of produce may be bought at the farm's stand at 92 Keeler Lane in North Salem, or at the Ossining Farmer's Market on Main Street, where it sets up shop on Saturdays from 8:30 A.M. to 2:30 P.M.
The North Salem stand is open Thursdays and Fridays from 1 to 6 P.M., Saturdays and Sundays from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.


It's Construction Versus Street Fair On Columbus
For months the beleaguered merchants of Columbus Avenue have looked forward to their annual street fair on Sept. 17, confident that the city would cover up the open construction pits that litter the avenue and that, at least for the day, the street would look inviting to shoppers.
Stephen Hanson, the owner of Isabella's restaurant, on Columbus Avenue at 77th Street, plans to sell food from a booth in front of his restaurant.
"There's a provision in the construction contract that they will make sure the pits are closed up to the best of their ability," he said.


Is More Security Needed?
Airports have tightened security measures to guard against terrorism.
Will this reduce the danger, or merely inconvenience travelers?
Does Security Work?
I'm always curious whether something is currently working, not whether somebody thinks it will work later.


Judith M. Levy, David E. Brenner
Dr.
Judith Miriam Levy and Dr.
David Edward Brenner, residents in internal medicine at Bellevue Hospital Center in New York, are to be married today in Huntington, L.I.
Rabbi Aaron Glatzer is to perform the ceremony at the Huntington Town House.
The bride, 26, and the bridegroom, 27, graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y., where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
They received their medical degrees from New York University.


After Soul-Searching, Cathedral Files Suit
The bonds between the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine and its across-the-street neighbor, the Amsterdam Nursing Home, are long and strong: The nursing home was founded in 1872 by an Episcopal priest; trustees have served on the boards of both institutions and the Very Rev.
James Parks Morton, the dean of the cathedral, used to visit the home every day when his mother lived there.
And so, Dean Morton said, it took some soul-searching before he and the cathedral's executive board filed a lawsuit against the home, seeking to block its plan to build a 13-story extension.
Church officials say the new wing would obstruct the views of and from the world's largest Gothic cathedral, destroy a historic garden and, more generally, degrade the splendor of a beautiful public monument.


U.S. Politics Delays Treaty On Poison Gas
Hopes that an international treaty banning chemical weapons would be ratified this year have been set back because of a partisan political standoff in Congress over reorganizing the State Department.
As a result, the commission set up to put monitoring operations in place and hire inspectors under one of the toughest control systems in any international treaty "is very quickly losing steam," said H. Martin Lancaster.
Mr.
Lancaster, a former Congressman from North Carolina, was named this spring by President Clinton as a special adviser on the treaty, known as the Chemical Weapons Convention.


Emily Becnel and Leslie Keno
Emily Grace Becnel, an administrator in the English furniture department at Sotheby's in New York, and Leslie Bernard Keno, a senior vice president and the director of American furniture and decorative arts at Sotheby's, were married yesterday in New York.
The Rev.
John Peter Gerhard performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer, and the Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley, an Episcopal priest, took part.
Mrs.
Keno graduated from Wheaton College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin Grace Becnel of Houston.
The bride's father is the president of Micon Processing Industries, a high-technology industrial-systems company in Houston.


A Would-Be Tito Helps to Dismantle His Legacy
When President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia appeared recently in public decked out in the white military dress uniform that was Tito's trademark, it was life imitating theater.
In a long-running, highly popular play here, Mr.
Tudjman is lampooned for emulating the vain leader who ruled Yugoslavia for nearly 40 years.
President Tudjman has adopted Tito's villa on the island of Brioni, and like Tito he is fond of going to the wine cellar and getting a vintage bottle from the year of his guest's birth.


Algerians Suspected in Latest Paris Blast
Suspicions mounted today that a bomb blast that wounded 17 people near the Arc de Triomphe on Thursday was carried out by the same Algerian extremist group that is suspected in the fatal bombing of a Paris underground train last month.
The RTL Radio station here said it had received a telephone call from someone taking responsibility for the attack Thursday "in the name of the G.I.A. General Command." G.I.A. are the French initials for the Armed Islamic Group, the most radical of several Islamic fundamentalist movements fighting to topple Algeria's military-backed regime.


For One Born to Sell, Not Even the Sky's the Limit
DAVID REDDEN HASN'T TRIED TO SELL anyone the Brooklyn Bridge.
But at an auction he organized two years ago at Sotheby's in New York, a buyer paid $68,500 for a Russian robotic scientific laboratory on wheels.
There was a catch: it was parked on the moon and would be for the foreseeable future.
"That was the first auction on earth of an object on another heavenly body," said the 46-year-old Mr.
Redden.
"The bidders bought the vision of owning a dune buggy on the moon, with no hope of ever physically possessing it. More than anything else, of course, it was an auction of an idea."


For a Chinese Senior Center, the Big Problem is Popularity
Every weekday morning, Cheng Szi-yu spends about 30 minutes traveling by bus and subway from Rego Park to the Nan Shan Senior Center in Flushing.
The trip is a hassle, she says, but the activities at Nan Shan, the borough's only Chinese senior center, make it worthwhile.
At the center, Mrs.
Cheng, 64, and up to 200 others busy themselves with about a dozen programs that include Chinese calligraphy, Chinese opera, t'ai chi and physical fitness, but mostly Mrs.
Cheng volunteers in the office or leads karaoke classes.
Every now and then, she sits at a table to play a round of a mah-jongg game called the Great Wall.


Ode to Proust: Remembrance Of Puzzles Past
WHAT: The Fish Puzzle, a 34-piece jigsaw puzzle.
Striped or spotted, the colorful pieces fit together fin to fin, forming a motley school of reef dwellers that include a peppermint bass, a purple firefish, a blackbarred jack, a Picasso triggerfish and a moon wrasse.
Think there is something fishy about those names?
Turn the pieces over and read a "factual highlight" that describes their native habitats and special characteristics.


Laos Struggles to Retain Its Culture
"We have 1,200 kilometers of frontier with Thailand, and what we hear and see comes from them," said Dara Kanlagna, an official of the Culture Ministry in Laos.
"The younger generation all accept this," she said.
"With the market economy that we have now, people have more money. They buy tape recorders instead of things they need. They feel this is modernization. The farmers take their transistor radios to the field with them."


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 Hope Cooke, the former Queen of Sikkim, deciphers the secret codes of the landscape of New York.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 In Ridgewood, the Street Gang Barber Shop makes a killing in hair design. (Tasmanian Devil, anyone?)  MOVIE CLOCK 12 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 14 Andean Bears in Flushing; New York's network of bridges at the Transit Museum; the jazz saxophonist Paquito D'Rivera.
GOOD EATING 14 A tour of SoHo; the serene Honmura An; the colorful Barolo.
SOAPBOX 15 "You're my daughter": the tale of a bus stop.
And letters.


'Airlift Politics'
Republican Presidential hopefuls, and legions of supporters, invaded Iowa for an early straw poll.
Iowa residency is optional; anyone with a $25 ticket can vote.
Campaigns used buses, trains, motor homes and airplanes to bring in boosters to advance their candidate's causes.
Article, page 22.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
ROGERS HORNSBY  A Biography. By Charles C. Alexander. Holt, $27.50.


Manners in the Air
To the Editor: I feel obligated to respond to the supposed rudeness of changing a diaper in midflight.
It's unfortunate that some people confuse physical necessity with impropriety.


Reading the Hidden City
TO Hope Cooke, New York is a palimpsest.
The word, from the Greek, describes a parchment that has been inscribed and erased several times, still bearing hints of old, faded messages.
As the city builds and rebuilds itself, barely legible remnants of its past are left behind.
Those remnants -- the faded signs, anomalous buildings and crooked streets -- are the clues that Ms.
Cooke, a self-described urban historian, tries to decipher.
Ms.
Cooke herself is something of a palimpsest.
In her 55 years she has been a debutante, a princess, a queen, a mother, a walking tour guide, a teacher and an author.


Out In the Open
To the Editor:
I share Anthony Tommasini's skepticism about a "gay esthetic" in music, but I am perplexed when he asserts in his review of "Out Classics" that "not one of the purportedly gay composers presented . . . lived anything like an openly gay life." Benjamin Britten made no effort to conceal his stormy and enduring relationship with Peter Pears.
Aaron Copland also lived openly with a "longtime companion" and made a special effort to befriend young gay musicians.
Leonard Bernstein, especially in his later years, was often seen club-hopping in the company of flamboyantly "out" young men.


IN BRIEF
Public Hearings Tomorrow On Proposed Hilltop Sale
Public hearings on the sale of the Hilltop tract in Essex County will be held tomorrow in the three towns that the Hilltop straddles, Verona, North Caldwell and Cedar Grove.
The 365-acre Hilltop, once the site of a tuberculosis sanitarium, is the largest undeveloped parcel owned by the financially troubled Essex County.
In May, County Executive James Treffinger moved to sell the land to the quasi-public Essex County Improvement Authority for $32 million, provided that it be resold to an outside buyer within three years.
The hearings are on the sale to the authority.


New Airplane Routes: Israel, Britain, Canada
Three North American airlines are establishing new international routes.
World Airways, (800) 967-5350, a cargo and charter operator, began scheduled passenger service between New York and Tel Aviv last month.
Nonstop flights on MD-11 aircraft leave New York Tuesday, Thursday and Sunday.
Westbound flights leave Ben Gurion International Airport in the wee hours of the same days, Tuesday, Thursday and Sunday.
Through Aug. 31, the round-trip fare is $699 for tickets bought at least 14 days in advance with a minimum stay of 6 days and a maximum stay of 45.


Correction
A brief article in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday about G &amp; P, a luncheonette that closed recently on West 25th Street, misstated its location.
It was between the Avenue of the Americas and Seventh Avenue, not Eighth and Ninth Avenues.


ON THE TOWNS
An opinionated guide to cultural and recreational goings-on around the state this week.
To submit items for consideration, write to On the Towns, Sunday New Jersey Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or send a fax to (212) 556-7219.
MUSIC ALBERT MUSIC HALL The Pinelands Cultural Society presents "Sounds of the Jersey Pines," a series of Saturday night concerts, through the end of the year.
The program features live presentations of bluegrass, country and Pinelands music.
Show time, 8 P.M.
Admission: $4; $1 for children under 12. 139 Wells Mill Road (Route 532), Waretown. (609) 971-1593.


In the Region/Westchester; Prodigy's Decision Not to Leave Helps the Market
THE beleaguered Westchester office market, still struggling with a vacancy rate of about 20 percent, got a reprieve earlier this month when Prodigy Services Company, one of the country's leading providers of on-line computer services, rescinded its plans to establish a new corporate headquarters in lower Manhattan and move about 200 to 225 of its roughly 500 employees there.
In June, Prodigy's president, Edward A. Bennett, had announced that the company was planning to vacate 340,000 square feet of space in downtown White Plains and move most of its operations to Manhattan.
Such a move was necessary, Mr.
Bennett explained, to be closer to the creative forces in the computer industry.
In recent years, several of the top software manufacturers have been clustering in the area south of 23d Street, turning it into a kind of computer artists' colony.


August 13-19: Japanese Remorse; Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama Says "Owabi" at Last
Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama this week did what no other Japanese leader has ever dared to do: he apologized for the suffering Japan inflicted on other countries during World War II.
Japanese officials have always danced around the problem by saying they felt "remorse" or "deep reflection" for committing atrocities that include sexual enslavement, forced labor and gruesome experiments on Chinese and other Asians.
This time, though, Mr.
Murayama used "owabi," an unambiguous word for apology, and he referred explicitly to Japan's "colonial rule" and "invasion."


Ms. Bartlett and Mr. Harrington
Susannah Chastain Bartlett, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Bartlett of Boulder, Colo., was married yesterday to Spencer Peter McIntyre Harrington, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Harrington of New York.
The Rev.
William Reller, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the Betasso Preserve in Boulder, Colo.
The bride, 29, is a senior transportation planner for the New York City Transit Authority in Brooklyn.
She graduated cum laude from Barnard College and received a master's degree in city planning from Columbia University.
Her father is a professor of physics at the University of Colorado at Boulder.
Her mother, Roxana Bartlett, is an artist.


THE MAN INSIDE BILL CLINTON'S FOREIGN POLICY
THE NEWS ARRIVED IN A NOTE MARKED urgent by a red dot.
In a few hours, it would plunge the Bosnian war into a desperate new phase.
But for the moment, the note brought a smile to the open, impish face of Anthony Lake for it told him that the warplanes were finally on the way.
"They've turned the keys," he said to the other officials at the interrupted White House staff meeting.
At long last, the United Nations was going to punish the Bosnian Serbs for their barbarous assaults on Sarajevo.
Lake walked down the hall to the Oval Office, where he offered the welcome news to President Clinton.
The President congratulated him on the breakthrough, and Lake warned him not to specify in public which country had sent the planes.
The Serbs, he warned, might take hostages.
When the phone rang at 4:34 the next morning, May 26, Lake's fears were being realized.
Gen.
John Shalikashvili, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, was calling.
Lake had to delay their talk as he groped for the key to convert his home phone to a secure line.
Yet the crux of the general's report was scarcely secret.
Serbian commanders, enraged by the bombing, had fired the single deadliest shell of the war, killing 71 civilians in the town of Tuzla.
They were about to take hundreds of U.N. hostages.
And over the next few months, the killing -- or as Lake says, the "evil" -- that he had hoped to contain would rage out of control.


Company Perks: Ego Is Out, Safety Is In
IN the heady 1980's, lavish perks reflected the unbridled optimism of corporate America -- company jets, company cars, even chauffeurs to drive the company cars.
In the uneasy 1990's, most of those goodies have been slashed.
That change speaks volumes about the difference between the decades, of course, but what may be equally revealing are the kinds of executive perks that have not gone under the knife.
Today, "executives are less interested in perks that merely stroke their egos," said Carol Edelstein, a compensation consultant at Hewitt Associates in Lincolnshire, Ill.
"They are more concerned about the future, so they are putting more emphasis on perks that provide a greater sense of security."


Make-Up on the Subway Is No Occasion for Humor
To the Editor:
Barbara S. Goodwin typifies the arrogance and bad manners of the "Me" generation in her Aug. 13 Soapbox essay "Yeah, I Make Up on the Subway. So What?" Not only do we have to put up with homeless people sleeping and smelling like sweaty beasts, people playing noisy music, people carrying knapsacks and hitting everybody with them, but with women like Miss Goodwin who have decided that subways are perfect to apply make-up, apply polish to their nails, pluck their eyebrows, have breakfast -- you name it.
Has Miss Goodwin ever thought of getting up 15 minutes earlier to finish her make-up at home?
Or is that too much of a sacrifice?
It is very sad to see this essay published as if it were something cute and funny.
CARLOS MUNOZ  Upper West Side


Of Misplaced Soccer Fields And a World War II Pact
To the Editor:
An Aug. 13 letter, "The Real Starlight Park," talks about a soccer field there.
In fact, there was none.
The nearest soccer field was in Crotona Park and wasted away most of the time until Monroe High School used it.
Toward wartime, many Hungarian, Greek and Italian soccer teams took over on weekends.


Sports of The Times; What We Want Most From Tyson
FINALLY, we came last night to the moment when accusations, condemnations and declarations of salvation could no longer be shouted above the roar of the star-studded crowd.
There was Shaq.
There was Sinbad.
There was Sharpton.
There was Seinfeld.
Sharon Stone.
And all the others, from Donald Trump to David Caruso to Divine Brown, here to welcome Mike Tyson -- tattoos, warts and all -- back to the business of legal assault.
Forgotten from the time Tyson took aim on the Great Wall known as Peter McNeeley's chin -- it predictably caved 89 seconds into Round 1 -- was Tyson's crime, Tyson's virtue, Tyson's literary contemplations, Mike on Mao.


Summer in SoHo, The Global Kitchen
BAROLO ** (212) 226-1102; 398 West Broadway, near Spring Street; $ [ c) all major credit cards


Who Saved Kyoto? Some Say Stimson
To the Editor:
"Cities of Shrines" (letter, Aug. 10) credits Edwin O. Reischauer, a Harvard professor and onetime Ambassador to Japan, with urging high American authorities to spare Kyoto the first atomic bomb dropped on Japan 50 years ago.
Although this story once had some currency, Reischauer himself denied it.


Prematurely Old at 18, Paris Museum Gets a Lift
SCAFFOLDING on the Georges Pompidou Center in Paris?
Well, who would notice?
For a good many Parisians, France's leading modern art museum has always seemed to be under repair, as if the pipes, tubes and ducts that cover its exterior were forever waiting to be hidden by a more conventional facade.
Not so, of course.
The architects Richard Rogers and Renzo Piano designed it that way -- as a jarringly modern counterpoint to the 18th- and 19th-century Paris that surrounds it.
The only problem is that, barely 18 years after its opening, the unusual inside-out building already needs a face lift.
Paint is peeling, there are signs of rust, and in general the museum looks older than it should.
So gray scaffolding has indeed now gone up beside the northern and southern ends of the center, marking the beginning of what will be an $80 million renovation of the entire structure.
The building's exterior and main plaza should be ready for the center's 20th birthday early in 1997.
Work on the inside will then follow.
In a city with churches, palaces and museums dating back hundreds of years, the need to repair the Pompidou Center so soon after its inauguration has of course sparked all sorts of unflattering remarks about the quality of modern architecture and engineering.
But French Government officials have an appealing explanation.
The center, they say, is a victim of its own success.
It was designed to receive 8,000 daily visitors, but it now averages close to 26,000.
Last year it had eight million visitors, almost twice as many as the Louvre.
What is most interesting about the center is that it serves as a sort of art supermarket.
It usually has a "special" on offer -- until tomorrow, it is a magnificent retrospective of the work of the Romanian sculptor Constantin Brancusi.
But at any one time, it also has half a dozen other exhibitions as well as music, movie and lecture programs.
And the sloping plaza beside its main entrance is alive in summer with musicians, "instant" portrait sketchers, acrobats, conjurers and street peddlers.
The center can also claim another, albeit indirect, success.
Its magnetic appeal has helped to revive what was once a fairly run-down part of Paris.
To the west, Les Halles, the city's 19th-century marketplace, was replaced in the 1970's by truly lamentable modern buildings, but neighboring streets are still packed with restaurants and nightclubs.
To the east, the Marais district has been gentrified with restaurants and art galleries, happily without losing its personality.
And at the center of this new world stands the Pompidou Center or, as Parisians call it, the Beaubourg (taking the name of the street that runs along its eastern flank).
Its renovation, which is in the hands of Renzo Piano, will take place in stages.
Plans include beautifying surrounding areas by adding new trees and better lighting.
An existing copy of Brancusi's studio will be demolished and rebuilt.
And, just as important, tourist buses will be given underground parking space, freeing the Rue Beaubourg from the noise and pollution of waiting buses.
Simultaneously, the exteriors of the center will be treated for rust and repainted.
During this 22-month stage, the museum itself will continue operating normally.
Details of the renovation of the center's interiors after 1997 have still to be disclosed, but officials said that everything possible will be done to limit inconvenience to visitors.
The museum will not close: work will be done floor by floor, with only a small reduction of total exhibition space at any one time.
By then, of course, the outside of the Beaubourg will look its best.
And for those who come simply to look at the center, that may be enough.
They may not like what they see, but at least they'll know it's not falling down.


N.F.L. TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Jacksonville Jaguars
The Heisman Trophy winner Andre Ware was 1 of the 16 players cut yesterday by the expansion Jaguars, who decided not to wait until Tuesday's deadline for cutting the roster.
Ware, who won college football's top individual honor in 1989 at the University of Houston, never threatened the Jaguars' top two quarterbacks, Steve Beuerlein and Mark Brunell, and was beaten out for the third spot by the rookie Rob Johnson.
The Jaguars also placed four players on injured reserve to leave themselves with 64 players, one under the limit that the two expansion teams are allowed to have by Tuesday.
The established teams can keep 60 players.
Ware played sparingly in the preseason, completing only 2 of 7 passes for 11 yards.
He was the seventh player taken in the 1990 draft after a brilliant career at Houston, where he set 26 National Collegiate Athletic Association records. (AP)
New England Patriots
New England Patriots Coach Bill Parcells released seven players yesterday, including Bucky Richardson, who was claimed off waivers from Houston two weeks ago.
Parcells, who hoped to turn the former quarterback into a backup fullback, still could bring him back if he clears waivers, in order to sign him at a reduced salary.
"I'm not going to explain why I did this at this moment," Parcells said.
"You'll know later in the week." (AP) Deion Sanders Derby
Jerry Jones, the Dallas Cowboys' owner, says he has the upper hand in a race with the San Francisco 49ers for the services of Deion Sanders, who was also widely and publicly coveted as a free agent last year.
"I'd be shocked if Deion Sanders doesn't join us," Jones told The Fort Worth Star-Telegram.
Carmen Policy, the 49ers' chief executive, is taking a more low-key public position on the competition.
"If Jerry puts his mind to something, he gets it," Policy said.
"If Jerry makes up his mind to find a way to put together a pre-eminent financial package for Deion, and if he finds a way to work with players to make the room, we may not be able to match it."
The Cowboys said Friday that they have presented the free-agent cornerback with a complex multiyear contract proposal.
Jones said Sanders would be offered the opportunity to play at wide receiver as well as cornerback.
San Francisco is offering a long-term pact valued in the $2 million-a-year range, The Star-Telegram said. (AP) Oakland Raiders
Thousands of bounced checks and refused credit cards mean the Raiders' first season back in Oakland isn't the sellout it was billed to be.
Oakland Coliseum officials stress they still have until next season to bring in the ticket revenue for the stadium renovations they promised the team owner, Al Davis.
Oakland originally proclaimed that fans snapped up all the so-called personal seat licenses for the Raiders' homecoming season.
That announcement was based on 44,880 applications received.
But checks have bounced on 300 of the applications and credit card payments have been refused on another 4,439, he said. (AP) Oilers' Game Canceled
A preseason game between Houston and San Diego Chargers was canceled because the artificial turf at the Astrodome was considered unsafe for play.
The game was canceled more than an hour after its scheduled start and will not be rescheduled.
The Elias Sports Bureau, which compiles statistics on pro sports, could not find another N.F.L. game that had been canceled. (AP)
Dolphins Win Game, Lose 5
The Dolphins lost five players with injuries, including the defensive stalwarts Bryan Cox and Troy Vincent, while beating the Washington Redskins, 27-13, in Miami.
The severity of the injuries wasn't immediately known.
Cox, a Pro Bowl linebacker, strained a ligament in his right knee.
Vincent bruised his right quadriceps.
The starting fullback Robert Wilson, the reserve running back Irving Spikes and the reserve cornerback Frankie Smith were also hurt.
Miami's Dan Marino bounced back from his poorest showing since high school, throwing for 140 yards and a touchdown in two and a half quarters.
Louis Oliver scored on a 97-yard interception return of a pass by the Redskins second-year quarterback, Heath Shuler. (AP)
Harbaugh Sparks Colts
The backup Jim Harbaugh showed the poise under pressure that the starter, Craig Erickson, lacked, guiding Indianapolis past host Green Bay, 20-17, in overtime.
Mike Cofer, who missed a 40-yard field goal with 13 seconds left in regulation time, hit a 20-yarder 3 minutes 30 seconds into overtime.
Harbaugh, who started nine games for the Colts last year but was relegated to backup when Indianapolis (2-1) lured Erickson from Tampa Bay, hit Lamont Warren for 30 yards to the 3, setting up Cofer's game-winner.
Harbaugh found the rookie running back Zack Crockett for a 3-yard touchdown with 1:45 left in regulation.
His 2-point conversion pass to Warren tied the score at 17.
Harbaugh was 15 of 24 for 187 yards and ran 4 times for 30 more.
Brett Favre was 13 of 20 for 159 yards and 2 touchdowns for Green Bay.
Erickson completed only 7 of 18 passes for 31 yards with an interception. (AP)
Falcons Squeeze Browns
Bobby Hebert hit Mario Bailey with a 45-yard touchdown pass in the third quarter and Morten Andersen made four field goals, leading the host Atlanta Falcons to a 19-10 victory over the Cleveland Browns.
The Falcons' defense did an outstanding job of shutting down Cleveland's running game that had been so effective in a 55-13 victory over Chicago on Monday night.
The Browns netted 76 yards on 24 carries. (AP)


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: August 20, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
THE BODY FARM, by Patricia Cornwell. (Berkley, $6.99.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates the murder of a small North Carolina girl.
2
9
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Bantam, $6.99.) Murder in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
3
15
THE STONE DIARIES, by Carol Shields. (Penguin, $10.95.) The journey of a woman from childhood to motherhood through old age.
4*
4
EVERYTHING TO GAIN, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) An act of violence destroys a woman's family life.
5
1
INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Signet, $7.50.) A widower and a widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold a sinister force at work in a Maine town.
6
8
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $7.50.) Jack Ryan vs. a Japanese plot.
7
4
BORN IN ICE, by Nora Roberts. (Jove, $5.99.) An Irishwoman who owns a bed-and-breakfast plays host to a mystery writer from America.
8
21
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $7.50.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing.
9
4
REMEMBRANCE, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $6.99.) A writer who was jilted finds consolation when she travels back to Edwardian England.
10
2
THE NIGHTINGALE LEGACY, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $6.50.) Romance with a mystery-laden nobleman in Regency England.
11
3
THE 13TH JUROR, by John T. Lescroart. (Island/Dell, $6.50.) A lawyer undertakes the defense of a woman accused of murdering two husbands and her young son.
12*
5
WHITE SHARK, by Peter Benchley. (St. Martin's, $6.50.) A marine biologist battles a mysterious underwater monster.
13
4
THE FIST OF GOD, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $6.99.) Spies, traitors and brave warriors at work during the Persian Gulf war.
14
1
THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD, by Lynne Reid Banks. (Avon, $3.99.) A toy comes to life, starting a series of strange, dangerous events.
15
15
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.99.) After an estranged couple reunite, they are haunted by a mysterious force.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
5
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Anchor/Doubleday, $6.99.) The discovery of the deadly Ebola virus in Virginia and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
2
8
APOLLO 13, by Jim Lovell and Jeffrey Kluger. (Pocket, $6.50.) The 1970 moon mission.
3
21
REVIVING OPHELIA, by Mary Pipher. (Ballantine, $12.50.) The dangers that beset teen-age girls.
4
48
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
5
84
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
6
15
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Delta, $12.95.) The experiences of women after the deaths of their mothers.
7*
615
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (+)
8*
36
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A discussion of love and relationships.
9
49
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a tiny Georgia town, as seen by a first-grade teacher.
10
127
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence. (+)
11
47
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
12
25
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Vintage, $12.) Memoirs of a young black reporter for The Washington Post.
13
6
THE CATCHER WAS A SPY, by Nicholas Dawidoff. (Vintage, $13.) The life of Moe Berg, big-league catcher, O.S.S. agent and lady's man.
14
9
THE KENNEDY WOMEN, by Laurence Leamer. (Ivy, $7.99.) Five generations of an American family.
15
13
CREATING A NEW CIVILIZATION, by Alvin Toffler and Heidi Toffler. (Turner Publishing, $7.95.) A proposal for reshaping society. (+)
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
47
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Uplifting stories. (+)
2
16
A 2ND HELPING OF CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) One hundred more stories. (+)
3
8
TEN STUPID THINGS WOMEN DO TO MESS UP THEIR LIVES, by Laura C. Schlessinger. (Harper Perennial, $10.) Therapy. (+)
4
225
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success. (+)
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 5, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
A dagger (+) indicates that some bookstores report receiving bulk orders for a book.


Lorrie Giventer And Adam Braff
Lorrie Allyson Giventer, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Giventer of Plantation, Fla., was married last evening to Adam Braff, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Braff of Greenwich, Conn.
Rabbi Kurt Stone officiated at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Palm Beach, Fla.
The couple graduated from Brown University, he magna cum laude, and both received law degrees from the University of Virginia.


Ruth, Gehrig, DiMaggio, Mantle . . . Cone? No, but Pitcher Looks Good in Pinstripes
David Cone looks like a Yankee, acts like a Yankee and talks like a Yankee.
For a pitcher who has been labeled with so many titles because of his engaging personality and his curious behavior and worn so many uniforms because of his ability to whip a baseball, saying that Cone looks proper in pinstripes is saying something.
Do not be fooled by this easy transition.
Cone has worked on it.
His compliments toward the Yankee captain, Don Mattingly, for welcoming him are nearing triple figures, he has studied the team's media guide to learn more about teammates and he even attended an alternative music concert with his new buddy and friendly pitching competitor, Jack McDowell, to see Big Audio Dynamite in Boston last week.
A few days later, Cone groped to remember the band's name.


Miss de Rochefort, Mr. Wenniger
Alexandra Simone Helene de Rochefort, a daughter of the Count and Countess de Rochefort of Bucharest, Romania, and Chester, Vt., was married yesterday to Ian Mace Maillette de Buy Wenniger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mace de Buy Wenniger of Manchester-by-the-Sea, Mass.
The Rev.
James M. Shea performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Mary's Church in Springfield, Vt.
The bride, 29, is the licensing director at the Society for the Preservation of New England Antiquities, a preservation organization and museum in Boston.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father is the senior adviser on banking policy to the National Bank of Romania, in Bucharest, on behalf of the European Union.


Ideas &amp; Trends; From the Yankees of '56 to the Men of Winter
THE public hadn't seen some of them together for nearly 40 years, since they were stars together, winning pennants and World Series, heroes to their generation and beyond.
They were the Yankees of the 1950's, strong and young and rulers of their hardball universe, seeming to many of their fans more like gods than men.
Perhaps even to themselves.
But last Tuesday in Dallas, at Mickey Mantle's funeral, several were honorary pallbearers for their Yankee teammate, the greatest switch-hitting slugger in history.
The Mick, the incomparable Mick, had died at age 63 of liver cancer, after years of alcohol abuse.


Simms Will Finally Allow Giants to Retire His No. 11
He was one of the best players in Giants history, and soon the team will recognize him with its ultimate honor.
The Giants will retire the jersey of the former quarterback Phil Simms at halftime of the Sept. 4 Monday night opener against the Dallas Cowboys.
Simms, who wore No. 11, will become only the ninth player in the 71-year history of the team to have his number retired.
The most recent player to have such an honor was the former linebacker Lawrence Taylor.
His number was retired last Oct. 10.


In Queens, Dairy Farms Continued Long After 1910
To the Editor:
The Aug. 6 Playing in the Neighborhood article "Down on the Farm in the Big City" contains the misleading statement that "there was active farm life in Queens until at least 1910." I should know: I married the farmer's son.


Woman Says Leg in Rubble May Be Son's
An Oklahoma City woman said today that a leg found deep in the rubble of the Federal Building might belong to her son, whom she has not heard from since the explosion there four months ago.
The woman, Roberta Bennett, said that her son, Sidney Aaron McCullum, who fits the general description deduced by the Medical Examiner's office, had been dropped off by friends to go to the Social Security office in the building early on the morning of April 19, shortly before the explosion that killed at least 167 people.


All-New Residence For TriBeCa
To the Editor:
I was pleased to see your positive coverage of the first new residential building to be constructed in TriBeCa  [ "A Touch of the New for Historic TriBeCa," Aug. 6 ] .
What is ironic, though, is that you quote the praises of a neighborhood activist and neighborhood association that vehemently fought the very zoning change that made this building fit contextually to TriBeCa.
The former manufacturing zone prohibited new residential apartments and encouraged towers.
RICHARD LANDMAN  The writer is former chairman of the TriBeCa Historic District Committee of Community Board 1 and a member of the committee that worked on the Zoning change for years.


Fight Leaves Police Officer Badly Beaten
An off-duty police officer was badly beaten and a man was shot in the hand on the Upper East Side last night after an argument between the officer and two men in a car turned violent and the officer pulled out a gun, the police said.
It was not known what prompted the fight, on Second Avenue near East 83d Street where the officer, Curtis Crystal, was crossing the street headed west about 7:45 P.M.


A Role Model for Wayward Youths Finds Trouble of His Own
In Lefrak City, Russell Barnwell has long been revered as a hero and a model parent.
Parents there say they are grateful to him because he has extended his love beyond his family, talking to at-risk youths and handing out his home number to anyone needing counseling or simply wanting a sympathetic ear.
Mr.
Barnwell's words have carried weight because of his job, as a corrections officer at Rikers Island.
He warned youths that they could listen to him as a friend, or take his orders in jail.


SHH!
Cheers for Tierney and his crusade to stop the nuisance of car alarms.
I was in London in June and the one time I heard such an alarm, somebody actually went to see if there was something wrong. (There wasn't.) EDWIN KENNEBECK New York


Parents Charged After Boy, 5, Shoots Sister
The four-shot .22-caliber Derringer revolver, which the police said looks more like a toy than a weapon, was in a dresser drawer when the 5-year-old boy found it in his father's Harlem apartment.
It was in the boy's hands when it fired accidentally yesterday afternoon, striking his 13-month-old sister once in the head, the police said.


Swing, Partner!
Practicing the do-si-do under the stars at Damrosch Park, Aug. 12.


Jill Cohen, Frederick Hyman
Jill Allison Cohen, a daughter of Marvin and Elaine Cohen of East Brunswick, N.J., was married last evening to Frederick D. Hyman, the son of Bernard R. Hyman of New York and Susan Hyman of Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Robert Levine performed the ceremony at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.


PUBLIC HOSPITALS AROUND COUNTRY CUT BASIC SERVICE
Battered by new market forces and intense pressure on governments to reduce spending on the poor, public hospitals from Los Angeles to New York are cutting back on basic services and confronting the once unthinkable prospect that they may be closed or sold.
The trend, fed by anti-tax fervor and in some cases anti-immigrant sentiments, as well as heightened competition in the health care industry, portends the demise of an American medical tradition that dates back more than two centuries.


Flying Blind; With 'Ghosts' and Other Evils About, Controllers Must Sift Fact From Illusion
Near the center of his circular green radar scope, Michael J. Hannigan was watching a cluster of letters and numbers representing Northwest Flight 1435, en route from Cincinnati to Minneapolis.
The coded information was meant to tell him that the plane, a DC-9, was crawling across the stretch of northern Indiana that was his responsibility that afternoon.
But at that moment, on the afternoon of July 28, the passenger jet was actually 100 miles northwest of where the screen showed it.
Mr.
Hannigan was watching a "ghost," an artifact created somewhere in the center's cluster of computers, which integrate data from eight radar stations, covering 120,000 square miles, with the flight plans filed by the airlines into the Federal Aviation Administration's computers.


Eiffel Tower
To the Editor: In the Travel Advisory report "Eiffel Tower, 106, Gets Its 17th Paint Job" (May 14), it is stated that the "landmark will be the same color as always: brown, in three tones that get progressively lighter from bottom to top."
Au contraire.


A QUESTION FOR: Spalding Gray
Q: You always seem to be cast in films as the bow-tie type.
Is this the real you, or would you like to play something different?
A: Hollywood rarely casts against type.
I've often paraphrased Bob Dylan's line "I may look like Robert Ford, but I feel just like Jesse James" by saying, "I may look like a doctor, the American Ambassador's aide or a gynecologist, but I feel like Woody Allen." I don't want to sound glib, but I don't have any sense of the "real" me.
With the coming of age, I look more and more like the WASP Republican I was originally programmed to be.
That's the outside image that the camera captures.
Inside, I'm an unconscious Luddite tripping over the ragged edges of my imperfect history, my heap of a life, still unable to tie a bow tie, satisfied with a clip-on.


TABLE HOPPING
Just what New York needs! New places to eat out, and new clothes to do it in.


When It Sizzles
Men with a traditional sense of style need not be upstaged by summer's continuing heat when they can turn to an old-time favorite: cotton seersucker.
This cool fabric appeals to older men who remember it from their youth, and to younger ones just discovering it.
Equally cool looking is a navy blazer (left) worn with white.
And a windowpane plaid (above) is yet another way for a gentleman to keep his flair and swagger.


3 Hospitals Talk About Forming an Affiliation
THREE Westchester community hospitals have begun affiliation talks to meet what their directors describe as the demands of a quickly changing health-care environment.
The changing marketplace is "unlike anything we've ever seen,"said Roger Dvorak, president of Lawrence Hospital in Bronxville, which is holding the talks with the White Plains Hospital Center and the Northern Westchester Hospital Center in Mount Kisco.
All hospitals are facing cutbacks in Medicaid and Medicare reimbursements and stricter control of expenses and procedures from managed-care groups.
In particular, health-maintenance groups and other managed-care organizations are limiting admissions, hospital procedures and length of stay.
They are also paying less to hospitals for their services.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Meatloaf and the 50's Style In New Village Eating Place  E. J.'s Luncheonettes have proved to be popular gathering spots for young singles on the Upper East Side and Upper West Side.
Now, the owners hope that a new outlet in the West Village, at 432 Avenue of the Americas, between Ninth and 10th Streets, will become a mecca for neighborhood residents.


Five Generations of Vanderbilts
To celebrate the hundredth anniversary of The Breakers, the magnificent 70-room Vanderbilt "cottage" in Newport, R.I., as well as its own 50th anniversary, the Preservation Society of Newport has organized an exhibition about the family of Commodore Cornelius Vanderbilt.
Three galleries at the Newport Art Museum hold a rich collection of paintings and drawings, sculpture and memorabilia lent by family members, museums and libraries.
Among the many portraits, from that of the patriarch through those of five generations of descendants, is a charming depiction of Flora Payne Whitney at age 12, by Howard Gardiner Cushing, painted in 1908.
Sargent's portrait of Gladys Moore Vanderbilt, now Countess Laszlo Szechenyi, is from 1906.


The Nation; Two Downed 737's Make a Nightmare, and a Mystery
IT doesn't have the panache required for for "Unsolved Mysteries," but Flight 427 does have its dedicated investigators.
Their coats are lab, not trench, and when they use the third degree, it is generally to tease useful testimony not from a human witness, but from a piece of metal, a scrap of data or an extensive computer simulation.
But like all good investigators, they are not sleeping well.
The case is the flight of the USAir Boeing 737 that came down on approach to Pittsburgh International Airport last Sept. 8, an uncomfortably long time ago for the National Transportation Safety Board, which is in charge of such investigations.
A few days ago the safety board took the unusual step of briefing the press to describe its progress, to discourage thinking that the case is unsolved, rather than simply in progress -- albeit for an awfully long time.


A Tale of Turmoil Arrives on Top of the News
IT ALWAYS HAD THE makings of a gripping movie.
In a storybook Asian land, the beautiful Oxford-educated daughter of the man considered the father of the nation returns home after decades abroad to confront the steely eyed generals who run the country.
They gun down thousands of her supporters and place her under house arrest, where she remains for years with only the barest contact with the outside world.
While detained, she wins the Nobel Peace Prize and retains the affection of millions inside and outside her country.
In a paragraph, that is the modern history of Myanmar, the nation better known by its colonial name, Burma.
The recent political turmoil in this isolated, tormented nation is now the backdrop for a film, "Beyond Rangoon," directed by John Boorman, starring Patricia Arquette and scheduled for release on Wednesday in the United States.


INSIDE
INVESTING IT /Page 3  Last week's good Nikkei news may have been ultimately inconclusive, but that's no reason for investors to shun Japan.
By Ken Brown.
SPENDING IT /Page 7  Adopting a child is a matter of love, but you still need to worry about the money.
Minding Your Business, by Laura Pedersen.
EARNING IT /Page 9  As America grays, more companies are helping their workers help their elderly parents.
By Margaret O. Kirk.
EARNING IT /Page 9  Executive perks in the 90's: Ego-stroking is out, and personal security -- physical and financial -- is in.
By J. Peder Zane.


An Artist's Ups, Downs and Influences
ABRAHAM WALKOWITZ (1880 to 1965) is at Nardin Galleries, here, personified by a group of drawings and paintings, some of which were hung in the gallery's "Salute to Edith Halpert" show last year.
This is not Walkowitz at his best but, rather, Walkowitz sustaining some of the ups and downs brought on by his influences.
The most conspicuous and least fortunate of these seems to have been Cezanne, whose work Walkowitz saw in the great 1907 exhibition in Paris, where he was studying at the Academie Julian.
Neither the landscape with clothed figures standing and reclining, a circa 1908 scene measuring almost six feet across and done in oil, pastel and watercolor on dark wood, nor the circa 1909 watercolor of many small figures standing motionless in the street of an Italian village, shows signs of the experience.


Garbage Plant That Raised State's Concerns Reopens, Sticking to Paper
Nekboh Recycling, a garbage transfer station on the Williamsburg waterfront that was shut down last month after its owner was charged with assault and arson, reopened last week when the state gave it permission to resume a scaled-back operation.
Nekboh stored, sorted and sent out garbage from its Kent Avenue plant for six years without an official operating permit from the state's Department of Environmental Conservation, receiving a series of temporary permits and extensions.
But when its owner, Philip Barretti Sr., was indicted on charges of assaulting a rival garbage carter and setting fire to his garbage truck, the state decided not to renew the temporary permit.
Nekboh closed down.


Heike Arendt, Edward Cheng
Heike Maria-Felicitas Arendt, a daughter of Ulrike and Volker Arendt of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to Edward S. Cheng, a son of Charmian Shieh Cheng and Robert Chung-Nan Cheng, also of Princeton.
The Rev.
Cynthia Jarvis, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Princeton University Chapel.
Ms.
Arendt, 27, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and received an M.B.A. from Dartmouth College.
The bride is a marketing assistant at Gorton's, the frozen-seafood company in Gloucester, Mass.
Her father is a senior research chemist at the American Cyanamid Company in Princeton.
Her mother is a senior examiner for test development at the Educational Testing Service in Princeton.
Mr.
Cheng, also 27, graduated from Princeton University and is a law student at Boston College.
His father is a consulting engineer in Princeton for the engineering and construction subsidiary of the Raytheon Corporation.
His mother is a librarian at the Gest Oriental Library at Princeton University.


Protesters Undaunted Over Indian Point 3
ANTI-NUCLEAR groups admittedly discouraged by the reopening of Indian Point 3 in Buchanan last month say they are still not ready to give up the fight -- having marched, "died in" and otherwise protested against the nuclear power plant since it was built 19 years ago.
They were spurred on when the plant was temporarily shut down early in 1993, and their cause was further strengthened when the reactor went on the Nuclear Regulatory Commission's watch list later that year.
And even though the July 2 restart has caused many in the anti-nuclear movement to lose heart, they say they have not lost faith.


IN SEARCH OF...


In New Orleans, a Rough Edge Is Endangered
Even when it is quiet here, in the nightclub called Tipitina's, you can hear the music.
A bust of the late zydeco piano man, Professor Longhair, watches over the joint, but it is out of place.
It should be in front of a keyboard, where the gold-toothed, long-fingered old man used to hammer out "Bald Head," or "Stag-O-Lee," or "How Long Has That Train Been Gone."


Rethinking Plans For Those Trains To the Planes
Plans for a rail system linking the two Queens airports and Manhattan have been dead since May.
Now, as the Port Authority presses forward with plans for a 7.5 mile monorail connecting the terminals at Kennedy International Airport to the Howard Beach station on the A subway line, community leaders are rethinking their positions.
Like many Howard Beach residents, Betty Braton, the chairwoman of Community Board 10, lives under the scream of jet airplanes.
People in her neighborhood are more concerned with getting away from the airport than getting to it.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE SECRET SIX  The True Tale of the Men  Who Conspired With John Brown.
By Edward J. Renehan Jr.
Crown, $25.


Bradley's Exit Is Not Just the Democrats' Problem
TAKEN alone, Senator Bill Bradley's decision to leave Congress, perhaps for an independent run for the White House, is just a straw in the wind, an isolated instance of a respected man's disenchantment with his party and politics.
The problem is, Mr.
Bradley is anything but alone.
American politics in the '90's is becoming a haystack caught in a whirlwind, the inchoate product of party alliances shattering and reforming, old orders crumbling, voters clutching here, then there for an ideology to cling to.
So Mr.
Bradley's departure is more than just a straw.
It foreshadows the end of the Democratic Party as Americans know it today -- if not now, within a matter of years.
Whether it signals a greater upheaval in the entire system is a matter of some dispute.


Compromise Collapses for Italian Festival
A proposed compromise over a controversial street festival on Fresh Pond Road has fallen apart amid protests from community board members who say the festival would be a public safety hazard.
After a bitter community meeting last month that generated charges of anti-Italian bias, the Community Assistance Unit of the Mayor's office recommended reducing a festival in honor of Madonna Santa Maria di Trapani, the patron saint of the Trapani province in Sicily, to three days, from five.


High Fashion Is No Longer In Fashion
The decision to make the documentary "The Hollywood Fashion Machine," which traces the history of fashion in film, was based on fashion designers' claims that the old movies shown on American Movie Classics were influencing their work.
Hence the burst, last season, of fashions of the 1930's to the 1970's on runways.
By tracking the history of designers' influence on film, and film's influence on designers from the beginning of movies, the documentary makes its case through insiders like Isaac Mizrahi, who noted, "For an American designer, Hollywood is probably the most important source of inspiration."


Labonte Brothers 1-2 in Goodwrench 400
Bobby Labonte made it a clean sweep yesterday, driving his Chevrolet Monte Carlo to victory in the GM Goodwrench 400 for his second straight victory at Michigan International Speedway in Brooklyn, Mich.
Labonte, who started his 84th Winston Cup race from the pole position, won the Miller Genuine Draft 400 on the high-banked, two-mile oval June 18.
Labonte, who also won the Coca-Cola 600 at Concord, N.C., on May 28, now has won three Nascar races -- all coming on superspeedways.


Fight Fans Are Quick To Voice Displeasure
Mike Tyson got $25 million.
Peter McNeeley got disqualified.


New York, Through the Tour Bus Window: Japanese; Whiff of Danger In the Big City
Koichi Tarabe had made exactly 41 trips outside Japan in his life, including 2 to Chicago.
But fear had kept him from New York, though the city had long gripped his imagination.
"I'd heard all the stories, and seen New York on television," he said, standing on the deck of the World Trade Center.
"But I wanted to see for myself how people here really live."


NEW JERSEY DAILY BRIEFING;
Andrew M. Cuomo, Assistant Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, will travel to Newark today to give the city a $1.29 million loan to help build an industrial park.
The loan will be used to help acquire land in the South Ward and construct buildings that the city hopes will attract businesses and create 300 permanent jobs, said Rosemary Hocking, Newark's director of development.


Mesa Sets Record for Late-Inning Reliability
Indians 8, Brewers 5
Jose Mesa set a major league record with his 37th save in 37 attempts yesterday after the Cleveland Indians rallied for five runs in the eighth inning to beat the Milwaukee Brewers, 8-5, at Jacobs Field.
Mesa, who hasn't allowed an earned run since June 8, pitched a scoreless ninth to surpass Dennis Eckersley's single-season mark of 36 straight saves without a blown opportunity set in 1992.
San Francisco's Rod Beck converted a record 41 in a row over three seasons from 1993-95.


CHRONICLE
BOOMER ESIASON, the New York Jets quarterback, has ventured into new terrain: he has written a children's book, "A Boy Named Boomer," that has been published by Scholastic Inc.
Intended for children in the first and second grades, it is a compilation of recollections of his childhood, ranging from family outings to his realization that he had a talent for sports to his embarrassment over a Valentine's gift he gave a girl.


Have It Your Way, Professor: Custom Textbooks on Demand
Before the start of the fall term at Cornell University, Prof.
Joan Piggott is expected to drop off at the university bookstore revisions to "Readings in Classical Japanese History," the text for one of the courses she teaches.
The volume, which was 353 pages long for the fall term last year (but may well be longer -- or shorter -- this fall), is an example of a growing phenomenon on college campuses.
Standard texts are being supplemented or replaced by custom books -- usually assembled from chapters of academic texts and articles from scholarly journals and the popular press.


Americans Capture Two-Man Event
The Americans Stein Jorgensen and John Mooney won the two-man kayak at 200 meters yesterday at the world canoe and kayak championships in Duisburg, Germany.
Jorgensen and Mooney, racing together for less than a year, took home the first United States gold medal in a major championship since 1988. (AP)


Special Teams Could Mean Special Season
You look at the Giants.
You look at the Jets.
You look at them on the same field, at the same time, as on this past Saturday night at Giants Stadium.
You look for star power.
You look for big plays.
You look for the receiver who requires double coverage.
You look for the robust, rushing defensive end who must be double-teamed.
You look for wicked speed.
You look for the passer who can wing it 60 yards on the fly, on the dime.
You look for the offensive line that can pull either way and can power straight ahead with equal precision.


Beachgoers Test the Waters
Heavy surf advisories remained in effect, but rough conditions caused by Hurricane Felix had improved enough yesterday to permit beachgoers to wade in waist deep at some New Jersey beaches.


Planet Out: 'Gay Global Village' of Cyberspace
Planet Out, a new electronic media company that will make its debut on the Microsoft Network later this week, is seeking to become the "gay global village" of cyberspace.
If it is successful -- and some of the most influential names in Hollywood, Silicon Valley, the on-line networks and the gay communities are offering their support to make sure it is -- Planet Out may also become a model for the type of highly focused marketing that other businesses, like magazine publishing, have found more and more successful.
But in cyberspace, there are no printing costs and deadlines are measured in minutes.
Words and images can be delivered faster and in greater quantities.


Aiming at H.M.O.'s, Upjohn Agrees to $13 Billion Merger
The Upjohn Company in the United States and Pharmacia A. B. of Sweden said yesterday that they would join forces in a $13 billion deal aimed in part at selling drugs in huge quantities to H.M.O.'s and other organizations that buy medicines on behalf of tens of thousands of patients.
The new company, to be named Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn Inc., would become the world's ninth-largest pharmaceutical firm, with annual sales of nearly $7 billion.
The merger is to be a friendly one, in contrast to other recent mergers of giant pharmaceutical companies.
But like the others, the new company would combine enough operations to cut the staff, in this case to 30,500 from 34,500.


Affirmative Action: One City's Experience; Fighting Bias With Bias and Leaving a Rift
The firefighters are color-blind in the smoke.
The black and white faces are hidden behind oxygen masks, and any resentment they carry inside a burning building is melted away by the heat.
"Fire doesn't discriminate," said Lieut.
Sandy Hatton, a 19-year veteran of the Birmingham Fire and Rescue Unit, who is white.
Never, he said, would a firefighter hesitate to come to the aid of another because of color.


How Ted Turner Plans to Play For a Network
When the aspiring television magnate Ted Turner bought his second station, WRET-TV in Charleston, S.C., in 1972, it was bargain-basement property in financial peril.
Desperate to keep it afloat, Mr.
Turner, then better known as an outdoor-advertising entrepreneur with a flair for the burlesque sales pitch, had the station run an on-air "beg-a-thon." Announcers beseeched viewers of the mostly old-movie channel to donate the price of two theater tickets.
The ploy raised more than $30,000 and helped keep WRET-TV on the air.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about the deaths of three United States diplomats in Bosnia referred incorrectly to one of the Balkan leaders involved in discussing an American peace plan.
It was the President of Serbia, not the President of Yugoslavia, who met with the American delegation.


The Limehouse Killings And Much, Much More
THE TRIAL OF ELIZABETH CREE A Novel of the Limehouse Murders  By Peter Ackroyd  261 pages.
Nan A. Talese/Doubleday. $22.
Peter Ackroyd provides a clue here and there in this brainy and shady historical murder mystery so that the attentive reader may guess at "the shocking truth" (as the dust jacket promises) lying at the heart of his story.
But Mr.
Ackroyd's literary touch is a subtle one.
So it would be easy to miss the indications that matters are not exactly what they seem in "The Trial of Elizabeth Cree," which spins so clever a maze that the reader may not even be aware, until the end, that it is a maze.
This could fall flat in the hands of a less skillful teller of tales, but this novel is one of those books that provide a thoroughly satisfying frisson when the truth is finally revealed.


Peter Shaw, 58, Literary Scholar Who Rallied Neoconservatives
Peter Shaw, an English professor who crossed academic disciplines to write a biography of John Adams in the 1970's and then became a leader of the neoconservative academic movement, died on Thursday at Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 58 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was heart disease, his family said.


Press Fad, or Future, in Minneapolis?
Joel R. Kramer, the publisher of The Minneapolis Star Tribune, would like to answer his critics.
He says he is shaking up journalistic traditions to save big-city newspapers from extinction.
And Mr.
Kramer has plenty of critics to answer.
The paper, where he was once editor, has a long tradition of solid journalism.
But with Mr.
Kramer as publisher since 1992, it has also become perhaps the most ridiculed newspaper in the country, described by critics inside the paper and out as a headquarters of political correctness and New Age journalism jargon.


Heavenly Prize Keeps Saratoga Stars Shining
On the day after Thunder Gulch dazzled the racing public by winning the Travers Stakes by 4 1/2 lengths, the great filly Heavenly Prize dazzled the public by winning the John A. Morris Handicap by 8 1/2 lengths over the same Saratoga course.
It was a weekend dominated by star horses, and none gave a better performance than the 4-year-old Ogden Phipps filly.
Sixth at the start, she was still fifth after three-quarters of a mile and third as they rounded the turn for home.
Then, with Pat Day waiting confidently in the saddle, Heavenly Prize glided past the leaders almost without effort.


New York, Through the Tour Bus Window: Arabs; Sodom And Gotham
In an attempt to relax during her visit to New York City, Nelly Mubarak broke a religious commandment.
She bowed to family advice and left her Islamic veils at home.
"In Egypt they told me that many people, salespeople in the stores, for instance, would be a little afraid of me," said Mrs.
Mubarak, 53, sitting on the Statue of Liberty ferry.
"I feel strange and I worry that God will see me and be upset."


Publishers Change a Summer Tactic
Summer has traditionally been the sleepy season for book publishing.
Authors tour less, and many New York publishing houses shut down on Friday afternoons, with editors and executives wafting between holidays and the Hamptons.
While books sell steadily, most bookstore owners and customers still look forward to the publishers' fall lists for the freshest, strongest titles of the year.
This summer has been something of an exception, especially for fiction.
Instead of waiting for the fall, trade-book publishers released a number of new novels by best-selling authors between June and August, including "Beach Music" (Talese/ Doubleday) by Pat Conroy; "Memnoch the Devil" (Alfred A. Knopf) by Anne Rice, and "Rose Madder" (Viking) by Stephen King.


Surprising Straw Poll Gives Dole A Glimpse of the Battles Ahead
In the first sign that Senator Bob Dole could be tripped up in his march to the Republican Presidential nomination, Senator Phil Gramm unexpectedly tied him on Saturday night in a straw poll sponsored by the Iowa Republican Party.
Although the poll was nonbinding and essentially a test of which candidates could haul in the most supporters from Iowa as well as other states, the results were an unmistakable disappointment for Mr.
Dole.


Consolation for Dawes
Dominique Dawes came back from a disappointing fourth-place finish in the all-around Friday night to win two event finals at the United States gymnastics championships Saturday night at the Superdome.
The best the new all-around champion, Dominique Moceanu, could muster was a silver and bronze.
Dawes won the uneven bars (9.912) and the floor exercise (9.9), Shannon Miller the vault (9.837) and Doni Thompson the balance beam (9.687).
The 13-year-old Moceanu slipped off the bars and nearly fell on the beam but won a silver on the floor exercise and a bronze on the vault.


Editors welcome Kennedy to their ranks (and help circulation along the way).
KENNEDY speaks!
O.K., O.K., so he doesn't. What of it?


Patents; Substantial questions linger after a ruling that could give patent holders more power.
THE nation's highest patent court potentially strengthened the power of patent holders in a surprising opinion issued quietly this month.
The 155-page ruling covers a seemingly obscure area of patent law but has important repercussions for everyday business decisions.
In the 7-to-5 ruling, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit bolstered a principle known as the doctrine of equivalents, which is meant to protect inventors from poachers who appropriate the essence of a patent without trespassing its literal borders.


After a General Tells of Killing P.O.W.'s in 1956, Israelis Argue Over Ethics of War
The Israeli Government decided today that it would not pursue a retired general's admission that he killed unarmed Egyptian prisoners during the 1956 war, a revelation made this month that provoked new soul-searching among Israelis about the corrupting force of the violence that has characterized so much of their history.
"God forbid if we start comparing how many we have killed and how many they have killed," Shulamit Aloni, the Minister of Communications, told reporters after the weekly meeting of the Cabinet today.
"This kind of arithmetic will make us engage in a discussion that will destroy our society."


Most Wanted; Old and New Hits Lead the Lists
Three NBC television hits -- "Friends," "Seinfeld" and "E.R." -- finished at Nos. 1, 2 and 3, respectively, this week.
These shows have been among the top 5 for 10 weeks, and on three occasions finished in the top three slots.


Giants Accuse Jets of Dirty Tactics in a Fight-Marred Game
Last week, when the Giants were watching film of the Jets' preseason games, they said they noticed how some Jets players were using what they called dirty tactics.
Jet offensive players, the Giants said, would come downfield and knock a defender down long after a play was clearly over, and sometimes they would go low, when a player was unaware the hit was coming.
Giants players said they knew the Jets might do some of these things against them and planned to try to stay cool.
But staying cool after someone knocks you 20 feet downfield after a play is blown dead isn't easy.
So the Giants were infuriated after their 32-31, fight-marred exhibition victory on Saturday night, with players blasting the Jets.


300 Killed and 400 Injured in a Train Wreck in India
About 300 people were killed and more than 400 were injured early today when a speeding passenger train in northern India plowed into another train that had stalled after hitting a cow, senior railroad officials said.
The casualty toll is expected to rise, according to other officials and to news reports from the site.


Two Gingrich Books Too Many for Publisher
Rupert Murdoch has never shied away from controversy, but publishing two books about House Speaker Newt Gingrich simultaneously was apparently more than he could handle.
Just a day or two before Mr.
Murdoch, the chairman of the News Corporation, testified before the House ethics committee on Aug. 1, largely about a lucrative book contract between his company's HarperCollins publishing subsidiary and the House Speaker, the same subsidiary abruptly killed plans to publish a glossy coffee table book whose photographs focused on Mr.
Gingrich.


U.S. to Sell Notes This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week includes today's weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills, and auctions of new two-year notes on Tuesday and five-year notes on Wednesday.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.42 percent, and on the six-month bill, 5.45 percent.
In when-issued trading, the two-year note was offered at a price to yield 6.12 percent and the five-year note at a price to yield 6.36 percent.


Nation Analyzes and Agonizes Over Citadel Dropout
At least 30 cadets had dropped out of The Citadel by Friday, acknowledging that they could not withstand the rigors of "hell week." For all but one, their departures were unremarkable.
No one talked about their weight, or said they had let down their entire sex, or praised them for sticking with it as long as they did.
No one celebrated their leaving.
No one even knew who they were, because their names were kept confidential.


The Doctor Left Free to Murder
Dr.
David Benjamin finally got what he deserved earlier this month when a jury convicted him of murder for botching an abortion in 1993 and then callously letting the patient bleed to death.
But it is appalling that Dr.
Benjamin was still practicing years after health authorities began trying to revoke his license.
Ordinarily doctors are not charged with murder for making mistakes.
But the trial made clear that Dr.
Benjamin had shown a reprehensible indifference to human life.
He bungled a complicated late-term abortion that he lacked the skills to perform, and then let his patient die in a recovery room while he performed another abortion.


His Majesty Takes International Trot
His Majesty, driven by Stefan Melander, swept three wide on the final turn Saturday night to capture the $300,000 36th International Trot at Yonkers Raceway by two lengths over the favored S J Photo.
His Majesty, who covered the mile in 2:262/5 , returned $26.40 for $2 to win, $6.20 and $4.40.


Tyee in Alliance With Wunderman
The Tyee Group in Portland, Ore., which specializes in infomercials, and Wunderman Cato Johnson in New York, the direct marketing unit of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., have formed a strategic alliance under which Wunderman has bought a minority interest in Tyee.
Though the terms were not disclosed, the two companies said Tyee would continue to operate independently under its current management and name.


A Sweep By the Mets Is Season's Highlight
It took 105 baseball games, but the Mets may have reached their finest moment of what has been a long and often torturous season.
On a gorgeous afternoon at Shea Stadium with a crowd of 33,668 looking on, the youthful Mets did something that seemed improbable a few weeks ago.
The Los Angeles Dodgers, tied with the Colorado Rockies atop the National League West, needed a victory yesterday to avoid an embarrassing three-game sweep by the Mets, who are in last place in the N.L.
East.
The Japanese sensation Hideo Nomo was on the mound for Los Angeles with about 10,000 Asian and Asian-American fans rooting for him.


Destroying a Housing Project, to Save It
Frustrated by years of crime, drugs and a never-ending battle with disrepair, city officials -- and many residents -- finally agreed that the Lafayette Courts public housing project simply could not be fixed.
So they threw a neighborhood demolition party today, and then blew up the project's six high-rises in a spectacle that brought both cheers and tears, and cleared the way for town houses, this city's new approach to public housing.


Battle Lines Fade at Tanglewood
Even in circles as self-consciously tradition-bound as the classical music world, change is a necessary condition of life, its opposite being stagnation.
Performers and musicologists refurbish their ideas about style regularly and have only lately (and grudgingly) made peace with the notion that their vaunted antiquarianism is itself a modernist stance.
At the new-music end of the spectrum, things are more complicated.
Composers have always searched restlessly for new sounds and forms, but after watching audiences drift away for decades, many are now reaching backward in the hope of giving listeners an impression of both novelty and familiarity.
Institutions change as well, although as a rule they change more slowly than the arts they conserve.
Tanglewood, the summer home of the Boston Symphony Orchestra, has always guarded its traditions, of which the veneer of inviting rusticity is nearly as central as the music making.
But there has been a revolution there over the last two years.
More specifically, there has been a complete revamping of the Tanglewood Music Center, the educational adjunct of the Boston Symphony's outpost in the Berkshires, but the effects have reshaped Tanglewood as a whole.


2 Republican Senators Caution Hillary Clinton on China Trip
Two Republican senators who are Presidential hopefuls cautioned Hillary Rodham Clinton today against going to China in September to attend an international conference on women.
Responding to a question on the CBS News program "Face the Nation," Bob Dole of Kansas said, "I think it would be a mistake for the First Lady to go as long as they're retaining an American prisoner there, Harry Wu, and as long as there's other human rights abuses."


2 Fire Island Houses Yield to Felix's Pull
Ron and Lucy Kerner bought their beachfront dream house last September.
They refinished its wooden floors, installed new windows and added a new roof.
Saturday, as the Kerners stood on the beach at high tide, they watched their house topple into the furious waves of the Atlantic Ocean, pulled down by the 200-mile reach of Hurricane Felix.


For a Black Squadron, an Enemy Not German
The year is 1943.
A group of young black airmen en route to Alabama from the North are ordered to leave the comfortable rear car of a troop train and move to the dirty and noisy first car beside the locomotive.
As the airmen step out, they stare at the men taking their place: German prisoners of war.
The real-life incident is one of the memorable, if shocking, moments in "The Tuskegee Airmen," a drama on Home Box Office about the first squadron of black fighter pilots in World War II, who faced two powerful enemies: the Germans abroad and bigotry at home.
The drama, starring Laurence Fishburne, will be shown on HBO starting Saturday evening.


No Headline
I wasn't sure I'd ever be back to play tennis again.
I can't believe this is real, oh boy! -- MONICA SELES, after winning a tournament in her return to the sport.  [ A1:2 ]


METRO DIGEST
TO TOURISTS, 8 MILLION IMAGES OF THE CITY
This year's batch of foreign visitors to New York City, the biggest so far this decade, might be compared to the blind men touching the elephant.
Judging from a selection of foreign-language tour bus rides, the conclusions they reach depend on what they are shown, how they are shown it and their own prisms of preconceptions.


London Journal; In Home of St. Paul's, Hindus Build for the Ages
It rises like a mirage out of a drab northwest London neighborhood, a collection of cream-colored domes and spires capped with golden ornaments, next to the Eurodollar Rent-a-Car depot.
When it was completed at a quarter to four this morning after three years of work and a decade and a half of planning, it fulfilled the wish of Britain's 1.5 million Hindus for a place of worship that they could compare in majesty to, say, St.
Paul's Cathedral in London -- and that they expect to stand as a testament to their faith for 1,000 years.


Team USA Falls to Finland in Final
Lulea, last season's runner-up in the Swedish Elite League, beat Team USA, 4-2, yesterday in the final of the Tampere Cup in Tampere, Finland.
Finland went ahead for good when Lars Modig broke a 2-2 tie at 2 minutes 41 seconds in the third period against the American team, composed entirely of college players.


Sports of The Times; A Manager Manages To Be Farce's Fall Guy
IN the instant Vinny Vecchione made a poor judgment call and jumped into the ring, he fell into a most undistinguished role: fall guy for a farce.
Vecchione's man, Peter McNeeley, was about to be stopped by Mike Tyson in Round 1 here Saturday night, no astonishing news.
But Vecchione beat Tyson to the punch, disqualifying McNeeley by entering the ring 89 seconds into the farce.
The well-heeled, star-studded crowd rained a chorus of boos and shouts of "fix." Pay-per-viewers worldwide undoubtedly stuck pins in their Don King dolls.


New York, Through the Tour Bus Window: Russians; Money, Money, Money, Money
Akh, the Russian's-eye view of New York!
The enthusiasm, so long suppressed by hostile ideology!
The swashbuckling tongue of Tolstoy, transforming chaos into sweeping generality!
The disregard for truth when it gets in the way of poetry!
The new love of lucre!
"Well, friends, New York is the capital of the world!" boomed the guide Isaak Borshch as his busful of Russian tourists, patrons of the People Travel Company of Brighton Beach, began their daylong tour.
"This city makes you live more fully, breathe more deeply -- that's the soul of New York!"


Bridge
The Greater New York Bridge Association's Von Zedtwitz double knockout team championship, which began nine months ago, has now come down to a three-team final among once-beaten squads.
A group headed by Robin Kay, the association's president, won a match a week ago at the Honors Club, at 42 East 73d Street, against Lapt Chan's team, previously unbeaten.
These two teams will now fight for the title along with Robb Gordon's team.
Both declarers in three no-trump, Phillip Alder for the Chan team and Alan Miller for the Kay team, were successful on the diagramed deal.
In each case the lead was the diamond jack.


CHRONICLE
When the curtain comes down on the matinee of "Crazy for You" on Sunday, PIA ZADORA, who joined the cast of the Broadway musical last week, will dash off -- to the altar.
She is getting married on that day to JONATHAN KAUFER, a director and screenwriter.
"The show ends at 5:45, I'll wipe off the makeup, slip on my new dress and say 'I do,' at 7 P.M.," she said the other day.
"I have an hour so I can even take a nap."


Students Find Way to Light Up
Some Princeton High School seniors have found a way to circumvent state laws banning smoking at public schools.
Because an open-campus policy allows them to leave the property when not in class, they have been simply stepping onto the sidewalks and lighting up.


Yankees' Hopes for Playing in the Post-Season Take Another Pounding
Puzzled and punished by another collision at the plate, Mike Stanley sat in the dirt with his head dangling as a trainer hovered over him with smelling salts.
His pain and confusion were evident and the picture was strangely symbolic of the scoreboard pain the Angels inflicted upon the Yankees in a 10-5 victory and of the confusion New York feels as its season crumbles through a devastating stretch.
Stanley was rammed in the back of the head during his unsuccessful blockade against Damion Easley in the second inning.
The catcher was replaced an inning later because he had a mild concussion.
On a day the Angels exploited the sluggish Yankees with their aggressiveness, some of Stanley's teammates wished they could have followed him to the clubhouse because Mark Langston was almost unhittable from the second to the seventh inning while Sterling Hitchcock was very hittable all afternoon.


Topics of The Times; Green Streets
To live and grow in New York City, a tree takes a lot of abuse -- too little water reaching the roots through inadequate openings in city sidewalks, air pollution, disease, vandalism and automobiles bounding over the curb.
Small wonder that the average life of a newly planted tree is less than 12 years.
Several hundred volunteers are currently conducting a census of the living and the dead throughout the city.
The last complete census was in 1948, when there were 548,000 trees.
It is expected that the new census will find roughly the same number.
They will not be the same trees, though.
There is a constant need for planting.
The city put $5 million for new trees in the current budget, hardly excessive when you consider that Chicago spends four times as much on trees as New York does, per person.


Webb a Winner in British Women's Open
In control since the second round, Karrie Webb, a 20-year-old who turned professional 10 months ago, won the British Women's Open by six strokes yesterday in Woburn, England.


Carrying On an Asphalt Legacy
In 1950, a Harlem teacher started a basketball tournament to help impoverished youngsters in the neighborhood pursue college careers.
That endeavor by the late Holcombe L. Rucker became the most storied summer basketball league ever.
"I never imagined at that time that it would get as large as it did," said Jumping Jackie Jackson, who, according to folklore, could snatch a quarter off the top of a backboard.


New York, Through the Tour Bus Window: Latin Americans; Eagerly Seeking Real New Yorkers
Rockefeller Center's hulking Atlas mustered only a sleepy-eyed nod.
The Empire State Building got no more than a passing crane of the neck.
For the 15 Latin American and Caribbean tourists zipping around Manhattan on a four-hour Spanish-language tour on a Pamtours minibus, the postcard settings seemed so ho-hum.
It was real New York they were seeking, the rituals of Manhattanites in their own tourist-free surroundings, the habits of the Fifth Avenue ultra-rich, the crush of bodies rising up in trancelike unison from the subway stairwells.


Nikon Files Lawsuit Against Cahners
Nikon Inc. has filed a lawsuit against the Cahners Publishing Company in Newton, Mass., accusing Cahners of a "lack of adequate response" after the wrong headline mistakenly appeared on a Nikon advertisement that ran last month in a Cahners publication.
The suit, filed on Friday in Federal District Court in New York, seeks injunctive relief including unspecified damages for the publication in the annual buyers guide of Test &amp; Measurement World magazine of an ad showing a woman working at a Nikon microscope.
The headline from a different, humorous ad in the magazine -- "We're shallow, cheap and easy" -- appeared superimposed on the Nikon ad in place of the correct headline, which was "User-friendliest!"


Wheatley May Miss a Week
He has had a rough going since joining the Giants, and now Tyrone Wheatley, the team's first-round draft pick, will miss at least one week with two cracked ribs he sustained in the Giants' 32-31 victory over the Jets on Saturday night.
It's uncertain on which play Wheatley was hurt, but after a 39-yard kickoff return that showed just how fast Wheatley is, he had a run of minus-3 yards followed by a 6-yard run and then a run for minus-1 yard.
Wheatley left the game after the third run.


INSIDE
Books' Link to Bombing
Books found among the belongings of the two suspects in the Oklahoma bombing suggest an effort to imitate crimes described in two books about extremist groups.
Page A12.
More Power for Schools
Union City, N.J., schools improved after the district gave more authority to local administrators, teachers, parents and students.
Page B1.
Turner's Cut-and-Paste Plan
Ted Turner is as eager as ever to buy CBS.
But as he tries to cobble together an offer, he still lacks the authority to act on his own.
Page D1. 'We Wuz Robbed'
Mike Tyson's fight lasted 89 seconds, but grumblings over the bout and the money it cost to see it have lasted much longer.
SportsMonday, C3.


Oklahoma Blast: A Tale in 2 Books?
Evidence in the case against Timothy J. McVeigh indicates that he modeled the plot to bomb the Federal Building here not only on his favorite book, "The Turner Diaries," but also on a far-right terrorist band of a decade ago, which itself consciously used the venomous novel about a bloody race war as a textbook.
And, the evidence further suggests, when Mr.
McVeigh sensed that his guerrilla dream was slipping away as his key confederate, Terry L. Nichols, apparently lost his ardor, he used another book about the earlier far-right band to reinspire faith in the plot.


A Record-Setting Victory for Trevino
Lee Trevino became the man with the most career victories on the Senior PGA Tour this afternoon by successfully defending his title in the Northville Long Island Classic in grand style -- anddespite discomfort in his right shoulder.
Trevino shot 66 today after 67 and 69 the first two days in winning the $800,000 tournament with a total of 14-under-par 202 for a four-shot victory over Bud Allin.
But Trevino, who surpassed Miller Barber by winning his 25th Senior title, said he would take the next three weeks off to do rehabilitation exercises and nurse his sore shoulder, the result of back surgery he had 10 months ago.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Upjohn and Pharmacia Plan $13 Billion Merger  In the latest giant merger of drug makers, Upjohn and Pharmacia of Sweden said they would combine in a $13 billion stock deal, creating the world's ninth-largest pharmaceuticals concern.
In contrast with other recent mergers in the industry, the deal, which would create a company with $6.8 billion in annual sales, is a friendly one.
But like the others, it will result in fewer jobs.  [ Page A1. ] Bank Industry's Consolidation Is Shifting Into a Higher Gear  The consolidation in the nation's banking industry is accelerating, with 5 mergers among the top 50 banks so far this year.
While industry executives say the deals are creating stronger institutions, the short-term effect will be more corporate name changes, branch closings and job losses.  [ A1. ] The Competitor as Cover Boy  John F. Kennedy Jr. and his new magazine, George, are getting much attention on the covers of other publications.
The spectacle of Mr.
Kennedy's joining the media horde he has spent his life avoiding has been too much to pass up.
Magazines.  [ D5. ] Advanced-TV Plan in Britain  Within two years, the British Government wants to adopt technology for high-definition television.
If it succeeds, Britain could become a test market for the next generation of television.  [ D4. ] The Foundation Behind the Book  Private foundations have long bankrolled books they view as important.
But many publishers say economics and a desire to see a field covered -- not politics -- are the motives behind most foundation support.  [ D5. ] Wood Siding Under Attack  Siding made by Louisiana-Pacific is doomed to failure in wet weather, leaving homes rotting away across North America, The Oregonian of Portland reported after an investigation.
Louisiana-Pacific defended its Inner-Seal wood siding and said that 99 percent of the houses with it do not have any problems.  [ A9. ] Protection for Patent Holders  In a surprising ruling, the nation's highest patent court has potentially strengthened the power of patent holders.
The court bolstered a principle known as the doctrine of equivalents, which is meant to protect inventors from poachers who appropriate the essence of a patent without trespassing its literal borders.  [ D2. ] Who's on Line, Anyhow?
As they consider the use of advertising on the Internet, companies are awaiting a Nielsen study on the demographics of on-line users.
Denise Caruso: Digital Commerce.  [ D3. ] Custom Textbooks on Demand  Digital printing is giving professors a way to customize the textbooks they use in their classes, and to make quick changes in them from semester to semester.  [ D3. ] A New I.B.M.-Microsoft Dispute  Simmering hostility between I.B.M. and its former partner, Microsoft, has burst into the open.
I.B.M. said that Microsoft had put pressure on trade-show organizers to remove an I.B.M. executive from the program.  [ D7. ] For a Magazine, The Start of Act 2  The reincarnated Mirabella magazine, which reaches newsstands next week, still sees itself as a fashion magazine that isn't really a fashion magazine.
But Hachette Filipacchi Magazines, the new owner, says the previous version faced problems that will not exist this time.  [ D5. ] Gay Services From Planet Out  Planet Out, a new electronic media company, wants to become the "gay global village" of cyberspace.
It will make its debut on the Microsoft Network later this week.  [ D3. ] Windows 95, the Tour  In a high-tech traveling show, an 18-wheeler truck will visit 75 cities, offering demonstrations of Microsoft's Windows 95.
Microsoft is not a sponsor.
Advertising.  [ D7. ]


Speedometers In the Subway: A Bumpy Life
For almost 90 years, New York's subway operators could only guess how fast they were going, and so, in fits and starts over two decades, transit officials searched for a speedometer that would do the job.
In 1992, they declared the problem solved, and speed gauges began appearing in the trains.
Unfortunately, hundreds of them do not work.


CHRONICLE
ELSA KLENSCH, who has had a weekly show about fashion on CNN since the day the station went on the air, June 1, 1980, estimates that she has seen 10,000 fashion shows, and probably interviewed 500 designers over the years.
Finally, she decided, it was time to distill some of what she has learned into a practical guide for women.
She has written a book called "Style" that has been published by the Berkley Publishing Group.
"Everywhere I go, I am deluged with questions," she said the other day.
"I wanted to do a book that would help women understand how to put themselves together. You really can improve your position in the world by having style. It sets you apart, makes you an individual."


Tyson Is Still A Very Big $25 Million Question
It was a scene out of "Casablanca."
Everyone was shocked -- shocked -- that something wrong had happened Saturday night to mar the theatrical return of Mike Tyson.


I.B.M.-Microsoft Feud Roils a Trade Show
The simmering hostility between I.B.M. and its onetime partner, the Microsoft Corporation, burst into the open last week, after I.B.M. disclosed that Microsoft had put pressure on the organizers of an industry trade show to remove one of I.B.M.'s top software executives from the program.
Leland R. Reiswig Jr., head of the International Business Machines Corporation's personal software products division and an outspoken critic of Microsoft's Windows software, was scheduled to deliver the closing keynote speech at the Windows Solutions trade show in San Francisco on September 1.


Taking In the Sites; Way Out West With the Best State Web Site
Californians befuddled by taxes or threatened by floods can turn to the World Wide Web to help sort out their predicaments.
Often, the information is just minutes old.
Several states offer extensive Web sites, but the breadth of California's coverage is especially impressive because many of its pages use information freshly gathered by instruments or observers, known to computer engineers as "live data."


At Least 300 Killed In Indian Rail Crash
At least 300 people were killed and 400 injured yesterday in India when a speeding passenger train hit another train that had stopped because it had hit a cow.
It was one of the country's worst rail disasters.


Merchant Feud Sheds Light On Fish Market's Workings
Fulton Fish Market merchants boast about a legendary tradition: that their word on a business agreement is an unbreakable pledge, better than a signed contract.
But a real estate arrangement among three merchants that went awry has provoked a rare public feud at the insular market and provided an unusual look at how deals are made to do business on property owned by New York City.
The dispute has erupted as the Giuliani administration is trying to end chaotic business practices, corruption and Mafia influence in the rough-and-tumble market in lower Manhattan.


British Government Wants Big Push for Advanced TV
The Government of Prime Minister John Major has announced it wants to push the country within two years into adopting the digital technology to carry high-definition television, with its crystal-clear pictures, wide screens and crisp sound.
If the effort succeeds, it would probably make Britain the first big nation to put mass-market digital technology to use, potentially making the country a test-bed for the next generation of television.


Steps in Time


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL 2-7 A C.I.A.
BALANCING ACT  A retired terrorist on the C.I.A.'s payroll, who was crucial to the agency's efforts to capture Carlos the Jackal, has given the agency cause for soul-searching because of his own violent career.
A1  BOSNIA'S POLITICAL FALLOUT  Recent events in Bosnia have reduced the size of operations needed both to support peacekeepers and to aid their withdrawal, but whatever happens is likely to have political impact in an election year.
A6  MIXED MESSAGE FROM SERBS  A letter of condolence from the Bosnian Serb leader about three American officials killed in an accident near the Bosnian capital suggested that they took an unnecessary risk by traveling that road.
A6  DOLE DISPUTING BOSNIA PLAN  Senator Bob Dole continued his criticism of the Clinton Administration's peace initiative for the Balkans, saying that it would be too conciliatory to the Serbs.
A6  A Bosnian boy was killed by a French border guard.
A6  CLOSING DOOR ON ISRAEL'S PAST  Israel decided that it would not investigate further a retired general's story that he killed unarmed Egyptian prisoners during the 1956 war, a revelation that has prompted much debate in the country.
A5  TOURISTS SHUN VIOLENT KASHMIR  Separatist violence in Kashmir, an area that had been legendary for its hospitality, put a damper on tourism there, and the recent kidnappings of foreign tourists, and killing of one, was a final blow.
A3  FATAL TRAIN CRASH IN INDIA About 300 people were dead in India, with the number expected to rise, when a speeding passenger train on a busy rail corridor hit another train that had been stopped because it had hit a cow.
A3  Republican Senators opposed a trip to China by Hillary Clinton.
A2  London Journal: For Britain's Hindus, a testament to their faith.
A4 NATIONAL A8-12 UPJOHN IN MERGER DEAL  In the latest merger of pharmaceutical giants, Upjohn and Pharmacia of Sweden said they would join forces in a $13 billion deal.
The new company would become the world's ninth-largest drug concern.
A1
FALLOUT FROM FEWER BANKS  The consolidation in the banking industry may leave the country with stronger institutions, but the short-term effect will be more corporate name changes, branch closings and job losses.
A1 SURPRISE IN IOWA STRAW POLL  Although it was a nonbinding competition, Senator Phil Gramm unexpectedly tied Senator Bob Dole in a straw poll sponsored by the Iowa Republican Party.
A1  AFFIRMATIVE ACTION, REVERSED  In the current nationwide debate, the fire department in Birmingham, Ala., is an example of how affirmative action policies can foster resentments and prejudices that are opposite of those they were intended to overcome.
A1  CITADEL'S OTHER DROPOUTS  Although at least 30 cadets had dropped out of The Citadel by Friday, the departure of only one, Shannon Faulkner, was considered remarkable.
A8  Survival as a freshman cadet at The Citadel is not easy.
A8  A DETECTIVE'S QUEST  A private investigator hired by O. J. Simpson went on a long journey to find tapes of Mark Fuhrman, a police detective whose comments have become hotly debated in the Simpson trial.
A8  SCANDAL AT LIVESTOCK SHOWS  At livestock shows across the country, an illegal growth-promoting drug was detected last fall and spring in more than a dozen steers and lambs.
And by no means is it the only method of cheating.
A9  BALTIMORE BRINGS DOWN PROJECT  Baltimore officials, frustrated by crime, drugs and a battle with disrepair, demolished the Lafayette Courts public housing project.
A10  CLINTON CELEBRATES 49TH  The President continued his vacation in Wyoming with plenty of golfing, hiking and eating before attending a "surprise" party that was the worst-kept secret in town.
A11  AT ZOO, ORANGUTANS OVERHEAD  A project the National Zoo in Washington calls its Orangutan Transit Line has a scientific purpose, but no one is denying the attraction to tourists of seeing six orangutans swinging overhead.
A11  BOOKS' SHADOW IN BOMBING  Evidence in the case against one of the suspects in the Oklahoma City bombing indicates that ideas for the plot may have come from two books about extremist groups.
A12  A popular wood siding for homes was called faulty.
A9 Metro Digest B1 Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C11-15  Making a film on a black World War II squadron.
C11  Music: Old-new battle lines are fading at Tanglewood.
C11  Carlos Vives.
C11  Dance: Ghettoriginal.
C12  Books: "The Trial of Elizabeth Cree," by Peter Ackroyd.
C13  Sports C1-9  Baseball: Mets sweep Dodgers.
C1  Yankees pounded by Angels.
C7  Indians' Mesa sets record.
C9  Boxing: Tyson a $25 million question.
C1  Columns: Araton on Tyson.
C3  Berkow on baseball.
C7  Football: Giants accuse Jets of dirty play.
C1  Obituaries B8  Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15  Editorials  The doctor left free to murder.
Dangerous times for Colombia.
Topics: Good sports.
Letters Bob Herbert: A broken conexion.
Florence King: Baseball immortality, fair and square.
Paul Krugman: The wealth gap is real and it's growing.
Lawrence K. Grossman: Cut the public in on the mega-mergers.
Chronicle A12 Bridge C13 Crossword C12


Johnny Adams, Horse Racing Trainer, 79
Johnny Adams, the Hall of Fame trainer who as a jockey won horse racing's Preakness Stakes, died on Saturday at his home in Arcadia, Calif., after a lengthy illness.
He was 79.
Mr.
Adams's riding career began in the early 1930's.
He rode 3,270 winners, which earned more than $9.7 million.
His biggest victory came aboard Hasty Road in the 1954 Preakness, the second leg of the Triple Crown.
He also won the Santa Anita Handicap twice and the Kentucky Oaks twice.


Despite Final Score, the Positives Outweigh the Negatives
For a team that lost, the Jets found much to cheer about from their preseason game against the Giants.
Their offense awakened, their defense kept good pressure on the quarterbacks and their bad moments usually resulted from mental errors or bad luck.
They could not wish away the erratic play of their special teams or the injury that knocked out center Dave Alexander for the season.


C.I.A. Re-examines Hiring Of Ex-Terrorist as Agent
As the Central Intelligence Agency cleans house after the cold war, trimming its roster of foreign agents and writing new rules for hiring them, a retired terrorist who was until recently on the agency's payroll has given it cause for some soul-searching.
The man gave crucial help to the agency's effort to track and trap the notorious Carlos the Jackal.
Carlos, the self-proclaimed mastermind of terrorist acts that killed 83 people in the 1970's and 1980's, was arrested last August in the Sudan.


Five Minutes of Terror After Man Hijacks Bus
A man commandeered a bus carrying several dozen passengers in the Bronx yesterday afternoon, but the hijacker was subdued by a passenger and arrested after the driver headed for a nearby police station house, the police said.
About 12 people suffered minor injuries when the bus came to a sudden stop as the hijacker struggled to gain control of the vehicle, officials said.
The incident occurred with about 40 passengers on board.


Sports of The Times; In Any Language, This Wasn't Finest Hour for Nomomania
BASEBALL fans streamed into Shea Stadium yesterday, including many debarking the Flushing 7 train with Japanese newspapers folded under their arms.
Others showed up carrying banners that would unfurl with Japanese lettering.
Public-address announcers were preparing to give the lineups in both English and Japanese.
All part of a new American ritual known as Nomomania, a distant relative of Fernandomania.
Tommy Lasorda sat in the visiting manager's office and talked about the eye of this international storm, one Hideo Nomo, right-handed pitcher, second in the league in earned run average, first in strikeouts and shutouts, heir to the exotic Dodger pitching tradition of Fernando Valenzuela, and Los Angeles's starting pitcher in a couple hours.


AT&amp;T's Entry Brings a Giant To the Internet
AT&amp;T's new Internet czar John Petrillo has a vision of the company's largest- volume of business calls, toll-free "800" numbers, making a seamless transition from voice to data.
If he is right, customers will soon be able to use their personal computers to reach AT&amp;T's network of tens of thousands of catalogue-shopping companies, airline reservation systems and services that are now available solely through 800 phone numbers.


New York, Through the Tour Bus Window
New York, Isaak Borshch informed his busload of Russian tourists, is such a fantastical city that no matter what you say about it, the truth is wider, bigger, more varied.
"So today," he said, "I'll just show you my New York, and it will become your New York. I love it. It fills me to the edges of my being. And if you come to love it, too, that will be the goal of our work."


In America; A Broken Conexion
I wonder how Murphy Brown would cover this story.
In December 1992 the Sprint Corporation bought a small Spanish-language telemarketing company in San Rafael, Calif., called La Conexion Familiar (the family connection).
The company's specialty was selling long-distance telephone service to Latino customers.


Bosnian Serb Chief Says U.S. Envoys Took 'Risky' Road
The leader of the Bosnian Serbs suggested today that three American diplomats killed in an accident on Saturday en route to Sarajevo took an "unnecessary risk" by traveling on a treacherous road controlled by the Bosnian Government.
A letter of condolences sent by Radovan Karadzic to President Clinton was clearly intended as an expression of good will and an attempt to re-establish contacts with an American Administration that has snubbed him for the past six months, but it was not without a typical Karadzic twist.


A Parade, and a Polka, for the Onion
Lining both sides of the Pulaski Highway, which cuts across the black-dirt onion fields of southern Orange County like a chalk mark on a board, dozens of Polish-American farming families waited eagerly.
In the distance, a line of red and white convertibles and parade floats approached, with a priest riding in a Mercedes roadster and a polka band and dancers holding forth on a flat-bed truck.


Domestic Violence
By focusing attention on the problem of demestic violence, the O.J.
Simpson case may have helped to spur legislation in the region and around the country.
State legislatures in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut have all passed domestic violence laws in the last year.


A study by A. C. Nielsen seeks to separate buyers from browsers on the Internet.
DESPITE the clear potential of the Internet's World Wide Web as a new publishing and entertainment medium, too many questions are still unanswered about how to make it a marketplace.
A year ago, companies putting up Web sites were saying that people would soon buy information and entertainment directly over the Internet.
Because that strategy was a bust -- people won't yet pay for much of anything over the Net -- they have shifted to a new business model.
Advertising, they now say, will underwrite the costs of putting their stuff on line.


Beaten Officer Withheld Identity, Witnesses Say
An off-duty police officer who was badly beaten Saturday night in a fight on the Upper East Side never identified himself as an officer, even when he drew his gun and pointed it at a man, two witnesses said yesterday.
The police said the two brothers who were arrested in the assaulting of the officer, Curtis Crystal, 27, flagged down a police car after the confrontation, told those officers that a man had pointed a gun at them, then took the police to the scene of the fight.


Slovak Government Triggers a Brain Drain
To the Editor:
"Slovakia Slips Backward" (editorial, Aug. 14) describes the rapidly deteriorating situation in that republic.
It is symptomatic that all members of Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar's Government are former Communists, except for one, who was in charge of atheistic education during the Communist regime.


Averting a Takeover of Schools; For Union City District, Efforts to Improve Seem to Work
There was a time a few years ago when Robert J. Fazio cringed before telling people he taught school here.
"No matter where we went around the state, there would be this kind of look," said Mr.
Fazio, now the principal of Christopher Columbus School.
"There was never anything said -- but the 'Oh, you're from UNION CITY' reaction was embarrassing."


Make Timber Jobs Last
To the Editor:
Keith D. Romig Jr. of the United Paperworkers International Union supports the deceptively named Southeast Alaska jobs and communities protection bill (letter, Aug. 15).
Unsustainable logging to provide the greatest number of timber jobs today -- without regard to long-term employment, the salmon industry, water quality, tourism and wildlife -- is self-defeating.


For Clinton and Family, a Vacation Of Golf, Hiking and Breathless Views
"I wish," the President of the United States said today, "we all had a moose."
Bill Clinton may not have a moose, but here in the late summer splendors of the Tetons, he is surrounded by plenty of them -- and not just the stuffed, stick-figure variety straddled by a 3-year-old tourist named Kelsey Scott, who prompted his whimsical musing on a lakeside hike today.


WAVE OF MERGERS IS TRANSFORMING AMERICAN BANKING
Long pillars of their communities, the nation's banks are merging with each other, moving their headquarters across the country and leaving in their wake disruption, layoffs and potentially higher costs for customers.
The consolidation is now at cruising speed -- with 5 mergers among the top 50 banks this year -- and the pace is expected to accelerate.
And while industry executives say the mergers are creating stronger institutions, big enough to offer innovative services, the practical effect in the short term will be to confront bank customers and employees with corporate name changes, branch closings and job losses.


Terror in Paradise Keeps Tourists From Kashmir
As the passengers from New Delhi cleared the Srinagar airport, the official registering foreigners pointed morosely to his list.
At the principal gateway to Kashmir, the Himalayan state that was once India's greatest tourist attraction after the Taj Mahal, only one man, a tall, well-dressed American, had listed himself as a tourist.
Even the American turned out to be a disapointment.
As he collected his bag, he was greeted by uniformed Indian Army officers.
Then he sped away to join anti-terrorist experts from the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Scotland Yard and the German federal security service who have joined Indian officials wrestling with the kidnapping of four foreigners that threatens to be the final straw for tourism in Kashmir.


Jerry Garcia Didn't Inspire Us to Use Drugs
To the Editor:
Re Christian Plunkett's beliefs ("If Jerry Garcia Carried Anti-Drug Message," letter, Aug. 15) that Jerry Garcia died solely as a result of drug abuse and that he is responsible for drug abuse among his young fans:


Marian Anderson Prize
Michelle DeYoung, a 27-year-old mezzo-soprano who grew up in Colorado and California, is the winner of the 1995 Marian Anderson Award, a $25,000 prize given annually to a singer who shows promise in recital, opera and oratorio repertory.
Candidates do not know that they are being considered.
This year's judges were the baritone William Warfield, the pianist John Wustman, the conductor and former music critic Will Crutchfield and Martin Feinstein, the former director of the Washington Opera.
Ms.
DeYoung has performed at the Metropolitan Opera since 1992, when she was a winner in the company's National Council Auditions.
She has also sung at Glimmerglass Opera and at the Wolf Trap Opera.


Kirov Ballet Cancels 6-Week American Tour
The Kirov Ballet has canceled an American tour that was scheduled to begin on Sept. 7 at Wolf Trap Farm Park in Vienna, Va., and end six weeks later in Costa Mesa, Calif.
Susan Weaving, president of Tour de Force, which books the company in North America, said the decision was made after difficulties with promoters caused the loss of engagements in Boston and Los Angeles.
She said talks were under way to reschedule the tour in two segments, on the West Coast as early as May 1996 and on the East Coast in 1997.


Police and Strikers Clash


For a Native, a Metropolis That's Not Too Foreign
With visions of opium dens in Chinatown and legends of Steve Brodie, who never really jumped off the Brooklyn Bridge, dancing in my head, I set out to see New York from a red double-decker tour bus.
I seemed to be the only native New Yorker on any of the six tours I took.
Like most locals, I brought the skepticism that anticipates hyperbolic litanies about sinful New York to titillate out-of-towners, domestic and foreign.


As Disco Faces Razing, Gay Alumni Share Memories
The ghosts who will witness the demolition of an old theater at Second Avenue and Sixth Street next month have been assembling there for a long time.
They began to gather 15 years ago, when the theater -- built as the Loew's Commodore, fabled as the Fillmore East -- reopened after a $4.2 million makeover as a discotheque called the Saint, where gay men could dance together under countless stars splashed across a sweeping planetarium dome.


Colombian Folk Rock, Tending All Its Roots
Star power works in mysterious ways.
Carlos Vives, who performed for screaming crowds at Radio City Music Hall over the weekend, didn't grow up singing vallenato music, the down-home accordion-driven music of northern Colombia.
Mr.
Vives was a soap-opera star who took on a new role a few years ago, as the 1940's vallenato singer Rafael Escalona in a biographical series for Colombian television.
The music, which might remind North American listeners of Tex-Mex and Cajun dance tunes, made him a convert.
Mr.
Vives hired a top vallenato accordionist, Egidio Cuadrado, and recorded an album of rock-tinged remakes of old vallenatos, "Clasicos de la Provincia" (Polygram Latino).
It sold more than 1.5 million copies, turning Mr.
Vives into a pop star and the vallenato into the makings of folk rock, Colombian style.


Reborn Mirabella Counts on Itself as Role Model
In 1989, Grace Mirabella, who had just been ousted as editor in chief of Vogue, started Mirabella, a new kind of fashion magazine that really was not a fashion magazine.
Under the direction of Ms.
Mirabella and its top editor, Amy Gross, the magazine became known as a smart, stylish magazine for intelligent, involved women.
Ms.
Gross left Mirabella in 1993 to become editorial director of one of the magazine's main rivals, Elle.
Last March, after six years in the red, Mirabella was sold by News America Publishing Inc. to Hachette Filipacchi Magazines, the owner of Elle -- which promptly suspended its publication.


Grants by Foundations Help Technology Books Make It to the Shelves
Richard Rhodes was desperate when he approached the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation in 1984 for help in finishing his book "The Making of the Atomic Bomb." He had used up his advance from Simon &amp; Schuster and a grant from the Ford Foundation, mortgaged his house and borrowed from his mother-in-law, but he was still not finished.
He sent a chapter of his manuscript and a plea for help to Sloan, a New York foundation with a strong focus on science and technology.
To his relief, the foundation put up $20,000.


Picking up Pace on Footbridge
Pedestrian access to Ellis Island moved one step forward last week when the North Jersey Transportation Planning Authority voted to spend $2 million to convert a temporary bridge that had been used in the immigration landmark's rehabilitation into a permanent crossing.


Janzen Vindicated By Par Putt For Victory
It had all come down to this -- six feet for par and the tournament victory.
For Lee Janzen, this would be the putt that would both validate and vindicate, the one that would cement his reputation as one of the most fearless closers in golf and the one that would erase any doubt about where he should be in mid-September.
This one was for the Sprint International, his third tournament victory of the season, but it was also for the Ryder Cup team, the one that Janzen didn't make, the one that he wasn't picked for.


New York, Through the Tour Bus Window: Germans; At the Shops, It's Bargain City
As the Gray Line bus slowed down in Chinatown, the passengers, all German and French speakers, were asked to step off.
The tour guide told them they would have a few minutes to walk around the crowded streets and browse through the shops.
The 20 or so passengers seemed somewhat taken aback.


N.F.L. TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Houston Oilers
The bump in the carpet may be a loophole.
This past Saturday night's exhibition game between the Houston Oilers and San Diego Chargers was canceled by National Football League officials because of a problem with the Astrodome's artificial surface.
And that could give the Oilers a loophole to accelerate their flight from Houston.


Still Missing in Rockies
On Aug. 3, Dr.
Travis M. Toly, a neurologist from Haddon Heights, told other participants at a medical conference he was attending in Aspen that he was going out for a hike.
He has not been seen since.


Rizzuto Stands by Decision
Phil Rizzuto said yesterday that there was no way he would return to the broadcast booth to call Yankees games this year or next, sounding more resolved than when he resigned Friday.
"I've been firm all along, and I guess it's my fault if I made anyone think there's a chance I'll come back," he said last night, after spending the day avoiding the constantly ringing telephone.
He added: "It's the hardest decision I've ever had to make, and the things being written about me, the faxes, the 'Save Our Scooter' stuff is nice, but I won't come back."


Will Organ Donation Change After Mantle?; Who Can Give Corneas
To the Editor:
One of the legacies Mickey Mantle wished to leave was increased awareness about donation for transplantation.
It is unfortunate then that misinformation about why Mr.
Mantle could not be a donor has been so widely disseminated.


No Contest: Seles Roars Down Comeback Trail
Felled in her prime by one of the most heinous incidents to mar any sport, Monica Seles completed the initial phase of the most formidable of 1995's summer sports comebacks by winning the du Maurier Ltd.
Open tennis tournament and dominating every opponent in the process.
The event marked the 21-year-old Seles's return to competition after being stabbed mid-match in Hamburg, Germany, by a fanatical supporter of Steffi Graf on April 30, 1993.
At that time, Seles owned 8 Grand Slam crowns among her 32 titles and seemed well on her way to becoming the greatest player to rule women's tennis.


Will Organ Donation Change After Mantle?
To the Editor:
I hope I will not seem unduly cynical when I question the widely touted organ transplant legacy of Mickey Mantle (Science Times, Aug. 15).
As a recipient of an anonymously donated kidney, I speak from a perspective rarely heard -- or sought -- by those who clamor to sign up whenever a celebrity needs an organ.
I may be criticized for saying so, but there are 40,000 Mickey Mantles waiting for organs who have no one to speak for them, no one waiting to eulogize their heroic struggles.


Frustrating Night for Yanks
Darryl Strawberry flicked Lee Smith's 3-2 fastball to deep left field and the Yankees thought they might witness a game-tying two-run homer in the ninth inning Saturday night.
Garret Anderson eliminated that idea with a leaping catch near the fence, and like everything else on a frustrating evening, the Yankees were stifled in a 5-3 loss to the Angels.
David Cone lost his first game as a Yankee while Manager Buck Showalter lost his cool when he trailed umpires up the dugout runway after the game because of a controversial play that favored California.


Kayaker, 66, Is Rescued in Jamaica Bay
A 66-year-old Queens man whose kayak capsized in Jamaica Bay was marooned overnight in a saltwater marsh until the United States Coast Guard rescued him yesterday morning.
Robert Roe, of Howard Beach, took his kayak out in the Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge about noon Saturday, something he did frequently, said Petty Officer Mathew Giltner of the Coast Guard office in Sandy Hook, N.J.
At about 11 P.M., Mr.
Roe's wife, Colleen, reported him missing, setting off a helicopter, boat and jet-ski search by the Coast Guard, the New York City Police Department and the National Park Police.


'An E-mail' by Any Other Name Might Sound Better
The people have spoken. And they are tone deaf.
Wait -- sorry.
The reporter of the election results is not supposed to betray his disappointment in the outcome.


Bronx Bus Hijacked
A man commandeered a bus in the Bronx filled with terrified passengers yesterday, but he was captured after the driver pulled up to the local police precinct stationhouse as riders shouted for help.
It was the first of two bus hijackings in the city; less than three hours after the Bronx incident, a gunman commandeered a bus in Brooklyn and ordered the operator to drive him a half-mile before fleeing.


Ban Nuclear Tests, in Virtual Reality Too
To the Editor:
President Clinton's welcome announcement that the United States will seek a permanent ban on all nuclear tests (news article, Aug. 12) and France's proposal to ban future tests (after seven more under the fragile coral atoll at Mururoa) are reasonable steps toward limiting the spread of nuclear weapons.


Tension Rises on the Water as the Surf Clam Population Declines
The lowly surf clam, burrowed in the sandy murk of the sea and the Sound, is not an inspiring poster creature for an environmental crusade.
Its image is dull, its personality flat and its meat too tough to serve raw on the half-shell.
About all that can be done to the surf clam is to catch it and chop it into chowder, a ritual carried out with such ruthless efficiency that the mollusk has quietly vanished without much public mourning from Long Island Sound.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:


Anheuser-Busch Expands Its Roster
Anheuser-Busch Inc., the brewing unit of the Anheuser-Busch Companies, has further expanded its agency roster by adding Goodby, Silverstein &amp; Partners in San Francisco, which has initially been assigned to develop creative ideas for the Bud Ice and Bud Ice Light beer brands.
The billings were not disclosed.
Bud Ice, originally named Ice Draft from Budweiser, and Bud Ice Light were previously handled by DDB Needham Chicago, which continues to handle brands like Budweiser, Bud Light and Bud Dry.
DDB Needham Chicago and Goodby, Silverstein are both owned by the Omnicom Group; August A. Busch 4th, vice president for brand management, and Bob Lachky, vice president for Budweiser brands, said on Friday that DDB Needham Chicago had recommended Goodby, Silverstein to Anheuser-Busch.


Dangerous Times for Colombia
A few weeks ago, President Ernesto Samper of Colombia seemed to be riding high.
One after another, the princes of the Cali cocaine cartel had been rounded up in a series of humiliating arrests.
Now Mr.
Samper stands accused of complicity with those very men.
He has declared a state of emergency.
His opponent in the very close election that brought him to power, Andres Pastrana, has suggested he take a leave of absence until all the charges are sorted out.
A poll taken last week indicates that 65 percent of Colombians think this is a good idea.
The picture is confusing.
Is Mr.
Samper a valiant fighter against drug corruption, or is he, in fact, owned by the drug lords?
In Colombia, it seems, both things are possible.


Fortunes of Bosnian War Ease U.S. Military Tasks
Despite Western setbacks and miscalculations, the United States suddenly finds its risks in Bosnia greatly reduced.
The dangers of the Balkans remain high, as the deaths on Saturday of three American diplomats on a rain-soaked mountain road near Sarajevo remind.
But Pentagon planners say that the extrication of 24,000 United Nations forces from Bosnia would require far fewer troops for only a portion of the time previously estimated.
Similarly, the size and risks of any peacekeeping operation could be smaller than had been thought.


A Windows 95 tour is about to hit the road, but Bill Gates isn't at the wheel. Is the CB radio working?
WITH Windows 95 about to be unleashed on a suspecting world, many marketers think the first customers will mostly be individuals, not businesses.
Companies of various stripes make up three-quarters of the potential market, but they may take months if not years to decide whether to buy the Microsoft upgrade.
How can Microsoft and its allies get them to pick up the pace?


A Private Investigator's Pursuit of a Police Detective Pays Off for Simpson
It was a phone call that turned the case on its head, but to a private investigator named Patrick McKenna, it began like hundreds of other calls he had gotten since O. J. Simpson hired him.
The voice at the other end was anonymous, cryptic and hurried.
"I have a client who knows this woman named Laura, who has tapes of Mark Fuhrman," the caller said.
"You should listen to them. They'd be very relevant to your case."


Topics of The Times; Good Sports
At the winter Olympics last year, the coach of the Swedish four-man bobsled team asked the Australian captain if he could spare five kilos -- about 11 pounds -- of ballast.
He could and did.
Sweden then beat Australia, and the accommodating Australian, Justin McDonald, won a Pierre de Coubertin Fair Play Trophy.
Another trophy went to Francesco Panetta of Italy, who stopped to help a fellow countryman who had fallen on a hurdle in the 3,000-meter steeplechase at the 1993 World Cup.
The man he helped went on to win.
Panetta, had he not stopped, might have taken a medal, but finished seventh.
The International Committee for Fair Play, based in Paris, has been saluting acts of fair play every year since 1964, largely unnoticed.
It recognizes the most outstanding with a trophy named for the father of the modern Olympics, and runners-up with citations.


Dole Again Criticizes Clinton's Bosnia Plan
Keeping up a drumbeat of criticism, Senator Bob Dole again today criticized President Clinton's new peace initiative for Bosnia, suggesting that it makes too many concessions to Serbia.
On the CBS News program "Face the Nation," Mr.
Dole said it was wrong for Mr.
Clinton to offer rewards to Serbia for recognizing Bosnia and Croatia, a move that he said "doesn't do any good."


Two Children Die in Fire
A fire that swept through an apartment building yesterday took the lives of a 3-year-old girl and her 1-year-old brother.
They were both sleeping when flames engulfed their apartment.
The fire trapped the girl, Samantha Quigley, and her brother, Joey, in their second-floor bedroom, officials said.
Their sister, 6-year-old Jen, managed to escape with four teen-agers by jumping from a second-story ledge, said Ed Johnson, an investigator for the Gloucester County Prosecutor's office.


Schossberg Comes From Behind To Capture the Iselin Handicap
Schossberg did not run at all last year.
The dark bay was out of action with a series of relatively minor ailments for 20 months at one point.
But the 5-year-old horse won today for the third time in four starts since returing to racing in May, catching the pacesetter Poor But Honest just before the sixteenth pole and drawing away for a commanding two-length victory in the 60th running of the Grade I $300,000 Philip H. Iselin Handicap at Monmouth Park.


Slovak Government Triggers a Brain Drain; Hungarian Scapegoats
To the Editor:
"Slovakia Slips Backward" (editorial, Aug. 14) did not mention that Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar's major scapegoat is the Hungarian minority.
Since Hungarians are 12 percent of the population and a "border" minority, they are presented in Mr.
Meciar's demonology as the eternal threat to Slovak statehood.


Two More Swans Are Killed
The question of who is killing off their prized swans is bedeviling the people who live near Upper Erskine Lake.
Last summer, two young swans were found dead with broken necks, and last Friday, the bodies of the birds' parents were found, the A.P. reported.


Agassi's Winning Formula: Talent and a Lot of Luck
To beat Andre Agassi the way he has been playing this summer, a player must bang in frequent aces, attack the net for winning volleys, score with ground-stroke winners, rally well and not make too many errors.
Richard Krajicek did all of that today in the final of the Volvo International tennis tournament -- and still lost, 3-6, 7-6 (7-2), 6-3, as Agassi won his 20th consecutive match and fourth straight tournament since losing in the semifinals at Wimbledon to Boris Becker.


In Lead Cases, Only Negligence Makes New York City Liable; Why He Did It
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 15 news article about Lawrence Gates, the youth accused of setting a homeless man on fire, puts the lie to the easy police dismissal of such behavior as Mr.
Gates's personal remedy for urban boredom.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Activated Jason Bere, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Rod Bolton, pitcher, to Nashville of the American Association.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Released Ron Darling, pitcher.
Recalled Doug Johns, pitcher, from Edmonton of the Pacific Coast League.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:


The Apple of Turner's Eye Is CBS, but Should It Be?
After a decade-long quest to buy a network, Ted Turner has wound up right where he started in 1985: tilting at a windmill called CBS.
That fact disappoints some longtime Turner watchers, who believe that the brash media mogul would do far better linking up with NBC.
For one thing, NBC has the deep financial resources of its corporate parent, the General Electric Company.
For another, NBC shares many of the same ambitions as Turner Broadcasting System to be a global leader in television news.


National Zoo Puts Six Orangutans to Work in a High-Wire Act
Justin Reed looked up at the series of towers and cables from his 10-year-old perspective and pronounced the enterprise "neat."
His 12-year-old brother, Bryan, on a family visit to the National Zoo from their home in Manassas, Va., agreed and, when told that orangutans would soon be swinging hand-over-hand along the cables above the heads of tourists, expressed the concern that will probably occur to others:





Training Regimen for Culling Ranks
Even on the best of days, survival as a freshman cadet during "hell week" at The Citadel is not easy.
Last year, 61 freshmen cadets, called "knobs" because of their shaved heads, gave up their dream of wearing The Citadel ring after only 10 days, which was one of the highest attrition rates ever.


In Lead Cases, Only Negligence Makes New York City Liable
To the Editor:
Re your Aug. 14 news article on the "liability explosion" New York City faces from a large number of claims for lead exposure: The city is liable only when a jury determines its negligence caused injuries.
The negligence of the city is the driving force of the litigation.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.


Versatile Hip-Hoppers With a Message of Belief
The Ghettoriginal hip-hop dancers have come a long way.
The program they presented on Saturday night at Performance Space 122 was sleek and even slick.
The energy of the city streets and clubs where hip-hop developed was never lost.
But the Ghettoriginals could teach other dance companies a great deal about staging, brevity and connecting with an audience.
The exuberant multiracial audience ranged in age from toddlers to the elderly.
With warmth and tact, the Ghettoriginals were guides into a sometimes alienating art whose tightly constructed, complex rhythms and internal rhymes seem designed to establish a form of order in a chaotic world.


In Assisted Suicide, Body Is Left Near Hospital
Dr.
Jack Kevorkian attended his 25th suicide early today, but in a new twist, the body was left in the back seat of a car in a doctors' parking lot outside the emergency room of one of Michigan's largest hospitals.
"A hospital is now involved," said Geoffrey Fieger, the lawyer for Dr.
Kevorkian, a retired pathologist who has led a five-year campaign to legalize assisted suicide.
"We are hoping that physicians at William Beaumont Hospital recognize that this is an issue that physicians need to become involved in."


25 Survive Plane Crash In Georgia
Twenty-five of the 29 people aboard a Delta commuter airplane survived a fiery crash landing in a west Georgia hayfield today after the plane apparently lost an engine in midflight.
The pilot, whom passengers and witnesses credited for the survival of so many, was one of two people killed immediately.
Two others died later at hospitals.
Survivors and law-enforcement officials said the plane, operated by Atlantic Southeast Airlines, a commuter line that is partly owned by and feeds into Delta Air Lines, developed trouble in one of its twin turboprop engines less than a half hour after taking off from Atlanta's Hartsfield International Airport on a 362-mile trip to Gulfport, Miss.


N.B.A. Dissidents Give Opinion
The 16 players who have filed an antitrust lawsuit against the National Basketball Association have told their colleagues that the owners "fooled the union leadership again" in the latest tentative labor agreement.
The players offered that view in a letter mailed to all players last Friday with an eight-page analysis done by the two lawyers who represent the dissident players.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, is selling $100 million of medium-term notes due in 1997 through Salomon Brothers.
The noncallable issue is priced at par to yield 6.07 percent.
*
Wellsford Residential Property Trust, New York, is selling $125 million of notes in two parts through Merrill Lynch: $55 million of notes due in 2000 priced at 99.381, to yield 7.40 percent, and $70 million of notes due in 2005 priced at 98.785 to yield 7.928 percent.
The ntoes are noncallable and are rated Baa3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc., BBB by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and BBB- by Duff &amp; Phelps.
Preferred  *
Pacific Gas and Electric Co., San Francisco, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell as much as $335 million of preferred securities.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co. will be the lead underwriter.
Common  *
Credit Acceptance Corp., Southfield, Mich., filed to sell five million shares.
William Blair &amp; Co. will be the lead underwriter.
*
Sterling Healthcare Group Inc., Coral Gables, Fla., filed to sell two million shares.
Smith Barney Inc., Oppenheimer &amp; Co. and Brean Murray, Foster Securities Inc. will be co-managing underwriters.


John Gilmore, 63, Saxophonist In the Avant-Garde of Jazz
John Gilmore, a tenor saxophonist who helped define the sound of the avant-garde during four decades with the Sun Ra Arkestra, died on Sunday at Germantown Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 63 and lived in Philadelphia.
The cause was emphysema, said Danny Thompson, a longtime baritone saxophonist with the band.


Revenge of the Studio System
The foxes are finally in the Hollywood chicken coop, or at least one might be excused for thinking so.
Sylvester Stallone signed a reported three-picture, $60 million contract at MCA/Universal shortly after his former agent, Ron Meyer, was picked to run the studio.
And one can only imagine what the installation of the world's most powerful agent, Michael Ovitz, as the chief executive at Disney might portend for his old clients.
After years of grumbling about Mr.
Ovitz and his Creative Artist Agency's alleged high-handedness in brokering with the studios for talent, the studio chieftains seem to have surrendered by inviting Mr.
Ovitz and Mr.
Meyer into the system.


Blowin' in the Wind


Neuron Talks to Chip, And Chip to Nerve Cell
ALTHOUGH prosthetic surgeons dream of replacing severed limbs with mechanical surrogates controlled directly by the living nervous system, the creation of "bionic" hybrids like Darth Vader of "Star Wars" and the Six Million-Dollar Man remains purely imaginary.
But a team of German biophysicists has now taken a small step toward mating man and machine by opening a two-way communication link between a silicon chip and a leech's nerve cell.
The achievement, by Dr.
Peter Fromherz and his research team at the Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry at Martinsried, near Munich, Germany, was described in a paper published yesterday in the journal Physical Review Letters.
The group reports that it has built a new type of junction between a microscopic spot on a silicon chip and a corresponding spot on a leech neuron.
A novel feature of the system is that no electric current passes from the chip to the neuron; the chip stimulates the neuron to "fire," or respond, by inducing an electric charge inside the leech cell.
Leech neurons were used for reasons of convenience, but the technique can presumably be adapted to human nerve cells.


Philip Semark, 49, Arts Administrator
Philip Semark, an arts administrator and a founder of Dance U.S.A., a service organization, died on Thursday at Sayville Hospital on Long Island.
He was 49 and lived in Occidental, Calif.
The cause was AIDS, said Richard LeBlond, a friend and colleague.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.69
5.68
4.69
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.43
5.42
4.62
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.43
5.45
4.98
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.52
6.54
7.31
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.87
6.90
7.55
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.76
7.79
8.41
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.29
6.31
6.42
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Under Technology-Stock Pressure, the Market Closes Weakly
The stock market opened yesterday with a bang, but closed with a whimper.
The first half-hour brought a buying surge, stemming from hope that the stronger dollar would stimulate foreign interest in American stocks.
The Dow Jones industrial average initially rose almost 40 points.


Bombardier Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


Intriguing Promises From Apple
WINDOWS 95, the system software upgrade that will finally be released this week by the Microsoft Corporation, has a number of keen and spiffy new features that will delight anyone who has never used an Apple Macintosh.
Once they install Windows 95 and spend hundreds of dollars replacing their existing applications with Windows-95-compliant versions, Microsoft's customers will be able to use long file names; organize files in nested folders; use a mouse to drag files from one window on screen to another; add new peripherals without needing an electrical engineering degree, and so on.


International Briefs; Asda to Buy Out Partner
The British retailer Asda Group P.L.C. agreed yesterday to buy out its joint venture partner British Aerospace P.L.C. in their Burwood House retail property company for $:88 million ($136 million).
Asda said it would also take over Burwood's debt of $:265 million ($409 million).
The deal gives Asda ownership control of 34 of its own stores and 4 shopping centers and helps British Aerospace end its ill-fated flirtation with property development, which it started six years ago. (Reuters)


International Briefs; German Outlook Dims
New figures on the German economy were announced yesterday that prompted economists to say the country's growth outlook was darkening again.
The Economics Ministry said industrial orders fell 3.5 percent in June from May after a 3 percent rise in May from April.
The Federal Statistics Office said western German producer prices fell one-tenth of a percent in July from June, the first fall since September.
Prices were up 1.9 percent from July 1994.
In Munich, the economic research institute Ifo said its monthly business confidence index fell to 97.5 in July from 99 in June, its lowest level in 15 months. (Reuters)


Low Bail to Be Sought In Killing
The authorities said they planned to ask at a hearing today that low bail be set for a 19-year-old Trenton woman who is accused of fatally stabbing her former boyfriend.


Bullying Taiwan
China has embarked on an escalating campaign of military maneuvers meant to intimidate Taiwan and undermine its President, Lee Teng-hui.
Washington, as much as it wants to calm troubled relations with Beijing, must firmly signal its opposition to this campaign.
Ties with China cannot be built on tolerance for provocative displays of military force and efforts to destabilize Taiwan.
Last week China began its second missile exercise this summer in the waters surrounding Taiwan.
More are planned in the weeks ahead, timed to coincide with the campaign to choose Taiwan's first democratically elected President next March.


Newark Gets $2.9 Million in Aid
City officials were disappointed last year when Federal officials did not choose Newark as an urban empowerment zone, which would have brought in $100 million for economic development.
But yesterday, the city received a consolation prize: $2.9 million in Federal aid and a designation as a Federal "enterprise community."


2 Youths Accused in Shooting Of Steel Dart Into Girl's Back
Two teen-agers were charged today with one of three dart attacks here in the last six weeks.
The youths, Michael Hatsis, 18, of Garden City, and Michael Simpson, 16, of Massapequa, were charged with shooting a three-and-one-eighth-inch steel dart into the back of a 15-year-old Massapequa girl as she rode her bicycle with friends along Unqua Road last Tuesday evening.


Can Parochial Schools Teach Public Schools?
To the Editor:
When Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani says that the Roman Catholic school system works in contrast to New York City's public school system, (news article, Aug. 15), he ignores a fundamental difference between the two systems.


Young Bull Rider Goes Up Against a Ton of Force
Jake Baker is 16 years old.
He stands 5 feet 6 inches tall and weighs 124 pounds.
Eighty times a year, he rides bulls, the most violent and dangerous event in rodeo and one of the most deadly sports.
He has done so since he was 12.
Baker, a Kissimmee, Fla., high school junior, recently competed here against 150 of North America's best young bull riders at the championship of the National High School Rodeo Association, which drew contestants from more than 30 states and 3 Canadian provinces.


2 Robberies on Casino Floors
The state police said yesterday that one man may have been responsible for two robberies that occurred on crowded casino floors two days apart.
In the latest incident, at the Trump Plaza Hotel and Casino on Sunday, a gunman grabbed $220 in cash from a woman who makes change and fled, Trooper Al Della Fave said.
On Friday, a woman who performs the same duties at the Showboat Casino Hotel was robbed of $250, the A.P. reported.


Doctors' Groups Sue Aetna Over Health Care Contracts
Groups of doctors at three Long Island hospitals filed a lawsuit in Federal court in Manhattan yesterday accusing the Aetna Life and Casualty Company of violating antitrust laws by putting pressure on the doctors to sign contracts that would make them part of Aetna's health care plan on Long Island.
The doctors were coerced into signing the contracts, the complaint said, because Aetna told the hospitals where they worked that the hospitals would be cut off from future business with Aetna if the doctors did not sign.
The three groups of doctors were anesthesiologists, whose business depends on being part of a hospital staff.


How's Sierra Doing? Showalter Hedges Opinion
So far.
Buck Showalter uttered the phrase over and over today while discussing Ruben Sierra's brief tenure with the Yankees, as in, so far, there hasn't been any trouble and, so far, he hasn't angered us with his behavior.
Showalter's responses to questions about Sierra, a problem player for the Athletics who returned to Oakland for the first time since being unloaded on the Yankees for Danny Tartabull, did not depict Sierra as the "village idiot," which Manager Tony La Russa of Oakland dubbed him earlier this season.
But Showalter did not paint Sierra as the village choir boy, either.
The Yankee manager is wondering precisely what kind of player the team has through the 1997 season.


Officer Charged in a Death Is Accused of an Assault
A Bronx police officer already awaiting trial in the death of a Florida man was arrested and charged yesterday with assaulting a 16-year-old boy whom he apprehended for recklessly riding a go-cart in 1993.
The case is the second in which the officer, Francis X. Livoti, 36, is accused of putting a choke hold on a suspect, deepening the legal troubles of a man who only a year ago was an ambitious union delegate rising in the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association.


Becker and Bollettieri Split
Guilty of conspicuous consumption when it comes to the hiring and firing of tennis coaches, BORIS BECKER confirmed yesterday that his 18-month association with NICK BOLLETTIERI has ended.
But unlike the mutually spiteful dissolution of Bollettieri's 10-year relationship with the top-ranked ANDRE AGASSI, this union has apparently ended amicably.


Chicago Jury Weighs Fate Of Lawmaker
The trial of Representative Mel Reynolds went to the jury today after prosecutors portrayed the Illinois Democrat as a man who used his position of esteem to lure a vulnerable 16-year-old girl into a sexual relationship.
Defense lawyers, in their closing arguments, argued that Mr.
Reynolds was the victim of an overzealous State's Attorney's office, charging that prosecutors were "not seeking justice, but seeking a trophy" in the high-profile case.


Nike Agency Adds Leap to Its Roster
Nike Inc. has expanded its agency roster by naming the Leap Partnership in Chicago to handle creative assignments for its Niketown chain of retail stores, previously handled by Wieden &amp; Kennedy in Portland, Ore.
The billings were not disclosed.
Keith G. Peters, a spokesman for Nike in Beaverton, Ore., confirmed reports of the assignment this week in Advertising Age and Adweek.
Nike was seeking to separate Niketown from the overall corporate and product account, he said, adding that Wieden &amp; Kennedy remains the Nike agency of record.
There are four Niketown stores, with plans to open at least five more in cities, including New York.


For Now, Judge Ito Defers Defense Request on Tapes
Judge Lance A. Ito today rejected the inventory of racial epithets, expletives and purported admissions of misconduct that O. J. Simpson's lawyers culled from a screenwriter's taped interviews with Detective Mark Fuhrman, saying the defense motion was so filled with mistakes as to be incoherent.
In a brief and scathing decision, Judge Ito listed 10 different instances in which defense lawyers offered erroneous page citations for particular passages on the tapes.
He said that the motion was unworthy of a legal team awash in wealth and manpower, said it was pointless for him to have finished reading it and sent it back for major repairs.


In a Southern Hemisphere Region, a Severe Winter


People's Bank To North Castle
People's Bank in Bridgeport, Conn., a unit of People's Mutual Holding, has named North Castle Partners in Stamford, Conn., to handle its account, which had been at the TBWA Advertising unit of the Omnicom Group in New York for the last seven years.
The billings were estimated at more than $6 million.


PHH Corp.(PHH,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 31


Man Is Charged In Arson Fire In Brooklyn
Had it not been for the fact that almost everyone was outside enjoying the weather, the fire would have been deadly.
With a steady breeze and low humidity, Sunday night was one of the most spectacular of the summer, and nearly everyone on Pine Street in the East New York section of Brooklyn was outdoors, even though it was close to midnight.
Neighbors were talking on the sidewalk or sitting on doorsteps enjoying the night when what fire officials said was a gasoline bomb exploded on the second floor of 77 Pine Street.


Unitog Co.(UTOG,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 30


Heavy Volcanic Eras Were Caused By Plumes From the Earth's Core
GEOLOGISTS on the trail of a rare isotope of helium have stumbled on a remarkable finding about the outpourings of lava that every few millions of years or so inundate vast regions of the planet with a sea of fiery rock.
These upheavals, among the most violent natural phenomena on earth, are important landmarks in geological history because they are associated with the most severe environmental crises, when life was very nearly extinguished from the planet for thousands of years.
Their rocky aftermath, known as flood basalts, can exceed by many thousandfold the volume from an ordinary volcanic eruption, like that at Mount St.
Helens in 1980.


Turner Board Won't Make Bid For King World
Turner Broadcasting System said yesterday that its board had decided against buying King World Productions.
Turner had been weighing an offer of about $47 a share, or $1.7 billion, for King World, which distributes television shows like "Oprah Winfrey" and "Jeopardy." A deal for King World might have furthered Turner's goal of acquiring CBS Inc. because Turner could have used the cash-rich King World in financing an offer for CBS.


Yankel Rosenbaum Remembered


Accounts
*
Cellular One of Rhode Island and Bristol County, Warwick, R.I., a unit of Southern New England Telecommunications, to Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, Boston, as the first agency to handle its account.
The billings were estimated at $6 million to $8 million.


From the 'Old School' of Hip-Hop
Hip-hop has been around long enough to have its own "old school," now the name of the bare-bones style that emerged from South Bronx parties in the late 1970's.
Disk jockeys strung together funk records, rappers came up with rhymes and break-dancers translated the beat into gymnastic spins, all of them sublimating rivalry into displays of skill.
"I make ultimatums for the fun of it," KRS-One rapped on Friday night at "Old School Throwdown III" at the Paramount.
The show was part reunion, part oldies concert and part history lesson, with stage sets and taped narration promising to "recreate the legendary battles of hip-hop." In an authentic touch, the sound system occasionally gave out.
But battles barely materialized, and there was little time for freestyling, the verbal improvisation by which rappers used to prove themselves.
Yet prime movers from the dawn of hip-hop were still vigorous, galvanized by a crowd that hadn't forgotten them.


BUSINESS DIGEST
ABC Apologizes for Saying Nicotine Was Manipulated ABC News apologized to Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds for asserting, on "Day One," that tobacco companies manipulated nicotine levels in cigarettes to addict smokers.
"That was a mistake," ABC said, settling a $10 billion libel suit that was to have gone to trial in October.
ABC will pay the two companies' legal expenses, which could run to $3 million, and the network agreed to apologize twice in prime time, first during the halftime of last night's broadcast of "Monday Night Football" and again on Thursday on "Day One." The legal fees and air time make this one of the costliest libel settlements ever.  [ Page A1. ] Analysts Speak, Intel Stock Falls  Intel shares plunged 7 percent after two analysts, expressing concern about profits, trimmed their earnings estimates.
The shares dropped $4.625, to $60.25, after hitting a lofty $76 just a month ago.  [ D8. ] A New Culprit in Peso's Collapse  Why did the Mexican peso collapse last winter?
At first, a drop in foreign investment was seen as the culprit, but a report by the International Monetary Fund points to Mexican investors who sent billions out of the country.
The Clinton Administration may face criticism for the billions it poured in, but the report agreed that a rescue was needed.  [ D5. ] Is Warner-Lambert Next?
Is Warner-Lambert the next drug maker ripe for merger, now that Upjohn and Pharmacia of Sweden have joined forces?
Perhaps, but investors should see a cautionary lesson in the uneven ride that both Upjohn and Pharmacia shares have taken.
Both stocks fell sharply at first, then rebounded after the companies met with analysts to explain the deal's merits.
Market Place.  [ D8. ] Dow Rises, Then Gives It Back  Stocks had a bumpy day, with the Dow industrials quickly rising nearly 40 points, then retreating as a weak outlook for Intel led technology stocks down.
The manufacturers said there would be "significant harm to the U.S. economy" in proposals to reduce such gases, which some fear cause a warming of the atmosphere.  [ D2. ] Arakis Shares Plunge on Doubts  Arakis Energy's shares plunged as investors questioned its ambitious but obscure plans to finance a huge oil and pipeline project in the Sudan with funds from a little-known Saudi prince.
The stock fell $4.50, to close at $13.50 yesterday.  [ D2. ] Surfing the Internetplex  Film promotion on the Internet?
Of course.
Nearly every studio has a "home page" on the World Wide Web, offering stills, cast biographies, soundtracks, entire trailers.
Star-struck viewers can even send E-mail to actors and directors (no response promised).


5,000 Plus 1


Bonds Prices Climb on Hopes The Fed Will Cut Rates Again
Bond prices rose in thin trading yesterday, reflecting optimism among a few buyers ahead of today's meeting of the Federal Reserve.
Some traders attributed the early gains largely to a Washington Post article on Saturday that said the Federal Reserve could act to lower interest rates at the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, its policy-making arm, because the inflation outlook is positive.
The article said such a move was unlikely but possible.


Mickey Sabbath, You're No Portnoy
SABBATH'S THEATER By Philip Roth 451 pages. Houghton Mifflin. $24.95.
At first glance, Mickey Sabbath, the blustering hero of Philip Roth's new novel, "Sabbath's Theater," seems like an older, more embittered version of Alexander Portnoy, the famously self-abusing narrator of Mr.
Roth's 1969 tour de force, "Portnoy's Complaint." Like Portnoy, Sabbath has made a concerted effort to be bad, to develop the "slimy, suicidal Dionysian side" of his nature.
Like Portnoy, he is afflicted with "endless" desires that often take the form of "acts of exhibitionism, voyeurism, fetishism, auto-eroticism and oral coitus." And like Portnoy, he often feels alone, imprisoned in his narcissism, "locked up in me." The two men enjoy the favors of inarticulate, compliant and sexually acrobatic girlfriends; they speak frequently of (or to) their mothers, and they even share brothers (or brother figures) named Morty.


Everett's 2 Homers Help Mets Top Giants
Bill Pulsipher has advice for those who may doubt that the Mets' recent resurgence is for real.
"Keep watching," the 21-year-old rookie said.


Ex-Senator in Plea Agreement on Ethics Charges
David F. Durenberger, a former Republican Senator from Minnesota who spent his last years in office fighting a host of ethics charges, has agreed to plead guilty to five counts involving cheating on his Senate expense account, Justice Department officials said today.
Mr.
Durenberger is scheduled to appear on Tuesday morning before a Federal judge here to plead guilty to the charges, all misdemeanors, in what his lawyers said was an effort to put an end to the matter.
He had been facing trial this fall on a pair of felony charges that he lied about his ownership of a condominium he used when in his home state on Senate business.


Corrections
The Parent &amp; Child column in The Home Section on Thursday, about recordings for children by established rock, pop, country and R &amp; B singers, referred to the mandolinist David Grisman incorrectly.
He and Jerry Garcia were collaborators, but Mr.
Grisman was never a member of the Grateful Dead.


Untold Story in Primates Lab Transfer
To the Editor:
You reported on the unexpected transfer of New York University's Laboratory for Experimental Medicine and Surgery in Primates, or Lemsip, which "has played an important role in the development of hepatitis vaccines, in tests of AIDS vaccines and in other areas" (news article, Aug. 10), to Dr.
Frederick Coulston, who "favors the use of chimpanzees, the closest living relative of humans and an endangered species in their home range in Africa in toxicity tests of drugs and industrial chemicals (news article, Aug. 7).


Jets Learn It Is Better to Receive Than Pass Up
After deciding that receivers Stevie Anderson and Orlando Parker -- who had 10 catches between them last season -- could not catch an I.R.T., the Jets released them yesterday.
Now the Jets are in the market for a veteran receiver.
How could a team go from Al Toon, Rob Moore, Terance Mathis and Chris Burkett three years ago to Ryan Yarborough, Alan Allen, Curtis Ceaser and Tyrone Davis today?


21 1/2 Years for Drug Smuggler
A man from Edison was sentenced yesterday to 21 1/2 years in prison for importing 77 pounds of heroin from Singapore, the largest heroin seizure ever in New Jersey, the United States Attorney's office said.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about Sean Ryan, one of two Mount Rainier park rangers who fell to their death while attempting to rescue an injured climber, incorrectly described his father, an oceanographer.
It was Sean Ryan, not his father, who participated in a marine geology program in Barbados.


A Lemon Law on Wheelchairs
A motorized wheelchair can cost up to $15,000, but until now, there has been little protection for the consumer who winds up with a lemon.
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman signed a bill yesterday requiring makers of motorized wheelchairs to provide a one-year warranty and to give customers a choice between a replacement chair or cash if the lemon cannot be fixed.
"This new law will help to ease the burden of additional cost, delay and gross disadvantage to those who rely on wheelchairs for mobility," The Associated Press quoted one of the sponsors, Assemblyman Anthony Impreveduto, Democrat of Secaucus, as saying.


International Briefs; Qantas Stock Ownership
Qantas Airways said yesterday that foreigners held 52 percent of the shares of the carrier, Australia's national airline, whose stock was recently offered to the public.
The percentage of stock held by foreigners exceeds the limit set by Australian laws.
Qantas said foreign investors had bought 31.1 million shares too many, surpassing a 49 percent ceiling on foreign ownership in Qantas set by the Government.
Qantas plans to notify offshore shareholders whose purchases ran above the Government's ceiling.
After being notified, those foreign investors in Qantas will have 90 days to sell their shares. (Reuters)


Brooke Group Ltd.(BGL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Chess
The members of the charmed circle are, of course, the Professional Chess Association's champion, Gary Kasparov of Russia, and his challenger, Viswanathan Anand of India, along with the International Chess Federation's champion, Anatoly Karpov of Russia, and his challenger, Gata Kamsky of Brooklyn.
The outsiders considered most likely to break in sometime or other are Vasily Ivanchuk of Ukraine and Vladimir Kramnik of Russia.
They are the late-round losers in the last cycle of qualifications for the world championships.
But they are also members of the select group of opponents whom Kasparov treats with the utmost care, the ones he is not embarrassed to make draws with, the ones he prepares his opening analysis for.
They are not an immediate danger to his supremacy, but, if he continues as titleholder, they will surely remain serious threats.


3 Teams of Adventurers Hope to Circle the Globe in Balloons
SOMETIME after Nov. 1, as many as three huge balloons may be in the air at the same time, each of their crews hoping to be the first in the two-century history of ballooning to circumnavigate the world nonstop.
The great balloon race will follow five unsuccessful attempts over a two-year period by the Earthwinds Hilton balloon led by Larry Newman, whose most recent try last New Year's Eve ended with a wrecked balloon and the loss of financial backing from his main sponsor, the hotel magnate Barron Hilton.


Julius Monk, Cabaret Impresario, Dies at 82
Julius Monk, the debonair impresario of satiric revues and the diviner of generations of talented performers, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 82.
In a series of New York supper clubs and cabarets -- the Ruban Bleu in the early 1940's, the Downstairs, the Upstairs at the Downstairs and, in the late 1960's, Plaza 9 at the Plaza Hotel -- Mr.
Monk was the host, or regisseur (meaning stage manager), a title he preferred.
In the heyday of cabaret comedy, he was the most celebrated maestro.


N.F.L. TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Cincinnati Bengals
Surgery is the best way to handle the knee injury that apparently will cost the top draft choice Ki-Jana Carter his rookie season with the Cincinnati Bengals, a surgeon told the team yesterday.
Dr.
James Andrews, an orthopedic surgeon, examined Carter in Birmingham, Ala.
A Bengals spokesman, Jack Brennan, said Andrews agreed with the opinion of the Bengals' team physician, Robert Heidt, that surgery should be done to repair the torn anterior cruciate ligament in Carter's left knee.


Charter Power Systems Inc.(CHP,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


Jurgen Schneider, 59, a Dancer, Instructor and Balletmaster
Jurgen Schneider, a teacher and balletmaster at American Ballet Theater, the Stuttgart Ballet and the Royal Ballet, drowned on Aug. 15 in Miami Beach, where he lived.
He was 59.
Mr.
Schneider trained at the government ballet school in East Berlin, where he was born, and at the State Institute for Theater Arts in Moscow, at the Bolshoi Ballet and the Vaganova Choreographic Institute in Leningrad, where he was a classmate of Rudolf Nureyev.
He performed with companies in East Germany, including the East Berlin Comic Opera, where he also served as balletmaster from 1968-71.


New York Times Names Vice President for Ad Sales
The New York Times announced yesterday that it had appointed Daniel H. Cohen vice president for advertising sales.
Mr.
Cohen, 43, will be responsible for advertising sales in a variety of business categories.
He is one of three advertising sales vice presidents who report to Janet L. Robinson, senior vice president for advertising.


A Former Governor Cancels Radio Show
L.
Douglas Wilder, a former Virginia Governor and onetime Presidential candidate who was part of a wave of unemployed politicians who started radio talk shows this year, today canceled his program, which had never made money or found a national audience.
Mr.
Wilder, who in 1989 became the first black to be elected governor of any state, began the show in January and will have his last broadcast on Aug. 31.
The show was heard for two hours each weekday morning on eight stations in Virginia, and one each in Washington and Baltimore.


Russian Assault Recaptures Police Station in Chechnya
Using tanks, helicopters and mortar fire, Russian special forces today stormed a Chechen police station that had been seized by about 250 separatist rebels on Sunday.
The Russian authorities announced that although a few rebels had escaped, troops of the Russian Interior Ministry had retaken the police building in Argun, eight miles east of the Chechen capital, Grozny.
But there were reports tonight that fighting continued in other parts of the town.


M. W. Chenault, 44, Gunman Who Killed Mother of Dr. King
Marcus Wayne Chenault Jr., who killed the mother of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. at a Sunday service in Ebenezer Baptist Church in Atlanta in 1974, died on Saturday at a hospital in the Atlanta suburb of Riverdale.
He was 44.
Mr.
Chenault was serving a life sentence at the state prison in Jackson, Ga., when he suffered a stroke on Aug. 3.
He never regained consciousness, a hospital spokeswoman said.


Fourstardave May Be Retired
In the 100th and maybe final race of his long career, Fourstardave failed today to extend his streak of winning at least once a year for eight years at Saratoga.
Instead, the 10-year-old gelding finished fifth in an allowance race for his second loss of the Saratoga season, with one week remaining.
His owner, Richard Bomze, said afterward that he would talk to Leo O'Brien, the trainer, about retiring the old warrior.
"He's still physically fit and competitive," Bomze said, "but he just doesn't have that punch he used to. I'm sure he could win at smaller tracks, or if we dropped him down in class and ran him in a claiming race. But we would never do that. I don't see any sense in running him to watch him finish third or fourth. It's very sad. The more I think about it, the sadder I get."


Uncovered Short Sales Post Drop of 1.9% on Big Board
While the stock market was treading water in July and early August, bearish sentiment sank, as measured by short interest in shares traded on the New York Stock Exchange.
Short interest -- basically, bets that stock prices will fall -- declined by 1.9 percent, to 1.94 billion shares from 1.98 billion, in the month ended Aug. 10.
During the same period, the stock market, as measured by the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index, was flat.


Jacksonville Journal; Panting for Football, and Standing Tall
Like a late bloomer in a class of overachievers, this city near the Georgia border has long been overshadowed in the Southeast by the likes of Miami, Orlando and Atlanta.
And, like guests on the "Oprah Winfrey Show," its residents have no qualms admitting an inferiority complex.
"The city has lacked identity and awareness," said Bill Lindley, head of the Convention and Visitors Bureau.
He added, "We never had the one big thing, like Orlando has."


Officer Charged in a Death Is Accused in Assault Case
A Bronx police officer already awaiting trial in the death of a Florida man was arrested and charged yesterday with assaulting a 16-year-old boy whom he apprehended for recklessly riding a go-cart in 1993.
The case is the second in which the officer, Francis X. Livoti, 36, is accused of putting a choke hold on a suspect, deepening the legal troubles of a man who only a year ago was an ambitious union delegate rising in the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association.


Ottoman Art: Seeking A Robust Image
For all the size, wealth and longevity of the Ottoman empire, its place in history has been strangely insecure, undermined not only by its 19th-century image as "the sick man of Europe," but also by modern Turkey's determination this century to be recognized as part of Western civilization.
At the apex of its power in the 15th, 16th and 17th centuries, the Ottoman dynasty was feared for its military might and Islamic fervor, and admired for its administrative skills and the sheer virtuosity of its artists and craftsmen.
Yet today many Turks feel ambivalent about this "glorious past."


Giants' Williams Finally Returns
Regarding the importance one player can have to a baseball team, just ask Dusty Baker about Matt Williams.
The San Francisco Giants were in first place by a half a game when Williams fouled a ball off his right foot and broke a bone on June 3.
Last night, with the Giants opening a three-game set against the Mets at Shea Stadium, Dusty Baker's club was in last place in the National League West, seven and a half games from the top.


Moody's Lowers Many Japanese Bank Ratings
In a blow to the nation's already battered financial institutions, Moody's Investors Service announced a new set of weaker ratings for Japanese banks today that in part reflected the heavy burden of bad debt many are carrying.
Moody's assessment -- made using a new rating scale -- came three weeks after Japanese regulators rescued the nation's fifth-largest credit union to stop a run by depositors.


Polyphony Of Weather And Music
Depending on when, exactly, they arrived in New York, Jaime Laredo and the Deutsche Kammerphilharmonie Bremen may have been less grateful for the blustery breeze that blew through Damrosch Park on Friday evening than the audience was.
It played havoc with the amplification system, producing crackles and rumbles that obviously distracted the players, who were hard put anyway to keep their music in place.
As is so often the case at outdoor concerts, such circumstances made it difficult to judge the performances in any detail.
The orchestra, which was founded in 1980 as an outgrowth of the German Youth Orchestra, is making the rounds of American summer festivals and was presented here by Lincoln Center Out of Doors.
It seemed an excellent ensemble in the string version of Grieg's "Holberg" Suite, though the amplification gave the crisp attacks in the first movement a percussive edge and the double basses an outsize thump.


U.S. Vows to Carry On Work Of 3 Envoys Killed in Bosnia
Invoking the myth of Sisyphus, top United States officials paid tribute today to three colleagues who died struggling to bring peace to Bosnia.
They said they would continue their struggle and, unlike Sisyphus, succeed.


First to College, Then the Mill
After five years of study, William Weigel earned a master's degree in mechanical engineering from the University of Louisville in May.
A few weeks later, he started work at a steel mill, running a machine that casts liquid steel into solid slabs.
Despite steel's image as an industry where strong backs are more useful than strong brains, Mr.
Weigel has plenty of high-technology company.
About 40 percent of the roughly 200 factory workers at the Gallatin Steel Company here have college degrees, mostly in mechanical engineering or metallurgy, and an additional 20 percent have two-year degrees.


By Design; Long, Leggy and Slim
The trendy young neo-mods may be wearing hip-hugging flared pants, but the rest of the fashion world favors stovepipe-leg pants that fit flat across the stomach.
Some are cropped above the ankle like capri pants, and others reach the tops of shoes, but they all make the wearer look slim and long-legged.
By far the most popular style shown for fall and resort, the pants are already in stores.
At Neiman Marcus, early best sellers include Calvin Klein's black satin style ($580), Isaac Mizrahi's charcoal stretch pants ($335) and a black sateen version by Company Ellen Tracy ($198).


Lawyers Told To Offer Way To Shield Jury In Bomb Case
The judge in the Oklahoma City bombing case today ordered lawyers for the prosecution and the defense to propose ways to shield the trial jury from outside interference and avoid sequestration.
"Use your imagination," urged Judge Wayne E. Alley of Federal District Court, whose name was drawn as the trial judge at the time Terry L. Nichols and Timothy J. McVeigh were indicted in the April 19 blast that killed at least 167 people in the Federal Building here.


A New and Deadly Fad Comes Riding Into Town
Teen-age joy riders call it "car-surfing." A couple sit on the hood of a car and lean back against the windshield as a friend races the car down the road.
It is a fad that the police in Suffolk County were not aware of until it claimed the life of 18-year-old Jessica Quire on Sunday morning.


Orchard Supply Hardware Stores Corp.(OSCH,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 30


Hevesi Says H.R.A. Barred Spot Audit of Foster Homes
City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi charged yesterday that the city's Human Resources Administration had improperly barred his staff from conducting unannounced investigations at six of the agency's group homes for foster children.
Mr.
Hevesi said his auditors arrived at the group homes around 8:45 yesterday morning to examine food-storage procedures, following a 1989 audit that found rotting food and health violations at several of the homes.
Officials at four of the homes refused to admit the auditors, he said, while at two of the homes auditors were allowed in and then ejected.
The agency's auditors were allowed to conduct their investigation at three other homes yesterday.


Kraft Sets Review For Grape-Nuts Job
The Kraft Foods unit of the Philip Morris Companies said yesterday that it had placed in review its Post Grape-Nuts cereal account, which has been handled by Grey Advertising in New York since 1980.
The billings were estimated at $25 million to $27 million.


Aamco Leaves Ally &amp; Gargano
Ally &amp; Gargano of New York has lost a client, Aamco Transmissions Inc. of Bala-Cynwyd, Pa.
The agency's assignment for the automotive repair chain, on a project basis, had billings estimated at more than $15 million.


Woods Sets Out to Defend Title
TIGER WOODS of Cypress, Calif., the youngest golfer to win the United States Amateur championship, will try to become the first champion in 12 years to successfully defend his title when the centennial edition of the tournament begins today at Newport Country Club on the same course that played host to the first amateur championship in 1895.


Avignon Journal; In France's Fabled South, a Plague of Panhandlers
George Ducroix had made a modest year-round living holding up his begging cup near the Palace of the Popes.
But he was feeling haunted by the "invaders," as he calls them.
He showed a bruised knee where two "invaders" had kicked him and then stolen his savings, nearly $30.
"This time of the year," the 58-year-old beggar said one recent evening, "life on the street becomes unbearable."


34 Hurt as Queens Churchgoers and Police Clash
A melee between about 100 police officers and hundreds of parishioners broke out Sunday night at a Pentecostal church in South Jamaica, Queens, injuring 34 people and prompting the Mayor and the Police Commissioner to order an investigation into how the police handled the clash.
By the time the standoff ended, about 4:30 A.M. yesterday, 7 people had been arrested on charges including rioting and obstructing justice, and 28 churchgoers and 6 police officers had been hurt, some by pepper spray and others after being struck by objects, possibly police batons.


Phillies Extend Fregosi's Contract
JIM FREGOSI will return as the manager of the Philadelphia Phillies next season, the team announced yesterday.
Fregosi's future was the subject of intense speculation ever since the Phillies plummeted from a 37-18 record and a five-game lead in the National League East on June 25 to their present record of 54-53, 12 1/2 games behind the first-place Atlanta Braves.
Radio talk shows in the city were calling for Fregosi's dismissal, and the team's managing general partner, BILL GILES, said the talk helped speed up the process of extending Fregosi's contract.


METRO DIGEST
CLASH HURTS OFFICERS AND CHURCHGOERS A melee between about a hundred police officers and hundreds of parishioners broke out after a revival meeting at a Pentecostal church in South Jamaica, Queens.
By the time the standoff was over, 28 churchgoers and 6 officers had been hurt.  [ Page A1. ] KOREAN IMMIGRANTS RETURN HOME Over the last two decades, the entrepreneurial energy of Korean immigrants transformed neighborhoods in New York and other cities.
Now, with Korea's economy burgeoning, thousands are returning to their homeland.  [ A1. ] NEW YORK CITY  MORE CHARGES FOR AN OFFICER A Bronx police officer already awaiting trial in the death of a Florida man was arrested and charged with assaulting a 16-year-old youth whom he apprehended for recklessly riding a go-cart in 1993.  [ B3. ] MAN CHARGED IN ARSON FIRE IN BROOKLYN A fire raced through five wood-frame houses in East New York, Brooklyn.


O. J. Initial Is Embroiled in Case
An appeals court yesterday upheld the conviction of a Dunellen man who spent five days in jail last year after a judge said he had threatened his wife by writing the initials "O. J." on two child-support checks.


U.S. Industries Oppose Emission Proposals
American manufacturers are urging the Clinton Administration not to make any early new commitment to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other "greenhouse gases" as a new round of international talks begins in Geneva.
The talks, which opened yesterday and are expected to last two weeks, are the first round in a negotiation that is to last two years and is expected to produce new worldwide emission-control targets.
Many fear greenhouse gases are warming the atmosphere to unhealthy levels.


Riesenberg Is Latest Giant To Fall
The Giants received crushing news yesterday when it was learned that offensive tackle Doug Riesenberg had a damaged posterior cruciate knee ligament.
He will likely miss the season opener against the Dallas Cowboys and could be sidelined a month.
Riesenberg, according to teammates and others close to the situation, was injured on the first play of the game against the Jets last Saturday night.
One of the toughest linemen on the Giants, Riesenberg played on the injured knee for the entire game.


Trans World Entertainment Corp.(TWMC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Review/Fashion; The New Shapes of the Shift
For years, designers and stores kept trying to bring back the dress.
It finally happened in the last year when trimmings and sleeves were discarded and the simple shift of the 1960's was reborn.
It was a style that women of any age could wear.
Even young women decided the shift (and its more fitted sister, the sheath) could be a hip alternative to pants.
Some version of a shift was seen in just about every one of the recent resort collections, from designers as disparate as Bill Blass and Marc Jacobs.
It was often shown on its own but sometimes with a dyed-to-match sweater or with a jacket or coat in the same fabric.


Isolation Ends For Prisoner Who Refused Testing for TB
A Federal judge has ruled that a murderer kept in solitary confinement for three and a half years because he refused to take a tuberculosis test must be put back into a regular cell at the Attica Correctional Facility.
Since December 1991, the murderer, Paul Jolly, who was convicted of shooting a Brooklyn man to death in front of his five children in 1989, has been waging a quiet struggle of wills with the state prison system.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-7  BOMB KILLS 4 IN JERUSALEM  A suicide bomber struck a Jerusalem bus, killing four people and wounding about 100 others.
A militant Palestinian group claimed responsibility.
The bombing set off protests against talks for Palestinians for self-rule.
A1  An American teacher died in the Jerusalem bombing.
A6  TRIBUTE AFTER BOSNIA DEATHS  Americans paid tribute to the three United States officials killed in an accident while on a peace mission in Bosnian, and their colleagues pledged to complete their mission successfully.
A1  BOSNIA'S FORGOTTEN REFUGEES  A group of 25,000 Bosnian Muslims, followers of a dissident allied with the Serbs, were forced into Croatia as a Serb siege was broken.
Now they are refugees, reflecting the Balkan war's complexities.
A7  DIVORCE SURGES IN CHINA  China's society is undergoing a profound change, with a surge in divorce reflecting rapid economic growth that is causing new hopes and fears and with less Government interference in personal lives.
A1  MORE CHECHNYA FIGHTING  Russian troops retook a police station in Chechnya that had been seized by Chechen separatist rebels, which appeared to be a severe setback in the fragile peace process for the region.
A3  RWANDA REFUGEES FORCED OUT  Zaire forced several thousand Rwandan refugees out of refugee camps and back across the border, causing thousands of other refugees to flee the camps because they fear reprisals if they return home.
A2  India searched for the signalman who fled after a rail disaster.
A5  Avignon Journal: Begging nomads get their hands slapped.
A4  National A8-13  ABC SETTLES TOBACCO SUITS  ABC News apologized for asserting in a news program that two large tobacco companies add extra nicotine to their cigarettes.
A1
AIR CRASH IN GEORGIA  A commuter plane flying from Georgia to Mississippi crashed in a field and broke apart, killing 3 people and injuring 26, some of whom fled the wreckage with their clothes on fire.
A8  DEFEAT FOR FUHRMAN TAPE  The judge in the O. J. Simpson trial rejected the taped interviews with Detective Mark Fuhrman, saying the defense motion was filled with mistakes.
A8  SPY STORE CHAIN INDICTED  A chain of spy shops and three of its executives were indicted on charges of smuggling illegal bugging and wiretapping devices into the country and selling them.
A10  EFFORT TO SHIELD BOMBING JURORS  The judge in the Oklahoma City bombing case ordered lawyers to propose ways to shield the trial jury from outside interference.
A12  DURENBERGER TO PLEAD GUILTY  David Durenberger, a former Republican Senator from Minnesota, has agreed to plead guilty to five counts involving cheating on his Senate expense account.
A11  REYNOLDS CASE TO JURY  The case against Representative Mel Reynolds went to the jury after prosecutors portrayed him as a man who lured a 16-year-old girl into a sexual relationship.
A13  Jacksonville Journal: A sports team brings a city an identity.
A8  Metro Digest B1  FOR KOREANS, KOREA CALLS  Thousands of Koreans who poured into this country over the last two decades are returning to their homeland, while potential immigrants are losing interest in moving to the United States.
A1  MELEE AT PENTECOSTAL CHURCH  Six officers and 28 churchgoers were injured in a clash between roughly a hundred police officers in riot gear and several hundred parishioners after a Pentecostal revival meeting in Queens.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C13-19  Ottoman art in a Geneva show.
C13  Richard Ford explores real estate as a metaphor for fulfillment.
C13  Music: All about Bartok.
C13  Mostly Mozart finale.
C14  A polyphony of weather and music.
C16  On hip-hop.
C18  Books: "Sabbath's Theater," by Philip Roth.
C17  Television: "Prozac on Trial." C18  Fashion B6  Science C1-12  Volcanic plumes, deeper than thought, spread vast fields.
C1  How malaria changes itself to resist treatment.
C1  Sports B7-12  Obituaries D19-20  Dr.
Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar, Nobel laureate in physics  Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15  Editorials  Bullying Taiwan.
The chaff in Iowa's straw poll.
Sadness at The Citadel.
Return of the champions.
Letters  Neal Gabler: Revenge of the studio system.
Donald F. Kettl, Louis Winnick: Privatize city jails?
Here's the hitch.
Geraldine A. Ferraro: Women's rights, human rights.
Danielle Crittenden: Yes, motherhood lowers pay.
Chronicle B2  Chess C11  Crossword C14


In China, Rapid Social Changes Bring a Surge in the Divorce Rate
For centuries, ordinary Chinese have greeted each other on the street with a question that reflected the nation's primary concern: "Chi le ma?" or "Have you eaten?"
Now, according to a popular joke in Beijing, people who see a friend on the street voice a new concern with a new question: "Li le ma?" -- "Have you divorced?"


Long Road To The Slots; By Train and Ferry, Bettors Cross The Sound to Connecticut's Casino
Stu Glass woke up on a Wednesday in early August at the crack of dawn, spent five hours making the pilgrimage from his home on Long Island to the Foxwoods Casino here in the hills of eastern Connecticut, lost $20 on the slot machines and called it fun.
"It was an adventure," Mr.
Glass, a 55-year-old pharmacist from Lynbrook, said of the trip, which required a car, two trains, two buses and a ferry.
"I wanted to see that place."


A Nomad's Ode to Soffit and Siding
After a lifetime of itinerancy, living in 9 states and some 14 homes, the novelist Richard Ford knows the language of real estate by heart.
"I try to be someone upon whom nothing is lost," he said the other day in his present hometown, New Orleans, borrowing a phrase from Henry James.
"Richard watches everything," said his wife, Kristina.


A CUNY Exodus
The City University of New York, in the largest voluntary faculty exodus in 20 years, is losing 472 senior faculty members to early retirement, and officials said they would not be replaced by full-time professors, leaving many classes to part-time teachers.
Several longtime professors said the retirement program probably saved jobs by averting layoffs.
But they lamented the latest blow to a system already reeling.
Article, page B4.


Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar, 84, Is Dead; Noble Laureate Uncovered 'White Dwarfs'
Dr.
Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar, a Nobel laureate in physics whose discovery about the evolution of stars pointed toward the existence of "black holes," died yesterday at the University of Chicago Hospitals.
He was 84 and lived in Chicago.
The cause was a heart attack, said a spokesman for the University of Chicago.


Defendant Tells Terror Trial He Was Training for Bosnia
On the videotape, Tarig Elhassan is seen mixing fuel oil and fertilizer for what prosecutors say was a bomb.
On an audio recording, he is heard discussing how long it would take to place bombs in a tunnel under the Hudson River and escape.
The prosecutors say the tapes -- secretly recorded in a Queens garage -- are graphic and powerful evidence that Mr.
Elhassan, a Sudanese immigrant who lives in Manhattan, was a conspirator in a terrorist plot to wreak death and destruction in the New York area in 1993.


A Teacher Who Taught With Love
Joan Davenny, the American killed in yesterday's suicide bombing aboard a Jerusalem bus, had arrived in Israel a few weeks ago to study Jewish history and culture, which she taught at two schools in Woodbridge, Conn., friends and school officials said last night.
Ms.
Davenny, 47, had just begun a year-long sabbatical from the Ezra Academy Day School and the Makom Community Hebrew High School, where she taught sixth- to ninth-graders.


System Software Associates Inc.(SSAX,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


3 Large Marketers Consolidate Agencies
Three large marketers said yesterday that they had consolidated accounts at agencies on their rosters.
Philips Electronics N.V. consolidated the worldwide creative and media portions of its accounts, with billings estimated at $300 million, at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles and Euro RSCG.
Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG in New York will handle the Philips Electronics North America Corporation advertising, which had been divided among various agencies including Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis (Magnavox) and McKinney &amp; Silver in Raleigh, N.C. (Philips Lighting).
D.M.B.&amp; B. will continue to handle accounts like Norelco.


Sports of The Times; A Critique Of a Former Champion
EVANDER HOLYFIELD sat in his midtown hotel room yesterday morning feeling the effects of a whirlwind interview schedule.
Late Sunday evening he had taped a segment of "Good Morning, America." Yesterday he was up and out at 6:30 A.M. to do "Good Morning, New York." Last night, the former heavyweight champion was scheduled to be the guest of honor at a celebrity roast sponsored by the Congress of Racial Equality and its chairman, Roy Innis.
Innis, a boxing champion in the 1950's at City College, wanted to promote Holyfield as an athlete of virtue.
"We need someone to counter the negative sports images -- the Steve Howes, Pete Roses, the Darryl Strawberrys, the Mike Tysons," he said


Rangers Blast Off Behind Gonzalez
Rangers 12, Twins 5
Juan Gonzalez hit a grand slam and a run-scoring single during an 11-run first inning that included three home runs last night, powering Texas past visiting Minnesota, 12-5.
Rusty Greer hit a three-run homer and Benji Gil connected for a solo shot as the Rangers sent 15 batters to the plate in the opening inning against the rookie pitchers Scott Klingenbeck and Oscar Munoz.


Employee Is Charged With Theft
A financial analyst was arrested yesterday and charged with stealing $667,000 from his employer, Exxon Research and Engineering Company in Florham Park, the Morris County Prosecutor's office said.


Executive Changes
CHEP U.S.A., Park Ridge, N.J., a unit of Brambles Industries, named Bobby L. Moore president and chief executive.
He succeeds Michael McCarthy, who will move to London to become chief executive of Chep in Europe.
FIDELITY INVESTMENTS CO., Boston, a unit of FMR Corp., named Donald C. Holborn senior vice president and national sales planning manager of its institutional services company.
QUAKER CHEMICAL CORP., Conshohocken, Pa., named Ronald J. Naples president and chief executive.
TRISM INC., Fort Worth, appointed John J. Kilcullen president and chief operating officer.
WESTIN HOTEL CO., Seattle, named Fred Kleisner to the new posts of president and chief operating officer.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Waived Atlee Hammaker, pitcher, for the purpose of giving his unconditional release.
National League
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Exercised the option on the contract of Jim Fregosi, manager, for next season.
Announced the retirement of Michael Ryan, bullpen coach, effective at the end of the season.
Football  National Football League
ARIZONA CARDINALS -- Waived Simon Shanks, linebacker; Jerry Drake, defensive tackle; Kevin Knox, wide receiver; and Eric Floyd and Mike Gentry, offensive linemen.
Placed Gabriel Oladipo and Bryan Hooks, defensive tackles; and Cornelius Turner, wide receiver, on injured reserve.
ATLANTA FALCONS -- Signed Jim Ritcher, offensive lineman.
Placed Leonard Harris, wide receiver, on injured reserve.
Released Preston Jones, quarterback; George Brewer, defensive tackle; Mario Bailey and Corey Dixon, wide receivers; Ricky Ceasar and Stacy Evans, defensive ends; Mark Dixon and Nate Miller, guards; Eric Jonassen, tackle; Toby Mills, center; Blair Thomas and Tony Vinson, running backs; and Scott Tyner, kicker.
Waived Nate Bolton, wide receiver, and Mitch Donahue and Alonzo Etheridge, defensive ends.
BUFFALO BILLS -- Released Steve Kratz, kicker; Travis Colquitt, punter; Randall Evans and Eric Green, wide receivers; Le-Lo Lang, cornerback; Peter Tuffo, linebacker; Andre Hewitt, offensive lineman; and Chuckie Johnson and Eric Counts, nose tackles.
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Released Donny Brady, defensive back; Greg DeLong, tight end; Pulo Poumele, guard; Toby Cates and A.C.
Tellison, wide receivers; and Andre Royal and Vashone Adams, linebackers.
Traded Ronnie Dixon, defensive tackle, to the Philadelphia Eagles for a conditional 1996 draft pick.
Traded Ray Ethridge, kick returner, to the Carolina Panthers for an undisclosed draft pick.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Released Reggie Holt and Rickey Dixon, safeties; Jerry Crafts, tackle; Jay Barker, quarterback; James Roberson, linebacker; and Charlie Simmons, linebacker.
Placed Paul Hutchins and Jeff Miller, tackles; Brian Satterfield, fullback; Jerrol Williams, linebacker; Tommie Stowers, tight end; and Sammy Walker, cornerback, on injured reserve.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Waived Doug Pederson, quarterback, Mark Caesar, defensive tackle; Melvin Crawford, safety, Seth Dittman, tackle; Jason James, center; Burt Thornton, wide receiver; and Rodney Wilkerson, linebacker.
Placed Scott Miller, wide receiver, on the physically-unable-to-perform list.
MINNESOTA VIKINGS -- Released Jay Kirchoff, kicker; Jeff Buffaloe, punter; Paul Burmeister, quarterback; Moses Ware and Ken Grace, wide receivers; Sean Crocker, defensive back; Chris Roe and Michael Titley, tight ends; Joe Burch, center; Royce Nelson, tackle; Joe O'Brien, defensive tackle; Robert Jackson, running back; and Jimmy Cunningham, wide receiver.
NEW YORK JETS -- Waived Stevie Anderson, Orlando Parker and Tom Garlick, wide receivers; Pat Terrell, safety; Bryan Wagner, punter; Paul Burke and LeVar Ball, tight end; John Sacca, quarterback; Fred Lester and Erik Marsh, running backs; Todd Baczek and Colin Cronin, guards; Marc Lamb, center; Elton Rhoades and Vaughn Bryant, cornerbacks; John Knutson, linebacker; and Wilky Bazile, defensive tackle.
Reached injury settlements with Eric Gant, fullback, and Jerold Jeffcoat, defensive tackle.
Placed Dave Alexander, center, on injured reserve.
Placed Melvin Hayes, tackle, on the physically-unable-to-perform list.
OAKLAND RAIDERS -- Traded Greg Robinson, running back, to the Green Bay Packers for an undisclosed draft choice.
Released Cecil Gray, tackle; Jeff Graham, quarterback; Tom Fletcher, center; David Jones, tight end; Tom Robsock, guard; Jon Baker, defensive end; and Chris Crooms, safety.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Waived Jeff Beckley, punter; Eric Fontenot, defensive tackle; Marvin Goodwin, safety; James Jefferson, defensive back; Reginald Lee, linebacker; and Ross Schulte, kicker.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Signed Norm Johnson, kicker.
Waived Ed Robinson and Kiefer Phillips, linebackers; Vincent Dinkins, center; Anthony Ingrassia, offensive tackle; William Lofton, defensive tackle; Tim Patillo, safety; Ed Toner, fullback; Kenny McEntyre, cornerback; and Craig Thompson, tight end.
Placed Damon Mays, wide receiver, and Barron Miles, defensive back, on injured reserve; Siulagi Palelei, guard, on the reserve-non-football-injury list; and Tracy Smith, cornerback, on the reserve-left camp list.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Signed Toi Cook, cornerback.
Waived Forey Duckett and Michael Williams, cornerbacks.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Released Keif Bryant, defensive end; Del Speer, safety; Ernest Allen, defensive tackle; Kelvin Anderson, running back; Bryan Heath, center; James McKeehan, tight end; Joe Pickens, quarterback; Kris Pollack, guard; Chad Wilson, cornerback; and Manley Woods, wide receiver.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Waived Rob Baxley, tackle; Tony Bouie and Macey Stephens, safeties; Joel Crisman, guard; Juan Hammonds, defensive end; Anthony McDowell, fullback; Kerry Mock, Karm McGill and Tommy Thigpen, linebackers; Tiger McMillon, running back; Dedric Smith and Dan Willis, wide receivers; and Ryan Thomas, cornerback.


RESULTS PLUS
LITTLE LEAGUE  New Jersey Team Loses
Toms River, the team from New Jersey that won the Eastern Regional title, used a grand slam by Chris Cerullo to overcome a 9-6 deficit in its last at-bat yesterday as the Little League World Series opened in Williamsport, Pa.
But the team from Spring, Tex., the South Regional champion, didn't lose heart and came back with two runs, winning the game, 11-10, on a wild pitch by reliever Colin Gaynor, his only pitch of the game.


International Briefs; CS Holding's Profit Declines by 3%
CS Holding, a Swiss financial services company, said yesterday that its first-half profit had fallen 3 percent, a drop that was less than had been expected, as its CS First Boston unit posted a turnaround and Swiss Volksbank shed bad debt.
"The results don't appear as bad as some expected," said Abi Leach, a banking industry analyst at Merrill Lynch.


CHRONICLE
If there was any question that the Hamptons increasingly resembles Hollywood, a Saturday softball game, in which a group of artists and performers played against writers, may have clinched the notion.


Driving Home a Point Against a Popular Mayor
THE protesters showed up at Mayor Bret Schundler's house yesterday morning at 8:30 sharp, just as his driver pulled up to take him to City Hall.
After 30 days, both sides have established what to do.
Mr.
Schundler took his time.
He helped his driver remove a flag, flown for Sunday's Puerto Rican Day Parade, from the car's antenna, before casually climbing into the front passenger seat.


Corrections
A report in the Guide column in the Connecticut Weekly on Sunday about the unveiling of a set of commemorative dinosaur postage stamps at the Peabody Museum in New Haven misstated the date.
The event has been called off because the Postal Service postponed release of the stamps.


Return of the Champions
Two of the hardest hitters in sports were back in competition over the weekend after long absences, but what a difference there was in the return engagements.
Mike Tyson resumed his boxing career in a ludicrous bout that further disgraced his sport, while Monica Seles won a clean, commanding victory that signaled she is ready to regain her position as the best woman player in the world.
The history of boxing is crowded with brazen mismatches designed to enhance the records and bank accounts of champions and top contenders, but few have featured a more hapless sacrificial punching bag than Tyson's opponent, Peter McNeeley.
The former champion, recently freed from prison after serving three years on a rape conviction, dispatched McNeeley in 89 seconds, without breaking a sweat.
He walked away with $25 million, or a cool $280,898.88 per second.
McNeeley collected $540,000.


Can Parochial Schools Teach Public Schools?; Small Is Better
To the Editor:
Re "In Schools, Small Alone Doesn't Mean Better" (letters, Aug. 14): Every time we have good news about schools, the first critics are too often other school people!


A Surprise For Clinton On Golf Tee
When President Clinton arrived at the practice tee of the Jackson Hole Golf and Tennis Club this morning, he found a swinging surprise from his wife, Hillary: Johnny Miller, the professional golfer and sports commentator, whom the First Lady had summoned to round out a foursome.
"All I know is that for the first time in our married life, Hillary told me I had to play golf this morning," Mr.
Clinton said with a chuckle as he practiced putts.
Then he played 18 holes with Mr.
Miller; a deputy chief of staff, Erskine B. Bowles, and Vernon E. Jordan, the Washington lawyer and lobbyist who had flown here to keep the President company.


Can Parochial Schools Teach Public Schools?; El Salvador's Success
To the Editor:
While Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has brought to our attention the systemic problems of our schools (news article, Aug. 15), Sandra Feldman, president of the United Federation of Teachers, is proposing a solution that ought to be heard.


A Gambler of Passion and Mystery
Herve Filion pushed himself like no other harness driver around.
Even after 40 years in the sport and a place in the Hall of Fame, he continued to race as often as 50 times a week.
No one seemed to have a prayer of matching his record of victories -- 14,783 -- as long as the 55-year-old driver kept up that grueling pace.
Daniel P. Kramer had always been fascinated by drivers like Filion.
As a young man growing up in an Orthodox Jewish home in Queens, he would rush out the door and head for the race track as soon as the Sabbath ended.
He loved to bet, too, and made a bundle doing so.
"For me," he once said, "the track was and still is an intoxicating place."


International Briefs; Axa Confirms Talks Over Orcofi
The French insurer Axa S.A. confirmed yesterday that it was in talks to acquire Orcofi, a company headed by Henri Racamier, the former chairman of LVMH Moet Hennessy-Louis Vuitton S.A.; Orcofi comprises various businesses owned by the Vuitton family.
According to the weekly financial magazine Le Nouvel Economiste, Axa will acquire a shell company whose only assets will be 3 billion francs ($600 million) in cash, resulting from the sale of LVMH stock.


As You Light That Cigar Remember the Migrant Farm Workers
To the Editor:
Re your Aug. 13 news article on the comeback of Connecticut's cigar industry: The vigorous re-emergent market for cigars neglects some of the hidden costs of cigar-tobacco production -- farm labor.
Contrary to your article, the Connecticut River Valley tobacco farms are heavily dependent on a migrant labor force.


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page on Friday, about the naming of Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg by Himmel Nutrition Inc. to handle advertising for the Ovaltine line of milk additives, misstated the scope of the assignment.
Avrett, Free will handle the creative portion of the account; the media planning and buying portion will continue to be handled by Himmel.


Malaria's Genetic Game Of Cloak and Dagger
THE most frightening things in life are not the unknown but the familiar demons that refuse to leave.
Among the greatest forces shaping the course of human history, sometimes scooping entire populations off the map, is infectious disease; after a brief, charming fantasy that the age of infectious diseases was behind us, the entire medieval bestiary of scourges has returned with teeth bared and claws extended: tuberculosis, cholera, typhus, virulent pneumonia and that festering tropical fever with the singsong Latinate name, malaria.
Not long ago, there was heady talk of eradicating malaria through a one-two punch of DDT, to control the mosquitoes that transmit the disease, and of the drug chloroquine, to treat patients already infected with the malarial parasite.
Now mosquitoes throughout the tropics are immune to most insecticides, while chloroquine-resistant strains of the most lethal malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum, are sweeping across sub-Saharan Africa and parts of Asia and Latin America.
Each year, nearly half a billion people develop malaria, and one million to two million die of the disease, most of them young children.


State Questions Plan to Cut School Day
State education officials have serious concerns about a request by the New York City Board of Education to allow school districts to shorten the elementary school day, a linchpin of the districts' efforts to pare $72 million from their budgets, a spokesman for the state Department of Education said yesterday.
In a letter that was still being drafted last night, state education officials were planning to ask the central board for more information on why it should be exempt from state regulations on classroom time, said Christopher Carpenter, the spokesman for the state education department.


A Court Asks That a New Jury Reconsider a Death Penalty
A man who killed his father, then 21 years later killed his former wife and son, has been spared the death penalty, at least for now.
The State Supreme Court said today that the death sentence imposed on Robert J. Breton Sr. of Waterbury almost six years ago must be considered by a new jury because it was not clear that the first jury had unanimously rejected all the factors in favor of Mr.
Breton.


Scientists Are Puzzled Over the Deaths of Whales in the St. Lawrence
THE Gulf of St.
Lawrence, drainage basin for more than 500,000 square miles of industrial Canada and the United States, is also the world's longest, widest and deepest estuary, home to whales, dolphins and seabirds.
It is a place where economic and ecological interests meet, and scientists concerned with both have been studying such questions as why the population of beluga whales here is not increasing despite a ban on hunting them.
Perched on a hill above the water here, the National Institute for Scientific Oceanic Research operates as a kind of consulting company to support both ecological balance and economic growth.
Many of the 25 professors and 70 graduate students, all from the University of Quebec at Rimouski, are at work on projects related to belugas, hydrodynamic modeling, spillage from sunken oil barges and aquaculture.


Market Place; After the Upjohn deal, takeover talk turns to Warner-Lambert.
WITH every new drug company merger in the last few years has come speculation about which company will be the next target.
One by one, the rumored candidates have been picked off -- with the Warner-Lambert Company as the main exception.
Attention turned again to Warner-Lambert yesterday after the Upjohn Company, perennially seen as a takeover target, agreed to merge with Pharmacia A.B. of Sweden.
That deal came on the heels of the announcement last week by Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc. of a hostile takeover offer for Fisons P.L.C.


Mantle Must Share Vaunted Hero Status
For the large cosmopolitan city it is, New York is more provincial than Cincinnati or Kansas City.
If it doesn't happen here, it doesn't happen anywhere.
If an athlete plays in New York, he automatically is the best, the brightest, the most awesome.
If he plays elsewhere, he may actually be the best but not receive the appropriate recognition as the best.


The frontier in movie promotion is -- you guessed it -- the Internet. But will it help the box office?
MAKE no mistake about it: Hollywood has found a new star.
Disney, Paramount, Universal and just about every other major studio have jumped onto the Internet bandwagon by putting their own "home pages" on the World Wide Web.
Film executives are calling the Web the next frontier in film promotion.


Casting an Ear on Bela Bartok
When nearly 400 people, most of them just average concertgoers, fill a college auditorium on a Saturday morning in the summer to attend a discussion and demonstration of the "Evolution of Violin Technique in the 20th Century," something significant in terms of classical music programming is happening.
This event was just one of 14 presented over the last two weekends as part of the Bard Music Festival's examination of "Bela Bartok and His World." For the sixth consecutive year, this Rediscovery, as the festivals are called, was presided over by Leon Botstein, who is the president of Bard College.
There were chamber music and choral concerts, thought-provoking panels, pre-concert lectures and two full programs by the American Symphony Orchestra led by Mr.
Botstein, the orchestra's music director.
As a conductor, Mr.
Botstein continues to have serious shortcomings that cannot be ignored in any consideration of his work.
But no one can say that Bartok, a seminal figure of 20th-century music who died 50 years ago, was not well served by this engrossing festival.


Women's Rights, Human Rights
Voices are growing louder in Washington against American participation in the United Nations Conference on Women in Beijing next month.
Powerful Republicans say Hillary Rodham Clinton's participation would lend credibility to a repressive regime.
They say Washington should refuse to send a delegation at all, to punish China for its human rights record.
Yet the American delegation, led by Madeleine Albright, the chief American representative at the United Nations, should hold firm.
This conference, along with parallel meetings of grass-roots organizations, is expected to be the largest international meeting in history.
The issue it will address is not women's rights but human rights: they are the same thing.


Bosnian Splinter Group Is Exiled and Unwanted
In six years, Robert Karajic, 24, has served in four armies.
He was drafted into the Yugoslav Army.
When Yugoslavia splintered, he found himself effectively in an army of Serbs.
Mr.
Karajic wanted nothing to do with that, so he joined the fight for the independence of his homeland, Bosnia.


Hills Stores Co.(HDS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Heat's No. 1 Draft Pick Sounds About Right to Knicks
The Knicks are willing to release Pat Riley from the final year of his contract provided that the Miami Heat grants their one wish: Give us one of your two 1996 first-round draft picks, the Knicks say, and we will gladly give you the right to negotiate with the sport's most successful coach over the past two decades.
As both clubs continue their dialogue regarding the Knicks' tampering claim against the Heat in June, two officials for the Knicks have privately indicated that they are willing to settle the matter before Commissioner David Stern's ruling, expected either late this week or early next week.


COMPANY BRIEFS
HUBCO INC., Union City, N.J., a bank holding company, plans to acquire Growth Financial Corp., Basking Ridge, N.J., for $14.64 a share, in a stock swap valued at about $24.7 million.
PURE TECH INTERNATIONAL INC., Ridgefield, N.J., which makes plastic products, completed its acquisition of a resins plant from Occidental Chemical Corp., Dallas, a subsidiary of Occidental Petroleum Corp., for $28 million.
TOY BIZ INC., New York, a toy maker, said it planned to acquire some of the assets of Spectra Star Inc., Yuma, Ariz., a maker of kites, yo-yos, marbles and flying disks.
Terms were not disclosed.
TRITON ENERGY CORP., Dallas, an oil and gas exploration concern, said it received $16 million in cash from the sale of its petroleum assets in France to Coparex International S.A., a French oil and gas company.


CHRONICLE
Perhaps TONY DANZA thinks he is actually Sean Penn?
On Sunday, as the former star of the television shows "Who's the Boss?" and "Taxi" was trying to catch some rays on the beach in Malibu, Calif., with his two children, two men skulked over with a video camera.
In response, Mr.
Danza followed them in his black Cadillac, bumped their car until they stopped and then hopped out, yelled at them, snatched their camera and kicked in a window, said a spokesman for the Malibu County sheriff's office.


No Headline
"My husband was a good worker, a good son to his parents, a good father to his son, and a terrible husband. That's what our society teaches men to do." LAN DING, divorced Chinese tailor.  [ A6:5 ]


CHRONICLE
People often ask her, and she often says no, but DEBORAH HARRY plans to appear in a benefit concert on Sept. 3 in Provincetown, Mass.
The cause: an AIDS charity.
"It fit into my schedule; I thought it would be fun and it's P-town," Ms.
Harry said in a telephone interview yesterday.
"And of course, it's AIDS."


INSIDE
School Board Seat Filled
Jerry Cammarata, a conservative and a Giuliani supporter, was named Staten Island's representative to the Board of Education.
Page B1.
Chechnya Pact Threatened
Russian troops retook a police station in Chechnya from separatist rebels, a setback to fragile peace talks over the region.
Page A3.
Commuter Plane Crashes
A commuter plane flying from Atlanta crashed in a field in western Georgia.
Two people, including the pilot, died, but 27 survived.
Page A8.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Waived Atlee Hammaker, pitcher, for the purpose of giving his unconditional release.
National League
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Exercised the option on the contract of Jim Fregosi, manager, for next season.
Announced the retirement of Michael Ryan, bullpen coach, effective at the end of the season.
Football  National Football League
ARIZONA CARDINALS -- Waived Simon Shanks, linebacker; Jerry Drake, defensive tackle; Kevin Knox, wide receiver; and Eric Floyd and Mike Gentry, offensive linemen.
Placed Gabriel Oladipo and Bryan Hooks, defensive tackles; and Cornelius Turner, wide receiver, on injured reserve.
ATLANTA FALCONS -- Signed Jim Ritcher, offensive lineman.
Placed Leonard Harris, wide receiver, on injured reserve.
Released Preston Jones, quarterback; George Brewer, defensive tackle; Mario Bailey and Corey Dixon, wide receivers; Ricky Ceasar and Stacy Evans, defensive ends; Mark Dixon and Nate Miller, guards; Eric Jonassen, tackle; Toby Mills, center; Blair Thomas and Tony Vinson, running backs; and Scott Tyner, kicker.
Waived Nate Bolton, wide receiver, and Mitch Donahue and Alonzo Etheridge, defensive ends.
BUFFALO BILLS -- Released Steve Kratz, kicker; Travis Colquitt, punter; Randall Evans and Eric Green, wide receivers; Le-Lo Lang, cornerback; Peter Tuffo, linebacker; Andre Hewitt, offensive lineman; and Chuckie Johnson and Eric Counts, nose tackles.
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Released Donny Brady, defensive back; Greg DeLong, tight end; Pulo Poumele, guard; Toby Cates and A.C.
Tellison, wide receivers; and Andre Royal and Vashone Adams, linebackers.
Traded Ronnie Dixon, defensive tackle, to the Philadelphia Eagles for a conditional 1996 draft pick.
Traded Ray Ethridge, kick returner, to the Carolina Panthers for an undisclosed draft pick.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Released Reggie Holt and Rickey Dixon, safeties; Jerry Crafts, tackle; Jay Barker, quarterback; James Roberson, linebacker; and Charlie Simmons, linebacker.
Placed Paul Hutchins and Jeff Miller, tackles; Brian Satterfield, fullback; Jerrol Williams, linebacker; Tommie Stowers, tight end; and Sammy Walker, cornerback, on injured reserve.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Waived Doug Pederson, quarterback, Mark Caesar, defensive tackle; Melvin Crawford, safety, Seth Dittman, tackle; Jason James, center; Burt Thornton, wide receiver; and Rodney Wilkerson, linebacker.
Placed Scott Miller, wide receiver, on the physically-unable-to-perform list.
MINNESOTA VIKINGS -- Released Jay Kirchoff, kicker; Jeff Buffaloe, punter; Paul Burmeister, quarterback; Moses Ware and Ken Grace, wide receivers; Sean Crocker, defensive back; Chris Roe and Michael Titley, tight ends; Joe Burch, center; Royce Nelson, tackle; Joe O'Brien, defensive tackle; Robert Jackson, running back; and Jimmy Cunningham, wide receiver.
NEW YORK JETS -- Waived Stevie Anderson, Orlando Parker and Tom Garlick, wide receivers; Pat Terrell, safety; Bryan Wagner, punter; Paul Burke and LeVar Ball, tight end; John Sacca, quarterback; Fred Lester and Erik Marsh, running backs; Todd Baczek and Colin Cronin, guards; Marc Lamb, center; Elton Rhoades and Vaughn Bryant, cornerbacks; John Knutson, linebacker; and Wilky Bazile, defensive tackle.
Reached injury settlements with Eric Gant, fullback, and Jerold Jeffcoat, defensive tackle.
Placed Dave Alexander, center, on injured reserve.
Placed Melvin Hayes, tackle, on the physically-unable-to-perform list.
OAKLAND RAIDERS -- Traded Greg Robinson, running back, to the Green Bay Packers for an undisclosed draft choice.
Released Cecil Gray, tackle; Jeff Graham, quarterback; Tom Fletcher, center; David Jones, tight end; Tom Robsock, guard; Jon Baker, defensive end; and Chris Crooms, safety.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Waived Jeff Beckley, punter; Eric Fontenot, defensive tackle; Marvin Goodwin, safety; James Jefferson, defensive back; Reginald Lee, linebacker; and Ross Schulte, kicker.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Signed Norm Johnson, kicker.
Waived Ed Robinson and Kiefer Phillips, linebackers; Vincent Dinkins, center; Anthony Ingrassia, offensive tackle; William Lofton, defensive tackle; Tim Patillo, safety; Ed Toner, fullback; Kenny McEntyre, cornerback; and Craig Thompson, tight end.
Placed Damon Mays, wide receiver, and Barron Miles, defensive back, on injured reserve; Siulagi Palelei, guard, on the reserve-non-football-injury list; and Tracy Smith, cornerback, on the reserve-left camp list.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Signed Toi Cook, cornerback.
Waived Forey Duckett and Michael Williams, cornerbacks.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Released Keif Bryant, defensive end; Del Speer, safety; Ernest Allen, defensive tackle; Kelvin Anderson, running back; Bryan Heath, center; James McKeehan, tight end; Joe Pickens, quarterback; Kris Pollack, guard; Chad Wilson, cornerback; and Manley Woods, wide receiver.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Waived Rob Baxley, tackle; Tony Bouie and Macey Stephens, safeties; Joel Crisman, guard; Juan Hammonds, defensive end; Anthony McDowell, fullback; Kerry Mock, Karm McGill and Tommy Thigpen, linebackers; Tiger McMillon, running back; Dedric Smith and Dan Willis, wide receivers; and Ryan Thomas, cornerback.


Who Must Tyson Face Next? A Finer Brand of Tomato Can
If you paid $45.95 for Saturday's Mike Tyson fight, and you felt ripped off, even astonished by its brevity, you must have ignored all we knew about how undeserving a challenger Peter McNeeley was.
He was a hurricane without an eye.
Other tomato cans are insulted when stacked on a shelf beside him.
Caveat emptor was feverishly at work here, even if Don King and his pay-per-view partner, Showtime Event Television, marketed McNeeley as some elemental force capable of giving Tyson a credible fight.
You should have known better.


Jets Look Deep and Cut 3 Receivers
In an unexpected move, the Jets cut 16 players today -- including three young wide receivers -- and Coach Rich Kotite said the team was in the market for an experienced receiver.
The Jets cut Stevie Anderson, Orlando Parker and Tom Garlick, leaving Ryan Yarborough, a second-year player, as the only Jet wide receiver with National Football League experience.
Considering Yarborough's grand total of six receptions last season, the Jets have left themselves little maneuvering room less than two weeks before the season opener in Miami against the Dolphins.


New Officer Named At Riney Agency
Hal Riney &amp; Partners in San Francisco said yesterday that Scott Marshall would join the agency on Sept. 5 in the new position of president, assuming responsibilities from Hal Riney, chairman and chief executive, who has been unofficially serving as president for the last three years.
Mr.
Marshall, 42 was previously president of Scattergood, a high-technology marketing agency in Seattle; before that he was president and chief creative officer of Cole &amp; Weber in Seattle, which is owned by the WPP Group.


Molinari Fills Opening on School Board
Borough President Guy V. Molinari yesterday named Jerry Cammarata, a conservative local school board member and speech therapist, as Staten Island's representative to the central Board of Education -- just in time to weigh in on the selection of a new schools chancellor.
Mr.
Cammarata, 48, is expected to be part of the conservative bloc of four on the board on social issues like the H.I.V.-AIDS curriculum and the multicultural curriculum.


I.M.F. Blames Mexicans for Flight of Peso
The collapse of the Mexican peso last winter came after Mexican investors sent billions of dollars out of the country, the International Monetary Fund has concluded.
"The available data show that the pressure on Mexico's foreign exchange reserves during 1994, and in particular just prior to the devaluation, came not from the flight of foreign investors or from speculative position-taking by these investors, but from Mexican residents," the fund said in its annual report on global financial markets.


Mayor's Plan on Fire-Alarm Boxes
A City Council committee yesterday approved the Giuliani administration's plan to turn off 25 percent of the fire alarm boxes in New York, fewer than the 40 percent the Fire Commissioner proposed at first.
Council members and the Giuliani administration completed work on the revised plan last Friday, and the full council is expected to vote on it in about three weeks.


Healthy Korean Economy Draws Immigrants Home
Four years ago, Chang Hyeok Soo began making plans to leave Korea and move to the United States.
He wanted to echo the success of his sister and brother-in-law, who had built a comfortable home in New Jersey and a thriving trading company in Manhattan.
But Korea's economic explosion made Mr.
Chang, 29, change his mind.
He took a trainee job with a Korean oil company and, in only a few years, his salary more than doubled.


472 Are Leaving Faculty At CUNY to Retire Early
The City University of New York, in the largest voluntary faculty exodus in 20 years, is losing 472 senior faculty members to early retirement, and officials said they would not be replaced by full-time professors, leaving many classes to less-experienced, part-time teachers.
Those who are leaving are taking an early retirement incentive package offered by the state last winter, said Jay Hershenson, director of university relations.


Sudan Oil Project Queries Cause Arakis Stock to Fall
Shares of the Arakis Energy Corporation plunged in Nasdaq trading yesterday as investors began to question the company's ambitious plans to finance a huge oil and pipeline project in the Sudan with funds from a little-known Saudi Arabian prince.
The shares, which are also traded on the stock exchange in Vancouver, British Columbia, fell $4.50, to close at $13.50 yesterday.
At one stage, the shares traded as low as $10.375.
About four weeks ago Arakis was trading at $25.625 a share on Nasdaq, giving the company, which is based in Vancouver, a market value of more than $561 million.


A Free Shuttle Bus for Downtown Manhattan
Cynthia Welsh did not even have time to do the tourist's "Where am I?" head-swivel.
No sooner had she stepped off a ferry from Hoboken, N.J., yesterday afternoon at the edge of Battery Park City than a small bus pulled up and took her, free of charge, to her destination, South Street Seaport.
Mrs.
Welsh, a 40-year-old visitor from Jamaica, did not know that she was among the first to take advantage of the Downtown Loop, inaugurated yesterday and billed by city officials and downtown merchants as the city's first regularly scheduled free shuttle service.


Review/Fashion; Setting Swimsuits Free
The love affair between the swimsuit and the push-up bra is over.
In presentations last week for the cruise 1996 season, designers showed a return to elegance as well as the athletic influence that has seeped into bathing suits in the last few years.
Athletic-style swimwear should have particular appeal next year since the height of the suit-buying season will coincide with the Summer Olympic Games in Atlanta.
The cover-up has evolved from just a wrap that goes from the water to the beachside bar into fully developed sportswear.
A shopper can now fulfill many more of her resort-wear needs in the swimwear department rather than in the sportswear area.


Judge Clears Antitrust Pact For Microsoft
A central chapter in the Government's investigation of the Microsoft Corporation was finally closed yesterday, when a Federal judge approved the Justice Department's 1994 antitrust settlement with the company.
The approving nod from Judge Thomas P. Jackson was not a surprise.
Nor did yesterday's action in a Federal District Court in Washington end the Government's scrutiny of Microsoft.
The Justice Department continues to investigate Microsoft's use of its next-generation operating system, Windows 95, to market the company's new on-line service.


A Trial (Not Simpson's) on Court TV
Who says Court TV carries nothing but the O. J. Simpson trial?
It's a darn canard.
Other cases are always being squeezed in during off days and off hours, and some are newsworthy.
Tonight, for example, comes "Prozac on Trial," an hourlong look at the first civil suit against the Eli Lilly Company, makers of the world's most popular feel-good drug, for its allegedly dire effects on one consumer.
The fact that Prozac now brings Eli Lilly around $1.6 billion a year lends a certain weight to the proceedings.
In 1989, a Prozac popper named Joseph Wesbecker shot and killed eight former co-workers at a Kentucky printing plant and wounded 12 others before killing himself.
The 27 plaintiffs -- the victims and their relatives -- blamed the newish drug for bringing out Mr.
Wesbecker's murderous propensities.
The company argued that the man was prone to violence before taking Prozac, which it maintained was a safe mood lifter.


Tadiran Ltd.(TAD,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


ABC NEWS SETTLES SUITS ON TOBACCO
In an extraordinary act of contrition, ABC News publicly apologized last night for asserting in a news program that two giant tobacco companies add extra nicotine to their cigarettes.
In joint statements, Capital Cities/ ABC, Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds said ABC agreed to apologize for a report on its program "Day One" that said Philip Morris and Reynolds controlled and manipulated nicotine levels to addict smokers.


Mozart's Requiem Ends His Festival
The Mostly Mozart Festival ended its season at Avery Fisher Hall on Saturday evening by singing its hero to his rest in a predictably reverential performance of his Requiem, led by the festival's music director, Gerard Schwarz.
Although the work (like most, nowadays) is hardly new to these precincts, the timing may reflect a heightened preoccupation with mortality on the part of the festival itself, its season having been cut by Lincoln Center from seven weeks to four.
The festival's reply to complaints of tired programming and often humdrum performances has long been a non sequitur: the house remains full.
And its only clear response to straitened circumstances this year was to throw ever more house-filling soloists into the breach.
Having two years ago made a halfhearted stab at thematic programming, seemingly concocted after the fact, the festival now seems determined to give wide berth to ideas of any kind.


The Chaff in Iowa's Straw Poll
These being the dog days of summer, the Republican Presidential straw poll in Ames, Iowa, last Saturday got a lot of attention.
Senator Phil Gramm ran dead even with the front-runner for the G.O.P. nomination, Senator Bob Dole, and for a moment there we were fooled into thinking something momentous had occurred.
That is just what Mr.
Gramm would have us believe.
His "stunning victory," he said, would force Republicans everywhere to think twice about the inevitability of Bob Dole.
The Dole folks reinforced this notion by walking around with long faces and lamenting that the results had been a "reality check" and a "wake-up call."


100 ARE WOUNDED
A suicide bomber struck once again inside Israel today, killing four passengers and himself and wounding about 100 others in a Jerusalem bus, and touching off angry daylong protests against the Israeli Government's negotiations with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
One of those killed was a Connecticut woman, the police said.


Harnischfeger Industries(HPH,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


Signalman Is Hunted as Error Is Blamed for Indian Train Wreck
The authorities in India were searching today for the signalman who fled his post after allowing a train onto a track where another train was stopped, leading to a collision early Sunday that killed more than 340 people and injured more than 400.
While small groups of anxious relatives, friends and colleagues of travelers on the wrecked trains gathered at New Delhi Railway Station for information today, rescuers in Firozabad, 185 miles southeast of here, continued to pull mangled bodies from the wreckage with the aid of cranes and blowtorches.


Rangers and Zubov Reach New Terms
The Rangers announced yesterday that they had reached terms on a new contract with Sergei Zubov, the Russian defenseman who was ninth in total points among National Hockey League defensemen last season.
Terms were not disclosed.
Zubov, 25, had 10 goals and 26 assists in 38 games last season.
He missed a month with an injured wrist.


Two More Officials Leave Bear, Stearns
Two senior managing directors have resigned from Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, bringing to six the number of senior executives to leave the firm since May.
Jonathan Ilany, a senior managing director in the firm's mortgage-backed bond group, resigned two weeks ago, people at the firm said yesterday.
Mr.
Ilany was the fifth member of the securities firm's board to resign in four months.


A Paroled Killer Takes the Stand in His Rape Trial in Rockland
After three weeks of standing before the jury as his own lawyer, Reginald McFadden, a paroled killer from Pennsylvania who is charged with raping a 55-year-old South Nyack woman, finally got the chance he had been waiting for today.
Mr.
McFadden walked with confidence to the witness stand, faced the jury in the Rockland County Courthouse, and in a methodical, sometimes unflappable manner, testified that he had nothing to do with the brutal five-hour attack.
He was home, he said, meditating and renouncing the world, a part of his routine as a believer in Islam, which he has since rejected.


George Bekefi, 70, Physics Researcher
George Bekefi, a teacher and researcher known for his contributions to plasma physics, particularly in the field of extremely high-power microwave generators, died last Thursday at his home in Brookline, Mass.
He was 70.
The cause was leukemia, his family said.


In the World of Fonts
MANY office workers produce documents that are printed or shown directly on a computer screen.
For either purpose, a judicious inventory of fonts is desirable.
But whether Windows or the Macintosh Operating System is in use, fonts get out of hand.
Several come with the system, more accompany word processors and other applications, others are supplied with printers, and at least hundreds are available elsewhere.
First, to make sure we are speaking the same language, here are some definitions.


Q&amp;A
Moon and Mind
Q.
Have studies been done on whether crimes, mental illness and violence increase around a full moon?


Executone Information Systems Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Corrections
An article last Tuesday about a Bronx police officer accused of shooting and killing a friend incorrectly described the injuries that the officer, Cathleen Byrnes, apparently suffered in a scuffle before the shooting.
According to a neighbor's account, it was her wrists, not her ribs, that were swollen and red.
The article also misstated the year when Officer Byrnes's service revolver was temporarily taken away because of concerns over her erratic behavior.
It was 1987, not 1990.


International Briefs; Mannesmann Shifts To First-Half Profit
The German engineering and technology company Mannesmann A.G. said yesterday that it had a profit of 141 million marks ($95 million) for the first half after a loss of 27 million ($18.3 million) for the corresponding period a year earlier.
The company said its profit and sales would continue to rise during the second half and that full-year levels would be higher than in 1994, when net profit surged to 340 million marks ($230.4 million) after a loss of 513 million ($347.7 million) in 1993, Mannesmann's worst year ever.


The Burden of Proof
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 17 editorial on Mumia Abu-Jamal, the black journalist-activist convicted of murder, contains this statement: "The case for his innocence is not unimpeachable."


Can Parochial Schools Teach Public Schools?; Why They Work
To the Editor:
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani was correct when he urged the New York City public school system to begin a radical reform modeled after parochial schools (news article, Aug. 15).


Following Welfare Rules
To the Editor:
Marva Livingston Hammons, New York City's Human Resources Commissioner, states in her Aug. 17 letter on the city's supposed use of state law and regulations for welfare eligibility: "Applicants and recipients either fulfill these criteria or not." She implies that all denials of benefits are based on these criteria.


Corrections
A report in the Night column on Sunday about the Taste of the Hamptons benefit for the Family Service League of Suffolk County on Aug. 12 misspelled the last name of a guest who is a host of "TV Diners" on the TV Food Network.
She is Nina Griscom, not Griscomb.


Sadness and Shame at The Citadel
When Shannon Faulkner took on the task of becoming the first female student at The Citadel, South Carolina's all-male military college, she also took on a broader responsibility.
Like it or not, she was acting not only for herself but for all other Americans who believe that a school financed by taxpayers' money has no right to discriminate on the basis of gender.
When Ms.
Faulkner, emotionally exhausted and physically depleted, dropped the banner she herself had raised, many of those rooting for her were doubtless disappointed.
But she is right to hope that "next year a whole group of women will be going in" and will succeed where she failed.
There are already many American women serving in the United States armed forces and performing with distinction in its service academies.
West Point's top graduate this year, in fact, was Second Lieut.
Rebecca E. Marier.


Can Parochial Schools Teach Public Schools?; Vouchers Needed
To the Editor:
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, in his comments on Roman Catholic schools as a model for the New York City public schools (news article, Aug. 15), points to the reasons for their success but goes on to say that he does not favor giving poor parents an equal opportunity to send their children to these schools!


Step Right Up, Monsieur!
Mark Nicholls felt "sheer terror" on the big Dragon Kahn roller coaster while his 6-year-old son, Lee, loved the tamer green-serpent carousel ride.
"We should have got the two-day pass," said Mr.
Nicholls, a 35-year- old automobile test driver from Coventry, England, as he wandered with his family through Port Aventura, Europe's newest theme park.
"We're enjoying it immensely."


Blast Suspect's Lawyers Seek Removal of Judge
Lawyers for Timothy J. McVeigh, charged in the April 19 bombing of the Federal Building here, today asked the trial judge to withdraw from the case, contending that he could not be impartial.
Mr.
McVeigh's lead lawyer, Stephen Jones, observed in the motion filed today that the courtroom of Judge Wayne E. Alley of Federal District Court was on the third floor of the Federal Building directly across the street from the blast.
The courtroom was severely damaged in the explosion.
The motion also said that a member of Judge Alley's staff had suffered cuts and bruises.


New Yeltsin Party Is Beaten In First Race in His Province
In its first electoral outing, the new political party created by President Boris N. Yeltsin and his Prime Minister, Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, suffered a humiliating defeat in Mr.
Yeltsin's home province, according to final election results reported today.
Eduard Rossel, whom Mr.
Yeltsin dismissed two years ago as the Governor of Sverdlovsk because he advocated greater regional independence, trounced Aleksei Strakhov, the man who was appointed to replace him, by a 2-to-1 margin.


Circle K Corp.(CRK,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 31


New Publisher For Cosmopolitan
Donna Kalajian Galotti, the vice president and publisher of The Ladies' Home Journal in New York, is leaving to join Cosmopolitan magazine as publisher, effective on Sept. 5.


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday of Dr.
Helen Singer Kaplan, founder of the Human Sexuality Program at the Payne Whitney Clinic of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, omitted a survivor.
She is Sofie Kane of Manhattan, Dr.
Kaplan's mother.


Wayward Manatee May Be Southbound
Chessie has a sense of adventure, seems to be thriving on the food in the New York region and never goes any place where he could be mugged.
But the people who follow his travels are worried and want him to go home to Florida.
Chessie is the manatee that has been swimming in these parts for the last several weeks, stirring intense interest among marine scientists, who want to protect the 10-foot, 1,200-pound mammal from eager sightseers.


Clarion Acquires Sports Marketer
Clarion Marketing and Communications in Greenwich, Conn., owned by D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, has acquired International Sports and Entertainment Strategies in Atlanta for undisclosed terms.


George Christie, 67, F. W. Dodge Officer
George A. Christie, former chief economist and vice president of the F. W. Dodge division of the McGraw-Hill Companies, died on Monday at the Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, N.J.
Mr.
Christie, a resident of Franklin Lakes, N.J., was 67.
The cause of death was cancer, his wife, Marjorie L. Christie, said.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a picture caption and article yesterday under the heading Jacksonville Journal, about the coming of professional football to Jacksonville, Fla., misstated the date of an exhibition game played by the city's new team, the Jaguars.
The game was last Friday night, not Sunday night.


N.F.L. TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Oakland Raiders
The Raiders released running back Greg Robinson yesterday, one day after he was traded to Green Bay and failed a physical because of swelling in one of his knees.


CHRONICLE
GERTRUDE MONGELLA, the secretary general of the United Nations' Fourth International Conference on Women, which will be held in Beijing next month, leaves for China today with a little extra carry-on baggage.
At a reception yesterday in her office at the United Nations, she was presented a giant volume holding signatures from 70,000 American women pledging their dedication to women's rights around the world.
The oath, which reads, "I pledge to support efforts to insure that all women and girls have a fair chance to achieve their just and rightful place in the world," was published last month in Self magazine, and readers were invited to sign it by mailing, phoning or E-mailing it or by going through a World Wide Web site to add their names.


A Bucket Full of Sun


Gerber Scientific Inc.(GRB,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 31


35 Homeless in a Newark Fire
At least 35 people remained homeless after a fire swept through five apartment buildings on Stone Street early yesterday, fire officials said.
Three buildings were demolished.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  Bartova Breaks Pole-Vault Mark Again
Daniela Bartova of the Czech Republic continued her assault on the women's world record in the pole vault in an international meet yesterday in Linz, Austria.
Bartova, who set a record of 13 feet 9 1/4 inches last Friday at Cologne, Germany, cleared 13-9 3/4 on her second effort yesterday.


Fire Ravages L.I. Pine Barrens, Causing Residents to Evacuate
A stubborn fire at the center of the Long Island Pine Barrens had consumed more than 2,500 acres of dry brush by this afternoon, prompting the evacuation of the residents of 35 houses and 150 people from two retirement homes at the edge of the forest.
At dusk, firefighters had pushed the blaze back from the residential area, and no houses were burning.


GC Companies Inc.(GCX,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.69
5.71
4.64
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.44
5.43
4.56
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.43
5.43
4.90
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.55
6.52
7.28
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.89
6.87
7.54
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.78
7.76
8.39
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.28
6.29
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Confused Atop a Mountain Peak? Clues to Cognitive Losses Found
BASED on experiments done on Mount Everest and Pikes Peak, researchers are discovering why many mountain climbers make mistakes and why women tend to adapt to high altitudes better than men.
The new findings apply not only to elite athletes and mountain climbers, the researchers said, but to summer vacationers who climb popular spots like Mount Rainier in Washington.


Gamblers Bought Off Louisiana Legislators, Affidavits Say
Federal agents listening in on conversations between some of Louisiana's most powerful legislators and owners of roadside gambling establishments have described a scheme in which payoffs to politicians were to be exchanged for favorable votes.
The agents, from the Federal Bureau of Investigation, heard about thousands of dollars changing hands, according to affidavits unsealed on Monday in connection with what the authorities describe as a large-scale investigation of public corruption in this state.
No charges have been filed in connection with the inquiry.


Loyal to a Long Tradition; And in This Corner . . . The New Wave Approach
IN the last year and a half, at least four Southern-style restaurants have opened in Manhattan.
Each has a different approach, as defined by their owners and chefs.
But none is pure Ma and Pa's home cooking.
What unites the four restaurants is that their sources -- recipes, flavors and memories -- are from the South.
Some of the recipes were passed from generation to generation, changing only slightly over time.
Others have been transformed.


Support for an Eroded Beach
After touring the beach yesterday to assess damage from Hurricane Felix, Senator Frank R. Lautenberg pronounced the United States Army Corps of Engineers' project to restore New Jersey beaches a success.
The Senator said that although the waves wore away part of the beach, leaving a six-foot drop, the sand dredged from nearby waterways helped prevent the beach from being wiped out and helped protect the boardwalk and businesses along the beachfront.
Some critics have called such replenishment projects a waste.


A Stuck-Out Tongue, Preserved Forever: The Art of the Goofy
ODED ZELDIN lurks by a shaded path in Central Park, an urban subversive with a loaded weapon on a mission that rattles every subway-hardened, stone-faced New Yorker.
He wants to shoot a picture of you being silly.
We're not talking City Council zany or Yankee Stadium stupid.
No, he wants you to stick your tongue out, cross your eyes and twist your lips.
Then, for free, he'll take a picture as proof of your moment of abandon.


Spartech Corp(SEH,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 29


Fresh Tofu: Safe Cooks Buy Carefully
A RECENT study on the health benefits of soy protein may prompt people to start eating more tofu, the fresh white bean curd that has been an integral part of Asian cooking for centuries.
Some people turn up their noses: others love this chameleon that tastes like whatever it's cooked with.


International Briefs; Layoffs at G.M. in Brazil
The Brazilian subsidiary of the General Motors Corporation has laid off more than 1,000 workers as a result of a sharp drop in sales, a company spokesman said yesterday.
The spokesman said the company had laid off 1,050 workers from assembly lines at two plants in the state of Sao Paulo.
The layoffs reduced G.M.'s work force to close to 22,500 in Brazil.
From June to July, G.M.'s sales in the country fell 36.2 percent, an auto industry trade group in Brazil reported, after the Government raised interest rates. (AP)


Mesa Arranges A 'Parachute' For Executives
Mesa Inc., besieged by dissident investors demanding that the company be sold, bolstered its defenses yesterday by guaranteeing T. Boone Pickens and other top executives at least twice their annual salaries if they lost their jobs under new owners.
This so-called golden parachute, approved by Mesa's board today, would allow Mr.
Pickens, Mesa's chairman and chief executive, to walk away with $2.2 million and provide another five officers with about $3.8 million more.


Germ War Plan Underreported, Iraq Tells U.N.
Iraq has told the head of a United Nations inspection team that its germ warfare program was larger and more advanced than it had previously admitted, including bombs and Scud missiles armed with lethal biological agents, officials of the team said today.
In weekend meetings with the United Nations official, Rolf Ekeus, the Iraqis provided new details of stockpiles of germ weapons that included substantial quantities of anthrax, botulin and other agents.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Aug. 18
Aug. 11
Aug. 19
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.6
7.3
7.4
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.1
3.3
Gasoline stocks
199.4
203.2
207.5
Distillate stocks
124.6
124.6
134.7
Crude imports, daily
7.2
8.3
7.5
Product imports, daily
1.7
1.3
2.7
Crude stocks
301.4
309.8
325.7
Crude production, daily
6.4
6.4
6.6
Refinery utilization (%)
93.5
93.6
95.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Sportmart Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 30


Singapore Creates Illusion of Prosperity
To the Editor:
"In Prosperous Singapore, Even the Elite Are Nervous About Speaking Out" (news article, Aug. 13) likens the bleak intellectual and political atmosphere of this city-state to that of an Eastern European capital under Communism.


Fire Spreads Over a City Block
A fire last night consumed three local businesses and forced the evacuation of 22 families, Mayor Bruce Walter said.
The fire began about 5:30 P.M. in a three-story building at 4401 Bergenline Avenue, with two floors of apartments above a street-level furniture store.
No one was reported injured.


The United Nations, never without its detractors, gets a 'happy 50th birthday' note from New York.
ANOTHER civic celebration, but this one isn't a yawn.
Consider the event: the 50th birthday of the United Nations on Oct. 24.
Consider the gridlock: the leaders of at least 175 countries -- more than have ever assembled anywhere before -- will be welcomed by President Clinton to a barrage of galas.
And consider the advertising: New York City is mounting a $1 million campaign to raise awareness of the anniversary events and, more importantly, to put the city's best foot forward.


DIGITAL IS THIRD PC MAKER TO ANNOUNCE DISCOUNTS
The Digital Equipment Corporation cut prices yesterday on its notebook computers by 14 percent to 30 percent, in the latest salvo in an industry price war.
On Monday, the Hewlett-Packard Company cut prices as much as 18 percent on its Vectra desktop computers for the corporate market.
The Compaq Computer Corporation cut prices last week by up to 25 percent on some of its ProLinea and Presario PC models.
Compaq said the cuts would make its systems less expensive than comparable offerings from Hewlett-Packard and the Dell Computer Corporation. (Reuters)


RISK CAPITAL SHRINKS ITS INITIAL PUBLIC OFFERING
The Risk Capital Corporation, a reinsurance holding company based in Greenwich, Conn., reduced the size of its initial public offering by 14 percent yesterday, citing market conditions a week after Normandy America Inc., withdrew a similar offering.
Risk Capital, the parent of Risk Capital Re Inc., reduced the offering to 12 million shares from 14 million, after delaying the sale twice in the last four trading days.
The action cuts $40 million from the $280 million the company expected to raise.
Normandy America withdrew its $180 million initial public offering the day after it began trading on the Nasdaq.
Reinsurers sell policies to insurance companies, to cover some of their risks. (Bloomberg Business News)


Bosnian Serbs Hit Sarajevo; U.N.'s Rules Delay Its Guns
Seemingly hamstrung by its own rules, the United Nations stood by helplessly most of today as Bosnian Serb attacks killed 6 people and wounded 38 in Sarajevo.
Six of the wounded were Egyptian soldiers in the United Nations force.
In the evening, the Bosnian Serb mortar position that fired on the peacekeepers' position was located and attacked by French artillery.


Buffett Gives Other Chiefs A New Reason to Frown
Warren E. Buffett occasionally makes other chief executives furious.
There's his track record at Berkshire Hathaway Inc., whose stock sells at the enviably high price-to-earnings ratio of 59.
There's the acclaim he gets as America's second-richest individual (after William H. Gates of the Microsoft Corporation) and as the world's most successful investor, despite poor bets on companies like USAir Group and Salomon Inc.
And, most maddening, there was his outspoken stance in 1993 favoring an accounting rule that would have charged grants for executive stock options against corporate earnings -- and thus kill the goose that laid the golden egg.


Big B Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Food Notes
Glory for Goat Cheese
Hundreds of cheeses in 27 categories were submitted for judging by the American Cheese Society earlier this month in Green Bay, Wis.
Named "best of show" was Wabash Cannonball, a goat cheese made in Greenville, Ind., by Capriole, a company owned by Judy Schad.
A deserving prize winner, it is a small, delicious round that has a full-flavored, velvety center with an edible rind.
The three-ounce cheese is $4.50 at Gourmet Garage, 453 Broome Street (Mercer Street), and at Dean &amp; DeLuca, 560 Broadway (Prince Street), and $3.95 at Agata &amp; Valentina, 1505 First Avenue (79th Street).
Hay Day Markets in Westchester and Connecticut will carry the cheese for $5.49 after Labor Day.
Chinatown a la Carte
On Sept. 10 the Roundtable for Women in Foodservice, an educational group, will sponsor a tour of Chinatown led by Karen Lee, a cooking teacher, caterer and author.
It will start at 10:30 A.M. at the Chinese-American Trading Company, 91 Mulberry Street (Canal Street), for a shopping expedition, followed by lunch at Canton Restaurant on Division Street.
The cost is $37.50 a person.
For reservations: (212) 807-5677.
Off the Menu Accumulating Restaurants
Ken Aretsky, an owner of Arcadia and the former chairman of the "21" Club, is on a restaurant shopping spree.
Last week he bought Christ Cella, the venerable two-story steakhouse at 160 East 46th Street.
Yesterday, he snared Pinocchio, a small Italian restaurant with a big dusty chandelier that has been at 170 East 81st Street for 20 years.
He plans to keep Christ Cella as a steakhouse after some renovation, but Pinocchio will not be Italian.
What Goes Around
Add the term rodizio to the culinary vocabulary.
A rodizio is a Brazilian rotisserie restaurant where waiters parade through the dining room with an array of spit-roasted meats on gigantic skewers. (Rodizio means "going around" in Portuguese.) For a set price, diners can select unlimited quantities of any meat, which is then carved at the table.
Riodizio, Manhattan's first rodizio, is scheduled to open at 417 Lafayette Street (Astor Place) in mid-September.
Plataforma, a rodizio with 400 seats at 316 West 49th Street, should be ready by the end of the year.
Alberico Campana, a partner, owns the largest rodizio in Rio de Janiero, also called Plataforma.
Joao Dematos, another partner, said: "It will be completely authentic. We are bringing everything from Brazil, even the chefs."
There is another rodizio in New York called Green Fields, at 108 Northern Boulevard in Corona, Queens.
From Perigord to Perigord
When Georges Briguet, the owner of Le Perigord, 405 East 52d Street, found out that Antoine Bouterin, his chef for the past 14 years, was leaving to open his own restaurant, he wasted no time in securing a replacement.
He is bringing another chef from France.
Pascal Coudouy, who had been Chez Pauline's chef in Paris for the last year and before that at Gascogne in New York, starts after Labor Day.
While Mr.
Bouterin's cooking reflected his native Provence, Mr.
Coudouy is from the Perigord region for which the restaurant is named.
Bring on the truffles and foie gras!
Fueling Wall Street
Peter Skeadas and Charles Morris Mount, part of the team that recently created Gloucester, 37 East 50th Street, are working on another project.
Opening in October will be the Trading Floor Grill and the Bull Run Bar in the Club Quarters Hotel at 52 William Street (Pine Street) in the financial district.
The hotel is to open by the end of the month.
Pascal's New Bistro
In October, Guy Pascal, the patissier who runs the cafe in Henri Bendel, will open Bistro Pascal in the Hotel Lexington, 48th Street and Lexington Avenue.
Harry Le Provost, who has worked at Park Bistro and Jour et Nuit, will be the chef for the new Provencal bistro.


CHRONICLE
VALERIE HARPER is back on the New York stage for the first time in 25 years and still working for a cause she has not let go of for almost two decades.
The actress, best known for her role as Rhoda on "The Mary Tyler Moore Show" in the 1970's and the spinoff series "Rhoda," took over two roles last week in the Off Broadway show "Death Defying Acts."


Puckett Drives in Three as Twins Slow Rangers Down
Twins 9, Rangers 4
Kirby Puckett drove in three runs with a two-run homer and a double as the Minnesota Twins snapped a three-game Texas winning streak by toppling the Rangers, 9-4, last night.


No Headline
"People wonder, 'Why don't suburbanites come downtown? Why don't business and industry want to pay for the privilege of investing downtown?' Stories like this scare people away." -- KEVIN JOYCE, a talk-radio host in Detroit.  [ A1:5. ]


Suspension and More Fines for Tarango
JEFF TARANGO, an American, was suspended from two Grand Slam tournaments and fined an additional $28,256 yesterday for his outburst at Wimbledon last month.
The sanctions, announced by the International Tennis Federation's Grand Slam Committee, are believed to be the toughest ever imposed against a player.
The committee found Tarango guilty of "aggravated behavior and conduct contrary to the integrity of the game."


Rapids, by Any Name, Are Rough for Clinton
It was only a matter of time.
So when word leaked out that President Clinton would take a river rafting ride over rocks and churning current today, the question was how to describe it.
Would it be, reporters wondered, a white-water trip?
"That," a chuckling President replied this morning, "remains to be seen."


Checks Delivered Via E-Mail Are Planned
Pretty soon it won't be, "The check is in the mail"; it will be, "The check is in the E-mail." A group of banks and technology companies said yesterday that they would design a system to create "electronic checks" that could be used to make payments over the Internet or other electronic mail systems.
The system would let a couple pay their phone bill by sending a payment to the telephone company over electronic mail, or they could send an electronic check to a child for a birthday present.
A person or company receiving an electronic check could immediately deposit it in a bank, also via electronic mail.


Labor Hearing Postponed
Baseball's labor negotiators yesterday gained their monthly postponement of the National Labor Relations Board trial into unfair labor practice charges against the owners.
Edwin Bennett, the administrative law judge scheduled to hear the case, granted the fourth postponement of the trial at the request of lawyers for the owners and the players.
The trial, which was originally scheduled to start May 22, was reset for Sept. 18.


Jamesway Corp.(JMY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Bulging Bag Yields Fake Bills
A poor job of packing may have led to Marino Mejia's arrest.
Mr.
Mejia admitted yesterday in United States District Court that he took $100,000 in counterfeit money into Newark International Airport last month.
Customs inspectors noticed that the false bottoms in his two black suitcases were bulging.
They found stacks of fake $100 United States bills.


Don't Cut Transit Service. Just Cut the Fat.
To the Editor:
Re "What You'll Get for That Extra Quarter" by E. Virgil Conway, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority chairman (Op-Ed, Aug. 16):


Smoke Clogs Holland Tunnel
A warehouse fire sent smoke billowing into the Holland Tunnel toll plaza early yesterday, injuring nine toll takers and four firefighters, none seriously, and causing delays of up to an hour for thousands of commuters.


H.M.O.'s Required to Offer Individuals Choice of Doctor
Gov.
George E. Pataki signed legislation today that will require health maintenance organizations to offer policies allowing individuals to use the doctors of their choice and not just those who are members of the H.M.O.'s network.
Managed-care companies will also have to offer individual policies covering prescription drugs.


Treasury Prices Fall as Fed Leaves Rates Unchanged
Prices of Treasury securities slipped yesterday, as the Federal Reserve left short-term interest rates unchanged at its monetary policy meeting and the Treasury sold two-year notes in a successful auction.
The 30-year bond slipped 8/32 of a percentage point, to a price of 99 28/32; its yield, which moves in the opposite direction from its price, was 6.89 percent, compared with 6.87 percent on Monday.


Jail Theft Is a Very Inside Job
A jail might not seem the likeliest place to steal a lot of money, but an inmate who was serving a 273-day sentence for theft found otherwise on Aug. 1, when he happened upon an unlocked safe in an unlocked property room at the Atlantic County Jail.
In the bag was $9,586 in bail money.


School Mourns Loss of Teacher, Remembering Passion for Israel
Eight days before the official start of school, hundreds of students, parents and teachers of the Ezra Academy gathered here tonight to mourn Joan Davenny, a teacher who personified Jewish commitment to Israel for them and who died in a terrorist attack in Jerusalem on Monday.
They filled long lines of chairs arrayed along the walls, and they sat on the floor, filling that too.
Reminded by rabbis that their memories of Ms.
Davenny "could be the seeds of her love," they then met in groups, the smallest with their parents and teachers, recent teen-age graduates with older alumni, to share the moments they remembered most vividly today.


Alan Yagoda, 60, Cancer Expert, Dies
Dr.
Alan Yagoda, an oncologist who specialized in genito-urinary cancer research and contributed a new treatment for metastatic bladder tumors, died on Saturday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 60 and lived in Pleasantville, N.Y.
The cause was complications from abdominal surgery, his office said.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on July 25 about a change in the tax law that is affecting low-income housing referred incorrectly to estimates by the National Housing Trust on its proposal that one-time grants replace monthly subsidies for tax-sheltered apartment projects.
The group estimated that the proposal would save much more than the $5.4 billion cited in the article.
The $2.3 billion in increased costs estimated for the first seven years of the plan was a Government estimate, not the group's.


Corrections
The credit with an obituary picture yesterday of Julius Monk misspelled the photographer's name.
It is Henri Dauman.


Former Calpers Chief Joining ICN's Board
Dale Hanson, a corporate-governance expert who started a campaign on Wall Street by lobbying corporate directors to be responsive to shareholders, yesterday joined the board of ICN Pharmaceuticals Inc., a company that has been dogged by regulatory and corporate controversy in recent years.
For Mr.
Hanson, who served for seven years as chief executive of the California Public Employees' Retirement System, known as Calpers, the country's largest pension fund, the move is a chance to put into practice the guidelines he fervently advocated.


Miller Awarded Alcohol Account
Marie Brizard Wines and Spirits USA in Miami said yesterday that it had named Howard R. Miller Communications in Miami as the first agency to handle advertising, marketing and public relations for Rainbow Spirits, a new line of premium-priced alcoholic beverages aimed at gay and lesbian consumers.
The billings were estimated at $1 million.
Miller, which handles advertising for other Marie Brizard products like Anisette, was awarded the Rainbow Spirits account without a review.
The products, including vodka, gin and rum, are now available in Miami.
They are scheduled to be introduced next month in Boston and New York and are expected to go on sale nationally by early next year.


Investigators of Plane Crash Focus on Left Engine Failure
The death toll from a commuter plane crash on Monday near Atlanta rose to five yesterday, as investigators began combing through the wreckage for clues about what caused the left engine to give out before the crash in a hayfield.
Twenty-four people remarkably survived.
Officials from the National Transportation Safety Board said yesterday that part of a blade had snapped off the left propeller of the Embraer 120 Brasilia aircraft.
On Aug. 3 a propeller blade broke off another Embraer 120 Brasilia before it landed safely at Luxembourg Airport.
The safety board is helping in the investigation of that incident.


In the Hamptons, Burglar Specializes In Fancy Teapots
It's tea time in the Hamptons, where an elusive burglar has carefully avoided motion detectors and sleeping homeowners to steal more than $200,000 worth of silverware -- and the same brand of pearl-handled teapot -- from four homes.
So many of the elaborate Georg Jensen tea sets have disappeared from the estates section of Southampton that the village police issued a public appeal yesterday for information about the burglaries, which started in early February.
They also added a warning.
"Don't leave your silver out in plain sight, even though they are nice pieces," said Sgt.
Michael Schucht of the Southampton police.
"Put them in the appropriate cabinet."


Bidder for Rockefeller Center Is Promised a Big Breakup Fee
Rockefeller Center Properties Inc., the real estate investment trust that owns the $1.3 billion mortgage on Rockefeller Center, will pay an $11.5 million breakup fee if it chooses to pursue a deal with someone other than the investor group led by Sam Zell, the Chicago real estate entrepreneur, which made a bid for control of the trust last week.
The breakup fee was included in documents that the real estate investment trust filed yesterday with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The filing disclosed a few new details about the Zell group's plans for gaining control of the trophy property.


Cyberspace Prophets Discuss Their 'Revolution' Face to Face
Surprising alliances are becoming commonplace in mountain settings.
The recent Disney-Capital Cities/ABC alliance was forged in the mountains of Sun Valley, Idaho, and just the other day Senator Bill Bradley, exploring a possible bid for the Presidency, was seen squeezing his large frame into a car here driven by Michael Eisner, Disney's chairman and arguably the most powerful man in Hollywood.
But one of the more surprising alliances was solidified over the past two days at the Ritz-Carlton hotel here, where supporters and advisers of Newt Gingrich gathered at a conference with the savants of cyberspace to create a common vision for America's future in the digital age.


Cole National Corp.(CNJ,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Ballet Schedule Changes
The New York City Ballet has dropped its traditional Sunday night performances at the New York State Theater, where the company is to perform from Nov. 21 through Feb. 25.
Elizabeth Healy, a spokeswoman for City Ballet, said that those performances had had lower ticket sales and that the change would allow for more rehearsal time.
The Sunday matinee will begin at 3 P.M., rather than 1 P.M.
The company will also open this year with "The Nutcracker" rather than the usual week of repertory before that production begins its holiday run.


Peace, Terror and Dissent in Israel
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel and Chairman Yasir Arafat of the Palestine Liberation Organization came up with exactly the right response to the latest suicide bombing by a Hamas fanatic, which killed 4 innocent people and wounded 100 others in Jerusalem Monday.
They both condemned the murderous attack and, after Israel had buried its dead, resumed negotiations on extending Palestinian self-rule.
For the first time Hamas has explicitly linked its terrorism to internal Israeli politics, declaring that the main goal of its present campaign is to defeat Mr.
Rabin, the chief sponsor of the peace agreement, in Israel's next national election, scheduled for November 1996.


Cut in Budget May Hamper 2000 Census
Just when the Census Bureau would usually start increasing its spending to prepare for the next 10-year count, the tight Federal budget is forcing it to cut its operations and possibly even limit the amount of information it gathers for the tally in the year 2000.
Some Republicans, including the head of a House subcommittee that oversees the Census Bureau's spending, say it asks Americans too many questions anyway and its operation should be simplified to save money.


Broadway Stores Inc.(BWY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Bistro Tables Nestled Amid Clusters of Grapes
Gerard Maurice, a chef who once worked at La Folie, and his wife, Pamela, have just opened Le Jardin, a homey French bistro with a lovely garden at 25 Cleveland Place, near Spring Street.
Most of the outdoor tables are sheltered by a lush arbor bearing clusters of ripening white grapes.
"We may have a harvest and I might try to make some Manhattan wine," said Mr.
Maurice, who has yet to identify the type of grape.
In the meantime, he gathers herbs and tomatoes from the garden to use in the kitchen.
The simple bistro menu has main dishes from $10 to $14.50.
Credit cards are not accepted.


CLINICORP REPORTS ITS CHIEF HAS RESIGNED
Clinicorp Inc. said yesterday that it would take a noncash charge of $6 million to $8 million against fourth-quarter earnings for losses related to the closing of some of unprofitable clinics.
The company, which is based in West Palm Beach, Fla., also said that Robert Goldsamt, its chairman and chief executive, resigned because of "philosophical differences." Clinicorp also said it might lose its listing on the American Stock Exchange because it continued to fail to satisfy listing requirements.
Clinicorp shares fell 37.5 cents yesterday, to close at $2.125. (Bloomberg Business News)


Sound and Fury in East Asia
Summing up his life's achievements, China's paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, once told a visitor, "There is only one thing that I shall have left undone in my lifetime: the resolution of the Taiwan question."
"I'm afraid I shall not live to see it," he said.


Mr. Pataki Rights a Wrong
Gov.
George Pataki of New York now agrees that he was wrong to let two senior members of his administration be co-chairmen of a big campaign fund-raising event last weekend at Saratoga Race Course.
His admission of error is welcome if overdue.
Senior government officials with the power to regulate or grant benefits have no business soliciting campaign donations.
The two officials are Joseph Neglia, a member of the three-member state Racing and Wagering Board, which regulates the racing and parimutuel betting industry; and Clarence Rappelyea Jr., chairman of the New York Power Authority, which provides low-cost electricity to businesses.
They served on the organizing committee for the Saratoga fund-raiser and their names appeared on the invitation sent out to potential contributors, including people in industries that typically do business with their offices.


Smoking's Unsettled State
ABC News has apologized for charging that tobacco companies "spiked" cigarettes with nicotine and has agreed to pay several million dollars in legal fees incurred by Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds in suing for libel.
This is an impressive public-relations victory for the tobacco manufacturers -- but in a side contest that does not diminish the tobacco industry's core legal difficulties.
If "spiking" a product means adding significant amounts of nicotine from outside sources, the news organization's former "Day One" program may have overstated the case against the industry, warranting a correction.
Without full access to production records, it is difficult for outsiders to judge.
But the companies say they merely restore nicotine that has been washed out in the production process, sometimes leaving less nicotine than the natural tobacco plant contained.


DARDEN TO CLOSE ITS CHINA COAST RESTAURANTS
Darden Restaurants Inc. said yesterday that it would close its 51 China Coast restaurants because of disappointing performance.
Darden, which also operates Red Lobster and Olive Garden restaurants, said it would take an after-tax charge of $45 million, or 28 cents a share, against its fiscal first-quarter earnings because of the closings.
It added that its net earnings before the charge will be up modestly from a year ago.
China Coast accounted for $71 million, or 2 percent, of Darden's sales of $3.2 billion in its latest fiscal year.
Darden, based in Orlando, Fla., said it would continue to operate more than 1,200 other restaurants.
The stock of Darden, which was spun off from General Mills Inc. in May, rose 75 cents, to $11, on the New York Stock Exchange. (Reuters)


Microsoft Seen Weighing $1 Billion Turner Stake
Negotiations between the Microsoft Corporation and Turner Broadcasting System are proceeding and involve an equity investment in Turner of about $1 billion, a person familiar with the discussions said yesterday.
The person added that the companies were also discussing a joint venture in which Turner's library of movies and its other news and entertainment programming would be used for CD-ROM products, on-line services and other efforts by Microsoft.


Majoli's Prep for Open Gets Off to a Good Start
After dropping the first set, Iva Majoli, an 18-year-old Croat, came back to defeat Anna Smashnova, 4-6, 6-3, 6-4, today in the first round of the Pathmark Tennis Classic.
Majoli, seeded fifth here and ranked 11th in the world, is using the tournament as a tuneup for the United States Open, which begins Monday at the National Tennis Center at Flushing Meadows, Queens.
She is hoping that a strong Open showing will propel her into the world's Top 10.


Main Break Discolors Water
Because of a water main break early yesterday, 350,000 residents and businesses in Newark, Belleville, Bloomfield, and Nutley were told to boil tap water before drinking it.


International Briefs; Eurotunnel Seeks Inquiry on Hoax
Eurotunnel said yesterday that it had requested that the French securities regulatory agency investigate a hoax that sent shares in the British-French company, which operates the tunnel under the English Channel, soaring.
The shares rose more than 8 percent in France yesterday after a caller identifying himself as a Eurotunnel official called news agencies to say that the tunnel authority had signed a rescheduling agreement with its creditor banks for its debt of 75 billion francs ($381.3 billion).
Agence France-Presse sent out a dispatch reporting the apparent news.


Alexander Z. Bielski, 83, a Guerrilla Fighter Who Harried Nazis and Saved Jews, Is Dead
Alexander Zeisal Bielski, a leader of the famous Bielski Brigade that harried German occupation forces and rescued hundreds of Jews from Nazi execution in Byelorussia during World War II, died on Friday at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 83.
His family said he died of cardiac arrest.


Crucifix Ruling Angers Bavarians
The office of Bavaria's million-member Committee of Catholics was a bit more frantic today than its director, Elke Hummeler, would have liked.
But the office was only a pale reflection of the upheaval into which this tradition-rich state has been thrown by a court decision that many Bavarians consider sacrilegious and hateful.
Germany's highest court decided this month that the Bavarian law requiring a crucifix to be hung in each of the state's 40,000 classrooms was unconstitutional.


The Citadel's Honor
To the Editor:
It isn't Shannon Faulkner who has failed to measure up ("Female Cadet Quits The Citadel, Citing Stress of Her Legal Battle," front page, Aug. 19).
It's The Citadel.


Petrolite Corp.(PLIT,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


John Lotas; Theater Producer, 74
John Lotas, the original producer of Hal Holbrook's "Mark Twain Tonight!" in New York, died on Friday after being struck by a car in Austin, Tex.
He was 74.
Mr.
Holbrook had been performing his one-man show around the United States for about eight years in the 1950's when Mr.
Lotas saw him do it at the Lambs Club in Manhattan.
In 1959, Mr.
Lotas presented the show at the Forty-First Street Theater, where it won acclaim.
Running for 174 performances, it became Mr.
Holbrook's signature performance and set him off on his acting career.
The show later reopened on Broadway.


Spanish Model for a Final Solution
THE ORIGINS OF THE INQUISITION IN 15TH-CENTURY SPAIN  By B. Netanyahu  1,384 pages.
Random House. $50.
This remarkable, lucid and very lengthy explanation of one of the central acts of malice in world history required a lifetime of scholarly devotion.
Benzion Netanyahu, who is a professor emeritus at Cornell University (and the father of Benjamin Netanyahu, the leader of the Likud Party in Israel), has spent much of his career studying that tragic historical creation known as the conversos or Marranos.
They are the former Jews of Spain whose conversion to Christianity in the 14th and 15th centuries did nothing to prevent some 30,000 of them from being burned at the stakes of the Inquisition.
Now, in a grand summing up of his research and reflection, Mr.
Netanyahu lays out a vision of the causes of the Inquisition that departs in many ways from what generations have thought about it until now.


Fatal Amusement Ride Reopens
A high-speed roller coaster, shut down after a rider inadvertently kicked a maintenance worker in the head and killed him, has reopened after being declared safe by the State Department of Labor.


In Virginia, 42 Female Cadets Report for Duty, but March to Their Own Drum
Crisp camouflage uniforms were tossed atop childhood teddy bears today as 42 women reported for duty at a new leadership college designed to spare the state-supported, all-male Virginia Military Institute from coeducation.
The college, the Virginia Women's Institute for Leadership, is part of Mary Baldwin College, a women's institution 35 miles north of Lexington, the home of V.M.I.
For 153 years, the two colleges' closest connection had been as a source of dates for the students.


International Briefs; Volvo Earnings Drop Despite Stronger Sales
Volvo A.B., the Swedish auto maker, said yesterday that its pretax earnings fell more than 40 percent in the first half of the year, even though car and truck sales grew.
Pretax profits tumbled to 5.33 billion kronor ($725.3 million) from 9.02 billion kronor a year earlier.
The earnings were below expectations.


Baker (J.) Inc.(JBAK,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
It's the usual morning rush-hour PATH train from Hoboken to Manhattan.
The train makes its usual lurches and jerks as it twists through the tunnel under the Hudson.
I have found a comfortable corner spot leaning against a wall.
Suddenly, when the train rounds a particularly sharp curve, an eight-foot pole in the middle of the car extending from floor to ceiling comes loose at both ends.
The two women who have been holding on to it look at each other in disbelief; for a few seconds they continue to grasp the pole as though it were still attached to the rest of the car.
Everyone stares; no one moves.


Salmon Blends With Two Staples of Summer
MANY recipes call for tomatoes and fresh corn this time of year.
Alternatives can be found from October to July, but they are pale copies.
With salmon for richness and ginger, cumin and garlic for spice, you'll want to make this dish several times before summer's end.
Salmon, Tomatoes,  Corn and Orzo  8 ounces whole onion or 7 ounces chopped, ready-cut onion (1 2/3 cups) 1 teaspoon olive oil 3 ears corn or 2 cups frozen corn kernels  Enough fresh or frozen ginger to yield 1 tablespoon, coarsely grated 1 teaspoon cumin  1/2 cup orzo  Pan spray 10 ounces salmon fillet 1 1/2 pounds ripe tomatoes 1 large clove garlic  A few sprigs of oregano to yield 1 tablespoon chopped.
1. Bring water to boil in large covered pot.
2. Chop whole onion.
3.
Heat nonstick pan over high heat until it very hot.
Reduce heat to medium-high and add oil and onion.
Saute until onion begins to soften.
4. Shuck corn and scrape kernels from cobs; grate the ginger.
5.
Add the corn kernels, cumin and ginger to the onion and continue to cook until the corn is done, two or three minutes.
6. Cook the orzo.
7.
When onion-corn mixture is cooked, spoon into a serving bowl.
Wipe out the pan and spray it lightly with pan spray.
Saute the salmon in the pan, following the Canadian rule: measure fish at the thickest part and cook 8 to 10 minutes to the inch.
8.
Wash, dry, trim and quarter the tomatoes and halve them.
Squeeze out some of the seeds and juice, and cut the tomatoes into small dice.
9.
Mince the garlic; wash, dry and chop the oregano and stir into the tomatoes.
Add to corn mixture.
10.
When orzo is cooked, drain and stir in.
When salmon is cooked, cut into bite-size pieces and carefully stir in.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 615 calories, 11 grams fat, 25 milligrams cholesterol, 130 milligrams sodium, 35 grams protein, 95 grams carbohydrate.


Brown-Forman Corp.(BF.A,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 31


Taxi!
Once upon a time in New York City, a cabbie (or so legend and old Warner Brothers movies tell us) was a guy who really knew his way around the block.
Every block.
You wouldn't catch him hanging out the car window and asking the driver next door which way to Penn Station.
This guy could even find Little West 12th Street on the first go.
Something else this guy could do.
He could speak English.
True, it was often colored by a kind of borough-specific accent, but it was always understandable.
And while turning off his mouth was sometimes a problem, asking him to turn off his radio was not.
It was seldom, if ever, on.


TRADING OF ARAKIS ENERGY SHARES HALTED
Trading of the shares of the Arakis Energy Corporation was halted at about 2:30 P.M. yesterday on the Nasdaq and the Vancouver Stock Exchange, at the request of the Vancouver exchange.
Vancouver disputed an Arakis news release yesterday that said the exchange had given preliminary approval to the company's $750 million financing plan.
The plan includes the proposed sale of 23 million new shares to the Arab Group International for $345 million.
Trading will resume once the company issues a clarifying release, said Angela Huxham of the Vancouver exchange.
Arakis shares had fallen $1.625, to $11.875, on Nasdaq volume of 6.2 million shares when trading stopped yesterday.
Arakis share prices have ranged from $13.50 to $25.625 on the Nasdaq, since the company announced in early July that the Arab Group would back its project to build a 950-mile pipeline in Sudan. (Bloomberg Business News)


The Clintons Confront White Water


SHAREHOLDERS' OFFERING RAISES $540 MILLION
An offering of shares of the H. J. Heinz Company by some shareholders this week generated $540.3 million.
The 12.75 million common shares were priced at $42.375 each late Monday.
The sellers include the Howard Heinz and Vira I. Heinz Endowments and Heinz family trusts.
The H. J. Heinz Company, a Pittsburgh-based producer of food products, would not receive any proceeds from the offering.
Heinz shares dropped 50 cents, to close at $41.875 yesterday, on the New York Stock Exchange. (Dow Jones)


Foreign Affairs; The No-Dead War
During a visit to Paris a few weeks ago I was fascinated to watch how the French dealt with two major news events that happened to coincide on a balmy summer weekend.
The 82d Tour de France bicycle race was concluded on the Champs-Elysees, and two French peacekeeping soldiers in Bosnia were killed in Sarajevo.
The French news coverage of the two events wasn't even close.
The Tour de France won by a mile.
When an Italian cyclist, Fabio Casartelli, was killed in a crash during the Tour de France earlier in the week, his picture was plastered on the front page of every Paris newspaper and he was mourned from Calais to Cannes.
But not a single French newspaper printed the names of the two French soldiers killed in Sarajevo, let alone their pictures.


International Briefs; Takeover Bid Extended
The Southern Company, the big utility based in Atlanta, said yesterday that it was extending its $1.5 billion takeover bid for South Western Electricity P.L.C. of Britain until Sept. 4.
Southern also said it already held about 14.4 percent of the British utility's shares.
Southern is offering $:9 (about $13.79) a share for South Western, valuing the regional electricity company at about $:1 billion ($1.53 billion). (Reuters)


Subway Train Hits Another in Lower Manhattan, Injuring 18
For the third time this year, a subway train rear-ended another yesterday, this time at the Brooklyn Bridge-City Hall station, in an accident that sent 18 bloodied and bruised straphangers to hospitals.
None were seriously hurt.
Transit officials said the operator of the rear train, a slow-moving, southbound No. 6, appeared to be at fault, though more investigation will be needed before a formal conclusion is reached.
Officials said the motorman, Alvin Darden, 31, had a clear view of the empty No. 6 train stopped in front of him.
And after a quick review showed that the signals were working properly, some speculated that Mr.
Darden had gone through a red light.


Transactions
Football  National Football League
ARIZONA CARDINALS -- Waived Steve Hendrickson and Oscar Gray, fullbacks.
Claimed Stevie Anderson, wide receiver, off waivers from the New York Jets.
Re-signed Terry Samuels, fullback.
Placed Sean Dykes, defensive back, on injured reserve.


Scandals of Yesteryear In the Nation's Capital
With names like Whitewater and Packwood enlivening the summer headlines, tonight's edition of "20th Century" brings back other zesty names from half a century of capital affairs: Wilbur Mills and Fanne Foxe, Wayne Hays and Elizabeth Ray, Gary Hart and Donna Rice, Sherman Adams and Bernard Goldfine, Spiro Agnew, Harrison Williams and more.
"Washington Scandals: Sex, Money, Power" is an hour's worth of hanky-panky, replayed by Mike Wallace with the assistance of CBS News clips.
The sex cases are the stuff of farce:


Injury in Escape Attempt
A teen-ager suspected of shoplifting at South Street Seaport was in critical condition last night after nearly drowning in a bid to escape security guards by jumping into the East River, a Police Department spokesman said.
The unidentified youth, who the police say is between 15 and 17 years old, was being escorted to a security office by the guards about 9:00 P.M., when he spotted police officers who had been summoned to investigate thefts at several shops.
He then ran off and jumped into the river, said the spokesman, Detective Mark Paterson.


Why Harassed Women Didn't Speak Up
To the Editor:
Senator Bob Packwood's response to charges of sexual harassment, that some women "did not complain at the time and, in fact, continued to work for him" (news article, Aug. 17), ignores that harassed women did not then, and often still do not, have such simple alternatives.


Don't Cut Transit Service. Just Cut the Fat.; Worse for Rail Riders
To the Editor:
As a daily Metro-North commuter, I would like to bring several items to your attention:


The Melancholy to Mercurial
No one has ever accused Joel Sachs of making life easy for the Juilliard students who play at his Summergarden concerts in the Sculpture Garden of the Museum of Modern Art.
For the penultimate program in the series, he assembled an evening of spiky cello works by Gunther Schuller, Hall Overton, Roger Sessions and Elliott Carter, and put them in the able hands of Darrett Adkins.
For a critic who remembers the days when a cellist would be considered heroic for including any one of these pieces on a program, the ease and musicality with which Mr.
Adkins sailed through all four on Saturday evening was stunning.
Technical challenges did not seem to faze him, and he played with a tone that retained its richness and warmth even after its voyage through the amplification system, a necessary compromise for a concert held outdoors in midtown Manhattan.


Merrill Corp.(MRLL,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


Petsmart Inc.(PETM,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 30


Nanni Loy, 69, Italian Director Known for Films on Wartime
Nanni Loy, an Italian director whose work included dramatic films on the Italian Resistance, zany tragicomedies set in Naples and popular television programs, died on Monday at a beach resort near Rome.
He was 69.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Karros's Single in 11th Inning Leads Dodgers to Victory
Dodgers 7, Expos 4
Eric Karros's r.b.i. single in the 11th broke a tie and Roberto Kelly added a two-run single to lead the Los Angeles Dodgers to a 7-4 victory over the Montreal Expos last night at Olympic Stadium.


Pedigree and Promise, but Still No Race for Young Colt
In a heavily treed expanse down Nelson Avenue outside the 127-year-old Saratoga Race Course, behind stone gates marked "private," generations of horses have been kept in splendor by members of the Whitney family.
Bowls of impatiens that are in bloom hang from the shedrow of two trim white barns.
An army of grooms keeps raking the dirt and shaking down new hay.
A one-mile training track disappears behind trees toward the mountains beyond.
This idyllic setting has been the summer home of Genuine Reward, the star-crossed colt whose mother, Genuine Risk, won the Kentucky Derby in 1980 and then endured 13 years of miscarriage and misfortune before finally giving birth to him two years ago at the age of 16.


Fluke Corp.(FLK,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 28


Man the Lifeboats: The Yankees Sink Below .500
Buck Showalter adamantly refused to call his chat with the Yankees on Monday night a concession speech, but it sure sounded like one.
The manager reminded the Yankees that they are alive in the wild-card chase and should not be exasperated by the huge gap that has formed beneath the first-place Red Sox.
Maybe the players misunderstood.
Showalter wanted the Yankees to focus on winning, to forget about Boston and to strive to be the best team in the American League, aside from the division winners, so they could still sneak into the post-season.


School Board Offers to Hire Business Expert
Offering a possible compromise with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, the president of the Board of Education said yesterday that the board would be willing to hire a business person with fiscal and managerial experience to serve as a deputy to the new Schools Chancellor.
Carol A. Gresser, the board's president, said that it "would of course be a plus" for the New York City school system to have someone with experience in the world of business and finance, as the Mayor has repeatedly suggested.
But that, she said, was "something you could buy in the person of a deputy chancellor."


Today's Longer Racquets Are Making a Lot of Noise
At 5 feet 8 inches, Michael Chang is one of the shortest players in men's tennis.
Except for stretching himself on a rack, adding an extra inch to improve his game was impossible until Prince supplied him with a 28-inch prototype racquet.
At one inch longer than the standard, the Prince racquet has helped Chang's serve, reach, power and net coverage.
It hasn't hurt his standing, either: Since 1993, his ATP computer ranking has risen from eighth to fifth.


American Stores Co.(ASC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Personal Health; Dangers of a little-known clotting disorder.
MOST people know of the inherited bleeding disorder hemophilia.
But von Willebrand's disease, a far more common clotting disorder, is little known.
Hemophilia afflicts one man in 10,000, but von Willebrand's may affect as many as one in 100 men and women, often causing frequent nosebleeds, bleeding gums, easy bruising and excessive menstrual flow.
Unlike hemophilia, it is not usually life-threatening.
More than 95 percent of people with von Willebrand's disease never know they have it.
Some have no recognizable symptoms, but others accept their annoying symptoms as normal, particularly if a parent had similar ones.
Yet, the failure to diagnose von Willebrand's disease as a cause of very heavy menstrual bleeding, or menorrhagia, can result in unnecessary tests and procedures, including repeated dilation and curettage procedures and hysterectomy, none of which get to the root of the problem.


Church Leaders Fault Police In Melee at Revival Meeting
As black religious leaders criticized the way the police handled a melee at a South Jamaica, Queens, church Sunday night, a senior police official said yesterday that officers had not conferred with supervisors before going into the church to arrest a parishioner.
It was that attempt to make the arrest -- for the beating of a retired policeman -- that ignited the melee.


Will the U.S. Sell Out the Bosnians?
For nearly three years, the Clinton Administration has distanced itself from its European allies by proclaiming an intent to preserve Bosnia as an undivided state.
Now, it is suddenly bent on sponsoring Bosnia's ethnic partition.
Last week, Assistant Secretary of State Richard Holbrooke and an American delegation traveled to the Balkans to present a new peace plan.
Tragically, three delegation members died in an accident on the road to Sarajevo.
After the memorial service, Mr.
Holbrooke is scheduled to return to the Bosnian capital with a plan that would, de facto, cede control over most of Bosnia's territory to Serbia and Croatia.


In a Session Lacking Focus, the Dow Rises 5.64 Points
Wall Street endured a typically dull late-August session yesterday, showing little response to the Federal Reserve Board's decision not to act on interest rates.
Trading volume was sluggish and there were relatively small changes on the plus side in the major market averages.


Rizzuto to Discuss His Status Today
PHIL RIZZUTO, who resigned from WPIX-TV/Channel 11 last week, will discuss his departure today at a Yankee Stadium news conference.
Rizzuto met yesterday with MICHAEL EIGNER, general manager of WPIX.
Eigner declined to say whether Rizzuto indicated he was reconsidering his decision or whether the former Yankee shortstop had submitted a formal resignation.
"We met," said Eigner.
"He's hard to read. He could change his mind. I don't know."


Expanding On a Cuban Musical Heritage
When Chico O'Farrill's Afro-Cuban Jazz Orchestra performed on Monday night at the Blue Note, most of the tunes started with conga drummers tapping out Cuban rhythms: a guaguanco, a rumba, a mambo, a cha-cha.
Mr.
O'Farrill, who helped pioneer Latin jazz in the late 1940's and early 50's with arrangements for Dizzy Gillespie, Benny Goodman, Stan Kenton and Machito, has held onto his Cuban musical heritage.
He extended it by bringing the multi-layered counterpoint of Cuban rhythm to the big band, making brass and reed and rhythm sections interlock like an Afro-Cuban percussion choir while reveling in modernist harmony.
Mr.
O'Farrill has just released his first album since the mid-1960's, "Pure Emotion" (Milestone).
In the meantime, he wrote arrangements for Gato Barbieri, Stan Kenton and David Bowie while earning a living with music for commercials.
He hasn't lost his touch.


Bork Wasn't Borked
To the Editor:
In his column of Aug. 12, "Was Newt Borked?" Frank Rich quoted William Safire's definition of "to bork" as to "attack viciously a candidate or appointee, especially by misrepresentation in the media."


NEW YORK REJECTS CUT IN SCHOOL DAY
State education officials yesterday rejected, at least for now, a request by the New York City Board of Education to shorten the elementary school day by up to two periods a week, leaving the city's community superintendents scrambling to find another way to cut $30 million from their budgets just two weeks before the start of school.
In a letter to the board, James A. Kadamus, the state's Acting Deputy Commissioner for Elementary and Secondary Education, said the board's proposal had raised serious questions, particularly with national studies showing that elementary school children "need more quality schooling, not less." Mr.
Kadamus seemed to offer the board only a slight ray of hope, saying he was turning down its request "at this time" and "based upon the information provided."


CEREAL MAKER ANTICIPATES UP TO 1,075 LAYOFFS
The Kellogg Company said yesterday that weakened domestic cereal sales might force it to cut 1,075 jobs, or about 14 percent of its United States work force.
A final decision is expected in November, the company said, after negotiations with the American Federation of Grain Millers union over severance and early-retirement packages.
Kellogg wants to cut about 800 of the 1,900 jobs at its cereal plant in Battle Creek, Mich., and about 275 of 600 jobs in Memphis.
The company eliminated 475 jobs in the second quarter. (AP)


Fed Leaving Rates Alone, As Expected
With the economy apparently recovering from a stumble in the spring, the Federal Reserve's top policy committee chose today to leave short-term rates unchanged.
The decision to do nothing had been widely expected, given a recent string of strong economic indicators that suggested little need for the Fed to stimulate the economy right now.
But the decision was nonetheless important as an indication that the central bank planned to move slowly on lowering rates even in the face of an equally striking set of indicators showing inflation was under control.


Hate the Sin, Love the Sinner; A Wheeler-Dealer Minister Denies Homophobia
The Rev.
Ruben Diaz was swiveling in his chair in his corner office, exasperated.
He was tired of being called a homophobe, he said, of defending himself, of being heckled.
For two years, he had prayed the issue would disappear.
"I want it to end," he said. "When is this going to end?"


BUSINESS DIGEST
Copley to Pay $150 Million In Respiratory-Drug Suit  Copley Pharmaceutical agreed to pay as much as $150 million to settle suits charging that albuterol, its respiratory drug used by asthmatics and others, made people ill or even led to their deaths.
The tentative settlement halted a 42-day trial that involved 14 deaths and 100 injuries all across the country.
Last year Copley recalled all of its albuterol, nearly four million vials, saying the action was merely a precaution.
But plaintiffs asserted that millions of vials of the inhaler had been contaminated since the company began manufacturing the drug in 1990.  [ Page D2. ] Microsoft Talking With Turner  Microsoft is negotiating with Turner Broadcasting System with an eye toward making a $1 billion equity investment in Turner, a person close to the talks said.
In addition the companies are said to be considering a joint venture in which Microsoft would use Turner's library of movies and other programming for CD-ROM products, on-line services and other efforts.  [ D3. ] Coming to Your Screen: E-Checks  The check's in the mail?
Not if some banks and technology companies have their way.
"Electronic checks" are what they envision, E-mail checks that could be used for phone bills and birthday presents -- but that, yes, could still bounce.  [ D2. ] Buffett Listens.
What Next?
Warren Buffett can infuriate chief executives -- as he did by saying grants for stock options should be charged against earnings, and as he does by, well, just being so capable.
Now he's really gone over the line: He's listening, and responding, to shareholders who had objected to a Berkshire Hathaway proposal.  [ D3. ] Outsider in the Board Room  Dale Hanson joined the board of ICN Pharmaceuticals, giving this campaigner for shareholder power an opportunity to practice what he preached as head of a huge California pension fund.
He'll have his hands full.
The S.E.C. is investigating ICN.  [ D3. ] News Corp.
Disappointment  The News Corporation reported higher earnings, helped by an improvement in Fox Television and in its British newspapers.
But analysts said that the company's fourth quarter was worse than expected, and its A.D.R.'s slipped.  [ D4. ] Is Rockefeller Center Cornered?
If Rockefeller Center Properties shuns Sam Zell for rival investors -- Tishman Speyer is already in the game, and speculation about another is rife -- it faces a breakup fee of $11.5 million, newly filed papers show.  [ D9. ] A Quiet Day for Stocks  Wall Street was quiet yesterday, as befits a sunny, late August day.
To those ends, it's mounting a $1 million advertising campaign.
And it's doing it without taxpayer money: The campaign is supported by individual and foundation philanthropy and by contributions of labor and services, all of it organized by volunteers.
Advertising.  [ D4. ] Cutting the Census Budget  The Census Bureau asks too many questions, say some Congressional Republicans who want to slash its budget.
But others insist that the demand for demographic information is soaring and see an information-age disaster if the flow of data dries up.  [ A1. ] The Fast Track Is Underground  The subway, business travelers the world over are discovering, is often the best alternative to fighting through traffic.
In Seoul, for instance, you can get across town in about half the time it takes to drive -- and in a civilized manner -- by going underground.
Business Travel.  [ D9. ]


New Retail Unit For McCann/SAS
McCann/SAS in Troy, Mich., a unit of McCann-Erickson Worldwide that has as its sole client the GMC truck division of the General Motors Corporation, has formed a separate advertising and marketing retail unit, McCann/SAS Retail, with the local GMC truck dealer marketing groups as its only client.


Trump Files a Suit to Block A New State Lottery Game
Acting against a potential competitor to his Atlantic City casinos, Donald Trump filed a lawsuit yesterday to block New York State's introduction of Quick Draw, a keno-style lottery game that is supposed to start appearing in bars, restaurants and other locations in September.
Mr.
Trump filed the lawsuit in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, charging that the state must pass a constitutional amendment to authorize any new form of gambling.
Although state officials call Quick Draw just another lottery game, Mr.
Trump alleged that that it was more akin to playing casino-style slot machines.


Ilheus Journal; Where Cocoa Was King, the Weeds Take Over
In the city that chocolate built, the news was not even bittersweet.
Protesters picketed the port.
Editorial writers railed.
But, armed with a court order, stevedores here unloaded African cocoa beans, the first since Brazil banned cocoa imports in 1934.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  IRAQI ARMS DISCLOSURES
Iraq has told the head of a United Nations inspection team that its germ warfare program was larger and more advanced than it had previously admitted.
A1  POLITICAL BLOW TO YELTSIN
The new political party created by Boris N. Yeltsin suffered a humiliating defeat in the Russian President's home province.
A1  UNSOLVED MURDER IN GUATEMALA
The widow of the Guatemalan President's cousin has found that even her powerful connection cannot produce an accounting of her husband's killing by a death squad.
A1  STRIKE AT ISRAEL'S GOVERNMENT
News Analysis: There was an ominous new twist to the latest suicide bus bombing in Jerusalem -- it was intended to bring down the Israeli Government in next year's elections.
A6  UPROAR OVER CROSS IN BAVARIA
A court ruling that Bavaria cannot require a crucifix to be hung in every classroom has the state in upheaval.
A3  MEXICO PURSUES DRUG LORD
The Mexican Government is negotiating for the surrender of one of the country's most powerful cocaine traffickers.
A5  TENSION OVER TAIWAN
News Analysis: For the first time in decades, Chinese and Western officials are wondering aloud whether there is a danger of war breaking out over Taiwan.
A12  Zairian soldiers forced thousands of refugees to return to Rwanda.
A3  Bosnian Serb attacks killed 6 people and wounded 38 in Sarajevo. .
A12  Ilheus Journal: Where Brazil's cocoa flourished, weeds grow.
A4  National A14-18  CUTBACKS BEFORE CENSUS TIME
The tight Federal budget is forcing the Census Bureau to cut operations just when it would usually start increasing spending to prepare for the next 10-year census.
A1  A DEATH TRANSFIXES DETROIT
Despite conflicting reports about a woman who died after plunging into the Detroit River, one thing is clear: No onlooker intervened until she had gone into the water.
A1  FOCUS ON PLANE'S ENGINE
Investigators began combing through the wreckage for clues about what caused an engine of a commuter plane to give out before it crashed in a Georgia field.
A14  TAPE OF SIMPSON DETECTIVE
Transcripts of taped interviews with a police witness in the O.J.
Simpson case reveal that he boasted that there was "nothing better" than "a good beating." A14  CONGRESSMAN CONVICTED
A jury convicted Representative Mel Reynolds of Illinois of having sex with a former campaign worker when she was underage.
A14  GAMBLING INQUIRY IN LOUISIANA
Affidavits revealed what authorities describe as a large investigation of public corruption involving legislators and owners of gambling establishments in Louisiana.
A16  CLINTONS GO RAFTING
The Clinton family, vacationing in Wyoming, took a rafting trip, which the White House was careful to describe without using the word "whitewater." A18  MAPPING OUT CYBERSPACE
Participants at the "Aspen Summit: Cyberspace and the American Dream II" agreed that the nation was entering an era that will profoundly remake its political, economic and social landscape.
A17  Education B6  Cadets arrive at the female version of the Virginia Military Institute.
Metro Digest B1  MAYOR CRITICIZES IMMIGRANT BILL
Immigration restrictions gathering steam in the Republican-led Congress would have "catastrophic social effects," Mayor Giuliani said, charging that they violated basic decency and could throw as many as 60,000 immigrants out of city schools and onto the streets.
A1  SHORTENED SCHOOL DAY REJECTED
State officials turned down a request by the New York City Board of Education to shorten the elementary school day by up to two periods a week, leaving community superintendents scrambling to find another way to cut $30 million.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  Goings-on between Ticketmaster and Pearl Jam.
C11  A scary 'play' in Brazil.
C11  Music: Works for cello.
C12  Chico O'Farrill and band.
C15  Books: Jews and the Inquisition.
C16  Book Notes C11  TV: "Washington Scandals." C16  The Living Section C1-8  Southern culinary traditions.
C1  A horse and marriage.
C1  New England's chardonnays.
C3  Health Page C10  Personal Health: Commonest clotting ailment isn't hemophilia.
Sports B8-13  Baseball: Yanks lose to A's B9  Steinbrennner makes playoffs a must.
B11  Giants topple Mets.
B11  Column: Berkow on the Jets.
B9  Football: Jets sign Marshall.
B9  Horse Racing: Derby dream fades for colt.
B9  Olympics: Atlanta gets favorable review.
B13  Tennis: Teen-ager takes dream to U.S.
Open.
B13  Obituaries B7  Alexander Z. Bielski, a guerrilla leader against the Nazis.
Nanni Loy, film director.
Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials  Israel: peace, terror and dissent.
Smoking's unsettled state.
Mr.
Pataki rights a wrong.
Taxi!
Letters  Thomas L. Friedman: The no-dead war.
Marshall Freeman Harris, Stephen W. Walker: The sellout of Bosnia.
A.
Lee Parks: Georgia's unholy alliance.
Susan Faludi: For Shannon Faulkner, strength in numbers.
Chronicle B2  Crossword C15


DOMTAR TO SELL UNITS TO FOCUS ON CORE BUSINESS
Domtar Inc. is planning to shed its gypsum and decorative-panel divisions as part of a new strategy focusing on lumber, papers and packaging.
The Montreal forest products company said on Monday that it intended to sell the units separately, not through a sale of stock to the public, as analysts had expected.
An analyst at Wood Gundy Inc., Don Roberts, said Domtar could receive $300 million to $350 million for its gypsum operations and $100 million to $120 million for the decorative-panel business.
Domtar would like to complete the sale by the end of the year, according to its president, Stephen Larson. (Bloomberg Business News)


In the Hamptons, Temptation Over a Teapot
It's tea time in the Hamptons, where an elusive burglar has carefully avoided motion detectors and sleeping homeowners to steal more than $200,000 worth of silverware -- and the same brand of pearl-handled teapot -- from four homes.
So many of the elaborate Georg Jensen tea sets have disappeared from the estates section of Southampton that the village police issued a public appeal yesterday for information about the burglaries, which started in early February.
They also added a warning.
"Don't leave your silver out in plain sight, even though they are nice pieces," said Sgt.
Michael Schucht of the Southampton police.
"Put them in the appropriate cabinet."


Newbridge Networks (NN,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 31


Oddities Continue With Ticketmaster And Pearl Jam
After the charges and countercharges, crossfires of legal papers and insults between the popular rock band Pearl Jam and the dominant ticket seller Ticketmaster, a two-sentence announcement early last month seemed oddly anticlimactic.
The Justice Department said it was dropping its antitrust investigation of Ticketmaster while continuing "to monitor competitive developments."
The end of the investigation closely followed the collapse of Pearl Jam's United States tour, which itself was a highly publicized counteroffensive to Ticketmaster.


A Drug Figure Is Said to Offer To Surrender To Mexicans
Under growing American pressure to make good on its promises of stronger efforts to stop illegal drugs, the Government of President Ernesto Zedillo is negotiating for the surrender of one of Mexico's most powerful cocaine traffickers, United States officials have confirmed.
The trafficker, Juan Garcia Abrego, became the first international drug kingpin to number among the F.B.I.'s "Ten Most Wanted Fugitives" when he was named to the list in March.


Surprise! Jets Sign Marshall at Linebacker
The Jets were looking for a veteran wide receiver with experience today and got an experienced linebacker who still has more receptions than all the wide receivers the Jets currently have in camp.
In a surprise move, the Jets signed the unrestricted free agent, Wilber Marshall, the 12-year veteran linebacker, who has 21 interceptions in his illustrious career, which is more than three times the number of receptions by the Jets' current corps of five receivers.
Only Ryan Yarborough has any National Football League experience and he has a grand total of six receptions.


Caresses, Nips and Kisses in a Scary Yet Delicious 'Play'
Bouncing over the highways of Sao Paulo, the lengthy truck echoed with the screams of passengers facing each other along two rows of swings suspended from the truck's roof.
The women shrieked, the men called out their lovers' names.
Voices whispered stories to them, while invisible presences caressed their faces, bit their ears and kissed their fingertips.
In total darkness, the anticipation was terrible and delicious at once, the clamorous protests hinting at defense, guilt, jealousy or, perhaps, desire.
The truck ride was the first "scene" of "Merlin's Great Voyage," a five-hour odyssey that takes the entire metropolitan area of the world's third-largest city as its stage.
The play leads participants to a series of "post-modern tourist attractions," as one of the show's directors calls them, including a city garbage dump all aflame, a cavernous decaying theater and a lake outside the city.


NCI Building Systems Inc. reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


BETWEEN RACES WITH: Julie Krone; Like a Horse And Carriage? Not Exactly.
SARATOGA SPRINGS, N.Y.
JULIE KRONE sat at the picnic table in the yard outside the jockeys' quarters at Saratoga Race Course wearing a T-shirt and riding pants and reflected on the approaching turn in her life.
On Saturday, right after she finishes riding, she is to be married.
Her wedding to Matthew Muzikar, a former security guard at the track who is now a television sports producer, will be followed by a reception for 300 given by Marylou Whitney, the dynamo of Saratoga society and a prominent horse owner, at Mrs.
Whitney's home, Cady Hill House.


A Pathmark For Queens Is Vetoed By Giuliani
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday vetoed a plan to build a giant Pathmark store in Queens, saying the city had acted unlawfully when it included a deal under which the company would donate more than $400,000 to other merchants.
The veto was the Mayor's seventh since he took office 20 months ago, and City Council leaders said they would override it.
That vote, they said, will likely be held next week.
Giuliani administration officials, in turn, said they would probably go to court to block the deal.


Sports of The Times; The Jets Test Their Testosterone
A ROOKIE Jet guard named Matt O'Dwyer, fresh from his scholarly pursuits at Northwestern University, has had the name Meathead conferred on him by some of his new teammates.
The 308-pound O'Dwyer, seeking to gain a starting spot in the offensive line, may be the symbol of a new age for the Jets and their first-year coach, Rich Kotite.
O'Dwyer has been in a few skirmishes with teammates in practice and was one of a handful of Jets to be charged by the Giants last Saturday night with repellent football, such as late hits and trying to cut down a Giant when his back was turned.


Don't Cut Transit Service. Just Cut the Fat.; Another Shell Game
To the Editor:
E.
Virgil Conway's self-serving Op-Ed article, "What You'll Get for That Extra Quarter" (Aug. 16) is another shell game designed to distract voters from the real issues.


International Briefs; BOC Gases to Buy Stake
BOC Gases said yesterday that it was buying a stake of roughly 40 percent in Indura, a Chilean provider of industrial gases, welding equipment and medical supplies, for about $50 million.
BOC Gases, which is a unit of BOC Group P.L.C., the British industrial chemicals concern, said it would acquire the stake through a series of stock purchases.
Indura, which is based in Santiago, Chile, has 650 employees, and its 1995 sales are projected to be $80 million. (Dow Jones)


What the Tapes in the Simpson Case Say
Transcripts of taped interviews with the former police detective who is a central prosecution witness in the O. J. Simpson case depict him boasting that on at least one occasion, he and other policemen had a "kill party" to celebrate a police shooting.
The detective, Mark Fuhrman, also declares that there is "nothing better" than "a good beating."
"That's when everybody wants to get some beer," said Mr.
Fuhrman, who found many pieces of evidence in the Simpson case, and whose racial and ethical attitudes now dominate the trial.
He continued, according to a transcript obtained by The New York Times: "It's like the end of a football game. You just won the championship. And you're on the real high. You're dominant. You're powerful. You're unbeatable."


Offensive Line Takes Hits From Injuries
Whenever left tackle Jumbo Elliott looks down the offensive line lately it seems there's a different face staring back.
It's musical linemen, except that when the jingle stops, there is sure to be an opening.
If the Giants somehow manage to beat Dallas in the season opener, Coach Dan Reeves might as well be named coach of the year on the spot.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMBERS STORES INC., Dallas, said it would close eight Dallas-area stores and a store in Clive, Iowa, as part of a plan to revamp the ailing company, an arts and crafts retailer.


Accounts
Toys "R" Us, Paramus, N.J., to Caroline Jones Inc., New York, to handle its account for advertising aimed at black consumers, previously handled by the Mingo Group, New York.
The billings were not disclosed.
City Center 55th Street Theater Foundation Inc., New York, to Beaver Reitzfeld, New York, to handle its account, previously at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York.
The billings were not disclosed.


For Shannon Faulkner, Strength in Numbers
Out of all the nearly 2,000 cadets who enrolled in an all-male military academy called The Citadel this year, the only one whose name we know was the one the school didn't want: Shannon Faulkner.
This distinction seems, on its face, too obvious to mention.
Of course she's famous -- that she was admitted to the academy at all was a cause celebre.
But the distinction is important, because it goes to the heart of the issue.
One reason the other Citadel cadets loathed Shannon Faulkner (aside from her sex) was her individuality, which affronted The Citadel's ethic.
The academy purports to educate young men by making them conform.
Conformity is enforced through anonymity.
From the day the cadets arrive, when they are issued identical uniforms and haircuts, they become so homogeneous that, as an upperclassman explained to me, "mothers can't even tell their sons apart."


UNCERTAINTY ABOUT BOCA RESEARCH DEAL HURTS STOCK
The shares of Boca Research Inc. dropped yesterday for the fourth consecutive day on concerns that its pending purchase of Hayes Microcomputer Products Inc. may fall through.
Boca shares lost $2.766, to close at $27.734, in Nasdaq trading.
Earlier, the stock traded as low as $24.25.
Boca signed a letter of intent in June to buy closely held Hayes for $29.7 million, a transaction that would make the company the largest independent maker of computer modems.
Hayes entered Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection last November. (Bloomberg Business News)


GIULIANI CRITICIZES A U.S. CRACKDOWN ON ILLEGAL ALIENS
Immigration restrictions gathering steam in the Republican-led Congress would have "catastrophic social effects" in New York City and other large cities, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday.
He charged that the proposals violated basic decency and could throw as many as 60,000 immigrant children out of the city's schools and onto the streets.
Once again taking sharp exception with the dominant conservative wing of his own party, Mr.
Giuliani said in an interview that the proposed crackdown on illegal immigrants was deliberately intended to play to the public's worst fears of foreigners, and did not take into consideration the positive effects of immigrants on cities like New York.


Southern Cookbooks, From Low Fat to Fatback
IN the last year or so, there has been a steady demand for Southern cookbooks, many of them new.
Cookbooks on the South -- a region that John Martin Taylor, the owner of Hoppin' John's bookstore in Charleston, S.C., says is "more idea than area" for food lovers -- contain recipes ranging from tearoom fare to spicier African-American dishes.


INSIDE
Subway Train Crash
For the third time this year, a subway train rear-ended another, this time on the No. 6 line at the Brooklyn Bridge-City Hall station.
No one was seriously hurt.
Page B1.
Fuhrman Boasts in Tapes
Transcripts of interviews with Mark Fuhrman, the detective with a leading role in the Simpson case, depict him boasting that he had celebrated a shooting by the police.
Page A14  Congressman Convicted
Representative Mel Reynolds of Illinois was convicted of having sex with a former campaign worker while she was underage.
Page A14.
No Change in Interest Rates
The Federal Reserve left interest rates unchanged, suggesting that the central bank planned to move slowly on lowering rates.
Page D1.


International Briefs; EMI Music Helps Thorn's Profit Grow
Thorn EMI P.L.C., the British rental, record and retail company, said yesterday that its profits rose 31.5 percent in the first quarter before taxes and exceptional items, with EMI Music, which the company plans to spin off, performing strongly.
Thorn said it earned $:60.1 million ($92.7 million) before taxes and special items in the three months that ended June 30, up from $:45.7 million a year earlier.
Thorn, which has been divesting itself of noncore businesses, sold its electrical retail chain Rumbelows last year but has bought the Dillons bookstore chain to add to its HMV division, which operates


Bank of Montreal (BMO,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


Wine Talk
THIS is a tale of three wines, the gap between perception and reality, the inadequacies of wine tasting, the problems with pinot noir as a grape and probably some other stuff.
The three wines are the Steele Winery Carneros pinot noir 1993, the Robert Mondavi Napa Valley pinot noir 1993 and the Louis Jadot Pernand-Vergelesses Clos de la Croix-de-Pierre 1989, from Burgundy.


Career Horizons Inc.(CARH,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


FORD TO BUY STAKE IN CHINESE AUTO MAKER
Providing details of an agreement disclosed last month, the Ford Motor Company said yesterday that it would pay $40 million for a 20 percent stake in the Jiangling Motors Company, a Chinese auto maker, as part of a plan to develop mini-vans and vans for sale in China and overseas.
The companies plan to use Ford's designs and trademark and Jiangling's components.
Ford's stake in Jiangling will make it the second-largest shareholder in the company, which is based in the Jiangsu province.
Jiangling's parent, the state-run Jiangling Motors Corporation, will remain the controlling shareholder with a 51 percent stake. (Dow Jones)


A Woman's Plunge to Death Transfixes Detroit
Tearful and furious, Dortha Word slammed a clenched fist down onto the bridge's gray steel railing on Monday night as she pictured her daughter clinging to it desperately, before falling to her death in the broad Detroit River early Saturday morning.
Then Mrs.
Word turned and looked back across the bridge, across the lanes where the police said traffic had been backed up as her daughter, Deletha, 33, was pulled from her car after a minor accident, stripped of some or all of her clothes, and beaten before she jumped into the river to escape.
All the while, about 40 people were looking on.


An Officer Is Convicted Of Perjury
A police officer linked to the corruption scandal in the 30th Precinct in Harlem was convicted of perjury yesterday, the second New York City officer in a week to be found guilty of lying during court proceedings.
It took a Manhattan jury just an hour and a half to find Officer Armando Palacio, 34, guilty of four counts of perjury arising from testimony he gave before a grand jury and an evidence hearing about the circumstances of a drug arrest he made in 1992.


Death Squads in Guatemala: Even the Elite Are Not Safe
Of the more than 100,000 people who have been killed in 34 years of conflict here, few have had credentials or a lineage more distinguished than Jorge Carpio Nicolle.
A first cousin of Guatemala's current President, Mr.
Carpio was publisher of the newspaper El Grafico and twice a presidential candidate himself -- hardly the profile of a typical death squad victim here.
Two years ago, however, a band of masked gunmen shot him to death along a dark, deserted highway.


Market Place; Court Curtails Insider Trading Cases
When Elton Bryan, then the director of the West Virginia state lottery, decided to award a lucrative state contract to a company, he first bought stock in the company.
That sounded like insider trading to the Justice Department and to a Federal court.
But in a little-publicized opinion that has alarmed the Securities and Exchange Commission, a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit threw out Mr.
Bryan's conviction on securities fraud earlier this summer.
In doing so, the panel issued a broad opinion that if adopted by other circuits and the Supreme Court, could substantially reduce the number of possible insider trading cases.


Dorel Industries reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


New York Festivals Adds a Competition
New York Festivals in Chappaqua, N.Y., which presents annual awards in categories including broadcast commercials and print advertisements, is introducing an awards competition that will present prizes based on the worldwide effectiveness of campaigns as well as their creativity.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about John Gilmore, an avant-garde tenor saxophonist, misstated the broadcast times for a retrospective of his recordings to be broadcast today on WKCR (89.9 FM).
The show is to be broadcast from 5 A.M. to 9:30 P.M., not from 4 to 9 P.M.


Sperm Bank Ordered To Cease Operations
The New York State Health Department has ordered the largest sperm bank in the state to cease operations after an appellate court refused to continue an order that would have allowed it to remain in business.
The action was the latest in proceedings against the corporation operating the sperm bank, which has been accused of a pattern of violations of state health and safety regulations over several years.


He's Out of the Limelight, but Whitaker Keeps Winning
If it is not Roy Jones waging a strong campaign for his imaginary pound-for-pound title, it is Julio Cesar Chavez conspicuously avoiding a rematch.
If it is not Mike Tyson gobbling up the pay-per-view revenue, it is the commotion surrounding Oscar de la Hoya's booming left hook.
It seems the only time anyone pays Pernell Whitaker attention is the week leading up to one of his fights.
He is getting quite used to it, although given his accomplishments it is still hard to fathom.


School Chief Inspects Work In Newark
Three weeks before New Jersey's largest school district was to open under state control, Acting Superintendent Beverly L. Hall spent a few hours today inspecting refurbished buildings and serving notice to principals that they would be held responsible for both the academic and physical conditions of their schools.
"We have been able to attack the facilities issue aggressively," Dr.
Hall said as she toured the 15th Avenue Elementary School to point out some results of the $6 million cleanup begun in the district's 82 schools after the State Department of Education took control July 12.


Vizcaino On Fire Even in Defeat
The Mets' five-game winning streak and the Giants' four-game losing streak came to an end last night.
But for shortstop Jose Vizcaino, there seems to be no end to the kind of performance that will make it difficult for the Mets to let him go once the season is over.
Robby Thompson and Glenallen Hill each homered to lead the Giants to a 5-1 victory at Shea Stadium as the Mets lost for only the fourth time in 14 games.
It was a methodical defeat in a methodical game that lacked the drama of the Mets' 5-4 victory over the Giants in 11 innings Monday night or Sunday afternoon's 5-3 triumph over Hideo Nomo and the Dodgers.


METRO DIGEST
GIULIANI FAULTS ILLEGAL-ALIEN CRACKDOWN
The immigration restrictions gathering steam in the Republican-led Congress would have "catastrophic social effects" in New York City and other large cities, Mayor Giuliani said, charging that the proposals violated basic decency and could throw as many as 60,000 immigrant children out of the city's schools and onto the streets.  [ Page A1. ] A SETBACK FOR THE SHORTER SCHOOL DAY
State education officials rejected, at least for now, a request by the New York City Board of Education to shorten the elementary school day by up to two periods a week, leaving the city's community superintendents scrambling to find another way to cut $30 million from their budgets just two weeks before the start of school.  [ A1. ] NEW YORK CITY


Islanders Hire Charron as Assistant Coach
GUY CHARRON has been hired as an assistant coach by the Islanders, Coach MIKE MILBURY said yesterday.
Charron, a former National Hockey League center who retired as a player in 1981, spent five years an assistant coach and assistant general manager for Hockey Canada and five years as an assistant coach for the Calgary Flames.
He was also the head coach of the 1990 Canadian Junior National team that won a gold medal in 1990.
Charron, 46, is a native of Verdun, Quebec.


A 'New Foreword' That Isn't
For millions of American readers who have loved "To Kill a Mockingbird," the prospect of a few more words from Harper Lee, its silent and mysterious author, is thrilling.
Since the novel appeared in 1960, Ms.
Lee, an Alabama native, has not produced a single book for publication.
Though she gave interviews when the film version of "Mockingbird" was released in 1962, she has since closed her shutters to the public, refusing to talk to journalists or make public appearances.


Addington Resources Inc.(ADDR,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Conservative Care for Early Prostate Tumors
Many older men with low-grade prostate cancer may expect a normal life span without undergoing potentially debilitating radiation or surgical treatment, researchers said today.
Scientists studying the medical records of 451 Connecticut men in whom localized prostate cancer was diagnosed from 1971 to 1976 found that those who received little or no treatment for the condition were not likely to die sooner than healthy men of the same age group, which was 65 to 75 years.


'The Enemy of My Enemy . . . '
The latest suicide bus bombing in Jerusalem was distressingly familiar, but there was an ominous new twist in the goal of the Islamic militants who planned the attack.
It was to bring down the Israeli Government in next year's elections.
The bombing, declared a statement issued by the military wing of the Islamic movement Hamas, was the second strike in a new campaign aimed against "No. 1 Terrorist Yitzhak Rabin" and his Labor Government, a campaign that is to continue through the Israeli elections in November 1996.
The political shouting that erupted even before investigators had finished sifting the charred debris for the last speck of blood suggested that the target was not out of range.


Furon Co.(FCY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Park Service Rescues More Hikers and Boaters Than Climbers
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 15 news article about the death of two park rangers trying to rescue mountain climbers, and related efforts to restrict climber access to National Park Service lands, said: "Rescuing stranded climbers is expensive. In 1992, the National Park Service spent more than $3 million for 4,300 rescue missions nationwide." I am sure that many readers drew the same inference I did: that those 4,300 rescue missions were climbing-related.


Suspect Denies Knowing He Mixed Bomb
The way Federal prosecutors tell it, Fadil Abdelghani, a 33-year-old immigrant from the Sudan, was a significant element in a terrorist plot to bomb major buildings and transportation links in the New York area.
They say that on a secretly made videotape he is seen helping deliver barrels of diesel oil to a Queens "bomb factory" and then helping make a bomb by mixing the oil with fertilizer.


Steinbrenner Wants Yankees in Playoffs
Speaking in an unusually soothing fashion, George Steinbrenner initially said he did not want "to stick my nose into" the struggles that have plagued the Yankees and transformed their pennant pursuit into a wild-card waltz.
But while discussing how the Yankees stumbled in a 13-4 setback to Oakland Monday, Steinbrenner indicated that he wanted them to wake up from their slumber soon.
He stuck his nose in after all.
"There are people there who are in control and hopefully they can handle it," said Steinbrenner in a telephone interview before today's game with the A's.
"I will say that they better snap out of it. We got 38 games left and we have to be there. We have the highest payroll in baseball. I hate to keep saying that. But unless we were dreadfully wrong in our talent assessment on players and what to pay them, then there's something wrong."


Counsel Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Late in the Day, Educators Look Elsewhere for Cuts
As an educator in the New York City schools for 35 years, Max Messer never imagined his Bronx district being so desperate for money that he would actually find himself advocating shortening the time that young pupils spend in elementary school each day.
Yet in recent weeks, as he concluded that there was no less painful way to cut his district's budget, Mr.
Messer said he was forced to recommend to his district board that it cut up to two periods a week from the elementary school day.


Croatia's Constitution Protects Croatia's Serbs
To the Editor:
Re your Aug. 20 profile of the Croatian leader Franjo Tudjman:


Market Place; How Small Investors Ended Up in Sudan
What kind of investors end up owning shares of an obscure Canadian company that is promoting a huge pipeline project in war-torn Sudan with pledges that it will be financed by a little-known Saudi Arabian prince?
Some of the biggest mutual funds in the country, that's who -- and, by proxy, millions of individuals who on their own might never go near such a venture.


Holy Cow Sent To Pasture As Rizzuto Retires
With tears in his eyes and a 7-Eleven coffee cup in one hand, Phil Rizzuto said yesterday that his retirement from WPIX-TV/Channel 11 is not a bluff.
"This time, you'd better believe me," he said at a Yankee Stadium news conference, where he called his own end to 39 years as a Yankee broadcaster.


Israel Seizes at Least 32 Suspects Linked to Latest Bus Bombings
The Israeli Government announced today that it had captured a Hamas gang suspected of organizing the last two bus bombings in Israel, and had learned the identity of the two suicide bombers.
The authorities said two organizers and more than 30 members of the militant Islamic movement Hamas were rounded up in the West Bank.
But they added that two Hamas leaders primarily responsible for the bombing campaign remained at large, one in Gaza and the other in Damascus, Syria.
The leader in Damascus, Muhammad Diff, ordered the bombings, officials said.


English Gardeners; A Quiet Revolution Happened Here
STANDING in the high grass of the wild meadow at Gravetye Manor on a misty cool evening early this summer as tendrils of smoke curled out of the chimneys of a 16th-century manor house, I half expected to see Mr.
Rochester embracing Jane Eyre in one of the lighted windows.
And as night settled over the old hawthorne tree by the lake, it was hard to remember that this place, now an elegant hotel, was once the seat of revolution.
It had been bought in 1885 by a cantankerous Irish-born gardener named William Robinson.
He had come to England in his early 20's and had proceeded, by force of his personality and his prolific, opinionated writings, to turn English gardeners from their infatuation with carpet bedding -- mosaiclike patterns of blue, yellow and red annuals -- to the use of hardy plants almost forgotten in the stampede for the tender exotics that were flooding England.


Bugner Announces a Comeback at 45
JOE BUGNER, who twice went the distance with MUHAMMAD ALI during his 19-year boxing career, is planning a GEORGE FOREMAN-style comeback next month at age 45.
Now a grandfather and Australian citizen, the former British and European heavyweight champion said yesterday he would fight VINCE CERVI, the 27-year-old Australian heavyweight champion, on Sept. 22 in the Gold Coast resort area of Australia.


Uni-Select reports earnings for 2nd qtr to Jun 30


UAP Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Catherines Stores (CATH,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Making Form Follow Function . . . And Function Follow Form
DEPRESSION?
What Depression?
Some people breezed through the 1930's in magnificent style.
"Moving Beauty," a show now on view at the Montreal Museum of Fine Arts, rolls out the legendary automobiles in which the rich rode out hard times.
Bugatti.
Lagonda.
Bentley.
Voisin.
It's comforting to know the crash didn't force everyone to hit the road on foot.
There has never been a used-car lot quite like this one.
Other museum shows have related cars to the history of painting; this show presents the automobile as art in itself.
Restored, repainted, polished to a high showroom gloss, the 50 cars, which will be on view through Oct. 15, are presented like mixed-media sculptures.


Killings by Teen-Agers Up Sharply in Canada
Johnathan George Thimpsen was born in this isolated Indian community on Dec. 30, 1987, and was killed here on July 8, 1995.
Playful and outgoing, he had a winsome smile and a couple of missing front teeth.
His hero was Zorro, the masked, caped, sword-wielding vanquisher of villains.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST WINDOWS 95 INTRODUCED WITH FLASH With free midnight pizzas in Manhattan and free morning newspapers in London, with special colored lights on the Empire State Building and a blitz of one-time, before-dawn sale prices across the country, the moguls of Microsoft let loose with the splashiest, most frenzied, most expensive introduction of a computer product in the industry's history.  [ Page A1. ] LACK OF RAIN AFFLICTS NEW YORK REGION The Hudson River and the region's reservoirs need rain.
Wells, apple trees and crops of all kinds need rain.
New Jersey's cows have the blues these dry days and need rain.
News analysis.  [ B11. ] CHILD DIES AMID 10 LIFEGUARDS A 5-year-old girl died shortly after a teen-ager found her unconscious in a city pool in Brooklyn.
Ten lifeguards were on duty at the Betsy Head Pool in Brownsville.  [ B3. ] A 2-year-old boy survived a fall from a fifth-floor window.  [ B2. ] REGION  GIULIANI ATTACKS PORT AUTHORITY Mayor Giuliani fired a sharp attack at the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, complaining that it favors suburbanites at the expense of New Yorkers.
He warned that New York would act to rectify the inequity.  [ B6. ] A HOUSEHOLD IS SMITTEN BY SNAKES "Watch it, Kathy," Randall Stechert said as his girlfriend crouched in front of the Eastern timber rattlesnake that was exploring an armchair in their living room.
"Oh, it's all right," Kathleen Michell replied.  [ B6. ] Chronicle B4


Yanks' Need to Rally Gets Hollow Response
The Yankees are arriving at the ball park on time, wearing the proper gray road uniforms, taking batting practice and trotting onto the field.
They look like a team that cares -- until the game begins.
Then the Yankees look dreary, defeated and dead.
Take today's debacle against Oakland.
Have you heard of Steve Wojciechowski?
That's wo-ji-COW-ski.
Few know of the rookie left-hander, who pitched on three days' rest and silenced the Yankees on one measly run into the sixth inning.
He will probably be demoted to the minor leagues on Thursday.
But he looked legendary today.
Against the free-falling Yankees, a lot of opposing pitchers and opposing teams are looking that way this month.


Leaving Old High-Rises Behind
Six years ago, the city of Newark built town houses for low-income residents in its Central Ward that were so shoddy that several of them collapsed in a storm while still under construction.
The Newark Housing Authority was forced to start over, and yesterday, the agency declared success and dedicated the 150 town houses called Oscar E. Miles Village.
The new town houses have enabled 75 families to move out of older high-rise apartments across the street -- "monstrosities that never should have been built," as Harold Lucas, executive director of the housing authority, described them.


No Headline
"This is the biggest thing since New Coke." -- RICHARD SCHNEIDER, trying out Windows 95.  [ D6:1. ]


Indictment in Killing of Chief
An Essex County grand jury indicted two men yesterday in the July 14 slaying of John Deventer, the retired police chief of Hanover, and for a series of unrelated crimes, Clifford J. Minor, the county Prosecutor, said.


HARCOURT GENERAL INC. (H,N)
Harcourt General Inc. said yesterday that its earnings from continuing operations in its third quarter rose 23 percent, though that still fell short of analyst expectations.
Harcourt said its operating earnings totaled $95.9 million, or $1.29 a share, compared to $77.5 million, or 97 cents a share, in the year-earlier period.
Earnings rose on higher sales of its elementary school books and a gain from investments, the company said.


COPLEY PHARMACEUTICAL EXPECTS TO TAKE A CHARGE
Copley Pharmaceutical Inc. said yesterday that it expected to take a charge of $5 million to $8 million in the third quarter to cover the initial costs of settling claims relating to its generic drug albuterol.
On Tuesday, Copley, which is based in Canton, Mass., admitted no wrongdoing but agreed to pay up to $150 million to settle lawsuits that contended that bacterial contamination of albuterol, an asthma drug, killed or harmed some users.
Copley said that its insurers would cover most costs of the settlement but that it would probably eventually pay as much as $25 million.
Copley's stock rose 50 cents yesterday, to $19.25, on Nasdaq. (Bloomberg Business News)


SCHERING A.G. PLANS ACQUISITION OF MEDRAD
Medrad Inc., a maker of medical devices, said yesterday that it would be acquired by the German chemical giant Schering A.G. for $28 a share, or a total of $180 million.
The stock of Medrad soared $5.375, or 24 percent, to $27.625, on Nasdaq.
Medrad, based in Pittsburgh, is the world's largest maker of vascular injection systems, which are used to enhance medical imaging procedures.
Medrad reported sales of $78.3 million last year, while Schering had sales of $2.9 billion.
Medrad employs 725 people. (Reuters)


Don't Take Iraq's Word for It
Iraq has turned over to United Nations inspectors chilling new information about its germ warfare program that it had concealed for years.
Its transparent motive was to pre-empt the promised disclosures of its former arms czar, Gen.
Hussein Kamel, who defected to Jordan earlier this month.
The new documents, which the U.N. will now evaluate for authenticity, show that Iraq not only possessed biological agents during the Persian Gulf war, but had bombs and Scud missiles armed with them.
At the time Washington feared Iraq might use chemical weapons and was developing nuclear bombs, but had little idea Baghdad's most advanced weapons of mass destruction were biological.
The weapons were not used, perhaps for fear of a withering American retaliation.


International Briefs; Big British Retailer To Cut 1,500 Positions
W.
H.
Smith Group P.L.C., the British book, newspaper, music and hardware retailer, said yesterday that it would cut 1,050 jobs, or 3 percent of its work force, in an effort to improve its performance after a flagging economy pushed down its pretax profit for the 1995 fiscal year by 8 percent.
The company said its pretax profit before one-time items for the 53 weeks that ended on June 3 had slipped to $:115.3 million ($179 million) from $:124.8 million a year earlier.
Sales rose 10 percent, to $:2.69 billion.


When Cubans Vote
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 15 front-page article on the fading threat to Fidel Castro a year after the Cuban boat exodus states that "the Government held local elections last month with its usual one-party slate." In local elections for municipal delegates, the Communist Party has no say in nominating candidates, nor do candidates have to be members.
Up to 50 percent have not been members.


Campus Areas Act as Magnet for Crime
To the Editor:
"Face-Off at Small Colleges on Arming of Security" (Education Page, Aug. 16) states that the fears of parents, students and security officers about crime at small suburban colleges are "generally unsubstantiated." While SUNY-Fredonia may not have had a serious crime on campus in more than a decade, that is the exception, not the rule.


Mayor Sharply Attacks Port Authority
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani fired a sharp attack at the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey yesterday, complaining that it favors suburbanites at the expense of New Yorkers.
He warned that New York would act to rectify the inequity.
Mr.
Giuliani's broadside reflects the complaints lodged by many of his predecessors, but unlike previous mayors, he vowed to do something about it though he did not say what.


International Briefs; Littlewoods' Ex-Chief Tries to Buy Company
Littlewoods Organization P.L.C., the family-owned operator of British betting pools and clothing shops, said yesterday that its former chief executive, Barry Dale, wanted to buy the company for $:1.1 billion ($1.69 billion).
Mr.
Dale's interest in buying the company, which dismissed him in March, was reported by the newspaper The Independent and confirmed by a Littlewoods spokeswoman.
"It's not a formal offer, and there's nothing to consider," Rosemary Cooper, the spokeswoman said.


In a House of Reptiles, Sit Cautiously
"Watch it, Kathy," Randall Stechert said as his girlfriend crouched in front of the yardlong Eastern timber rattlesnake that was exploring an armchair in their living room.
"Oh, it's all right," Kathleen Michell replied.


Norstan Inc.(NRRD,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 29


CHRONICLE
Six New Yorkers have been designated living landmarks by the New York Landmarks Conservancy, a group that usually puts its energy into identifying and extolling great buildings, not great people.
The six have been cited for their contributions to the city.
This year, the second year of the awards, the living landmarks are HELEN GURLEY BROWN, the editor in chief of Cosmopolitan magazine; WALTER CRONKITE; SIRIO MACCIONE, the restaurateur who owns Le Cirque; ARTHUR MITCHELL, the founder of Dance Theater of Harlem; LEWIS RUDIN, the real estate developer, and JOAN RIVERS.


Regis Corp.(RGIS,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


ADC Telecommunications Inc.(ADCT,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


'Ecstasy' Drug Tests Employed High Doses
To the Editor:
Re the Aug. 15 Science Times article about the drug MDMA, known as Ecstasy, and brain damage:


Midnight Sales Frenzy Ushers in Windows 95
Marin Pesa, a 24-year-old plumber, had not planned to spend last night's witching hour in a jostling scrum of technophiles surrounding a waist-high pile of Windows 95 software boxes at the CompUSA store in midtown Manhattan.
But "The hype got me here," he acknowledged.


Kidnapped U.S. Journalist Freed After 11 Months in Colombia
An American journalist who had been kidnapped 11 months ago, apparently by left-wing rebels, was released on Monday in a mountainous region of Colombia.
The American, Thomas Hargrove, who worked as an editor of scientific publications at the International Center for Tropical Agriculture, which is based in the city of Cali, was believed to have been abducted by a guerrilla group calling itself the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia and was released after his family paid an undisclosed amount in ransom.
Initially, his captors had reportedly demanded $6 million for his release.


Westvaco Corp.(W,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


Subway Brawl Inflames Issue of G.I.'s in Korea
It all began when an American soldier put his hand on a Korean woman's rump.
The version that has captured the local imagination is that a group of drunken American soldiers were rampaging through the subway, molesting Korean women, and that the soldiers then attacked good citizens who dared protest the errant hand.


After Changes in Test Format, S.A.T. Scores Show an Increase
High school students this fall turned in their best scores in years on the Scholastic Assessment Test, which was revised last year.
The math average was the highest in two decades.
Asian-Americans are still at the top in the nation's most widely used college entrance exam, with whites close behind, but other minority students have made broad gains in recent years.
Although males continued to outscore females, the scores for females increased for the fourth year, narrowing the gap this year to 3 points on verbal and 40 points on math scores.


Getting Around Goldman at Rockefeller Center
The battle for control of Rockefeller Center is raging, but a loophole in a loan agreement could handicap one tough contender for the trophy property, Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
Goldman and its many and diverse relationships with the real estate investment trust, Rockefeller Center Properties Inc., which holds the $1.3 billion mortgage on the center, present a substantial hurdle for bidders competing for the property.


Michaels Stores (MIKE,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 30


A Race Boat Dressed Up Like a Swan
When it comes to designing a grand prix sailboat, lighter is better and sparse is preferable to plush.
But with Highland Fling, a new Swan 60, the crew puts in the extra time to have it both ways.
What other serious racing team has to worry about a last coat of varnish before leaving the dock?
And what about the freezer full of food that has to be emptied because it weighs too much?
Or how about the bubble wrap that needs to be spread like bed sheets over the yacht's polished wood interior?


Pirates Are Circling the Good Ship Windows 95
William H. Gates, the chairman of Microsoft, has spent this week on the television talk-show hustings, from "Larry King Live" to "Good Morning America," extolling the virtues of Windows 95, which goes on sale today.
But last week, a software expert of sorts beat Mr.
Gates to market, telling Dutch television that there was no reason to wait.
Interviewed off-camera and dubbed Pete the Pirate, he asserted that he already had 50,000 illicit copies of Windows 95 ready for sale.


Critic Pushes Tobacco Case Settled by ABC
Although Capital Cities/ABC has settled the libel lawsuit brought by Philip Morris, a prominent Congressional critic of the tobacco industry is continuing to press the case against the giant cigarette company.
Representative Henry A. Waxman said he planned to send a letter today asking the Philip Morris Companies to make public reams of internal documents it filed in its suit against the television network.
Mr.
Waxman has no legal authority to force Philip Morris to do so, and his previous requests for the documents have been rejected.


Nordson Corp.(NDSN,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 30


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  Firstar Corp., Milwaukee, is selling $100 million of subordinated notes due in 2000 through Merrill Lynch.
The notes are priced at par to yield 7.15 percent.
Callable in three years, the issue is rated A3 by Moody's Investors Service and BBB+ by Standard &amp; Poor's.
Household Finance Corp., Prospect Heights, Ill., a unit of Household International Inc., is selling $150 million of notes due in 2005 through J. P. Morgan Securities.
The notes are priced at 99.674 to yield 7.171 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated A2 by Moody's, A by S.&amp; P. and A+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Mexico to Offer Relief on Rates To Aid Debtors Under Pressure
Caught between angry, impoverished debtors and increasingly nervous creditors, the Mexican Government announced a $1.1 billion plan tonight to help individuals and small companies that are having trouble repaying loans.
Under the program, officials said, the Government will guarantee interest rates of about half the current levels on parts of outstanding credit card, mortgage, business and consumer debts.
The program is to take effect on Sept. 1 and continue for 13 months.


ROADWAY SERVICES TO SPIN OFF TRUCKING UNIT
Roadway Services Inc. of Akron, Ohio, said yesterday that it would spin off its Roadway Express trucking unit into a separate publicly traded company.
Under the plan, stock in Roadway Express will be distributed directly to shareholders of Roadway Services.
Roadway Services plans to retain its air freight and customized freight handling operations.
The spinoff will leave Roadway Services with about $3 billion a year in sales, while Roadway Express will generate about $2 billion a year in revenue.
Roadway's stock jumped $4.375 yesterday, to $55.50, on Nasdaq. (AP)


Liberties; Will Jane Nix Pix?
Edith Wharton will never eat lunch in this town again.
She was hot here, until "The Age of Innocence" drooped at the box office.
Then scripts for "The Custom of the Country" and "The House of Mirth" expired on the shelf.


S.A.T. Scores Inch Ahead
New Jersey students are doing better on the Scholastic Achievement Test, but continue to rank below the national average, according to figures released yesterday by the College Board.
Test scores for 59,037 students improved by 3 points in mathematics since last year (to 478), and by 2 points on the verbal section (to 420).
But the scores were still 4 points below the national average in math and 8 points below for the verbal section.
Since 1985, New Jersey students have moved up from 44th place in the nation in math scores to 35th, and from 42d in verbal scores to 40th, said the state's Education Commissioner, Leo F. Klagholz.


New Utility Merger to Form Regional Giant
The Public Service Company of Colorado and the Southwestern Public Service Company said yesterday that they had agreed to merge, creating an electric-utility company that would cover an area stretching from Texas to Wyoming.
The deal, to be carried out as a stock swap, would create a holding company with a market capitalization of $3.2 billion.
It is the latest in a round of proposed mergers and takeovers to sweep the power industry as utilities brace for deregulated markets and the intensified competition this will bring.


HECHINGER TO COMBINE MANAGEMENTS OF 2 CHAINS
The Hechinger Company said yesterday that it would combine the managements of its Hechinger and Home Quarters Warehouse stores, a move that will result in about 200 job cuts and a charge against earnings of as much as $25 million in the fourth quarter.
The stores, which sell home improvement products, will keep their separate names.
The move will result in savings of about $20 million a year after it is completed in late 1996, the company said.
The class A shares of Hechinger, which is based in Landover, Md., fell 12.5 cents, to $6.25, on Nasdaq. (Bloomberg Business News)


'Megan's Law' Judges Named
The state's Chief Justice, Robert N. Wilentz, appointed 15 Superior Court judges yesterday to handle closed-door hearings for paroled sex offenders who want to prevent a community from being notified that they pose a danger, The Associated Press reported.


Sizzler Intl.(SZ,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 23


Standex International (SXI,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Graf Has Same Game And Pain
Six weeks ago, despite a bad back, Steffi Graf won her sixth Wimbledon singles title in eight years.
Then she did not play until a week ago and was unceremoniously knocked out in the first round of the Canadian Open in Toronto by Amanda Coetzer, ranked 21st in the world.
Tonight, in Graf's first outing since that loss, she beat 20th-ranked Lisa Raymond of Wayne, Pa., 6-3, 7-5, in an exhibition during the Genovese Hamlet Cup men's tennis tournament.
Graf's game was mostly the same -- big (although erratic) serve, heavy topspin forehand, severe underhit backhand.
And her back seemed to hold up.


Video Screen Isn't Lying: Mets Robbed of Homer
Manager Dallas Green was stretching his 6-foot-5-inch frame on its tiptoes, straining to look over several heads to see a video screen in a small corner of the Mets' clubhouse.
On the screen was a frozen moment of what was the second-to-last play of yesterday's game against the Giants at Shea Stadium.
Magnified about a zillion times its normal size and outlined by one of those computerized circles that brightens the background was a baseball, captured in flight, hitting the right side of the right-field foul pole.


Commercial Intertech Corp.(TEC,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


Threat to Cut E.P.A. Budget Reflects a New Political Shift
The voice-mail message from Senator Frank H. Murkowski's aide was polite but firm.
The Senator wanted some answers from the Environmental Protection Agency about its case against the Alaska Pulp Corporation, a case the Alaska Republican thought was baseless.
"We would prefer not to have to do anything with an appropriations rider on this," said the aide, Maureen Koetz.


An Impassioned Debate On Terror Restraints
Small explosions are set off on tomorrow night's "Firing Line" debate ("Resolved: The New Anti-Terror Bill is Good for Americans") when Dr.
James J. Zogby collides with Steven Emerson.
That is not surprising, since Mr.
Emerson, the executive producer of the PBS documentary "Jihad in America," has made a career of sounding the alarm about those whom he calls militant Islamic terrorists, and Dr.
Zogby, president of the Arab American Institute, devotes himself to speaking up for Americans of Arab descent.
Dr.
Zogby acknowledges that his particular objection to the Comprehensive Terrorism Prevention Act of 1995, now before Congress, is the notion, which he blames Mr.
Emerson for fostering, that Arabs and Muslims are terrorists.
Mr.
Emerson denies this hotly, maintaining that he is out to get all terrorists, be their provenance the Irish Republican Army or the Jewish Defense League.


Clark Clifford's Lifelong Agenda
FRIENDS IN HIGH PLACES The Rise and Fall of Clark Clifford  By Douglas Frantz and David McKean  Illustrated. 450 pages.
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $24.95.
"This is an unauthorized biography," Douglas Frantz and David McKean write in the acknowledgments to this book.
"However, near the conclusion of our research, Mr. Clifford finally agreed to sit with us and answer any and all of the questions that we wished to put to him. In all, we had more than 50 hours of taped conversations with Mr. Clifford."


Remembering Those Who Labored for Peace


Boyd Gaming (BYD,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Motorman in Crash Was Not on Drugs
The subway operator whose train rear-ended another train on Tuesday was not under the influence of alcohol or drugs, transit officials said yesterday.
Investigators said they were nearly certain that he had intentionally run a red light without permission.
Investigators yesterday were sifting through conflicting versions of what happened, and they said that in their first interviews with the operator of the rear train, Alvin Darden, he contradicted himself.
In an interview with WABC-TV, Mr.
Darden did not offer an explanation for the accident, but he insisted that he did not run a red light.
He added, "I have total faith that I will be totally vindicated of any wrongdoing.


Anger Against Union On Rise for Dissidents
As if the National Basketball Association's civil war needed further inflammatory fuel, representatives of the dissident camp of players reacted with outrage yesterday at details of the proposed labor agreement that the union disclosed two months after they were negotiated.
Only a week away from the election that will determine the union's future and perhaps the N.B.A. season, a series of provisions union officials termed "less significant" prompted agents and lawyers to levy even harsher criticism at the tentative six-year agreement.


28 Indicted in Cocaine Smuggling Scheme
Federal authorities said yesterday that they had dismantled "the Company," an organization suspected of having smuggled Colombian cocaine into the United States from Mexico in furniture trucks.
Zachary Carter, the United States Attorney for the Eastern District of New York, announced the indictment of 28 men on charges of taking part in an operation that ran for six years, starting in 1988.
Eleven of the suspects were taken into custody Tuesday in raids in Florida, North Carolina, Texas and California, and the others were being sought, Mark Wasserman, an assistant United States attorney, said.


Methode Electronics Inc.(METHA,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 31


LACK OF RAINFALL BLIGHTS NEW YORK
The Hudson River and the region's reservoirs need rain.
Wells, apple trees and crops need rain.
New Jersey's cows have the blues these dry days and need rain.
In fact, just about everything in the New York metropolitan area needs rain.
Rainfall for August and the rest of 1995 is far below normal throughout the region, and in mid-Manhattan the month is on track for becoming the driest since the Federal Government began recording monthly rainfall in Central Park in 1869.


Knicks, Heat Still Talking On Riley Deal
The Knicks and the Miami Heat are continuing to negotiate a deal to allow Pat Riley to coach the Heat next season in exchange for one of Miami's two first-round draft picks in 1996 plus more than $1 million in cash.
A deal would eliminate the necessity of a ruling by Commissioner David Stern on the Knicks' charge of tampering against the Heat.
Stern, who conducted a hearing on the charge on Aug. 4, has said he would decide the matter by tomorrow but would rather the teams work out a settlement on their own.


Voting Differences by Sex Are Overplayed, Study Says
While the difference between how women and men vote is wider than it has been in decades, a new study argues that the disparity is being blown out of proportion.
In the study, to be made public on Thursday, the National Women's Political Caucus found that even more significant than the differences in how men and women vote are the differences between other groups: married and single, urban and rural, Protestants and Jews, rich and poor, "born-again" Christians and others, and blacks and whites.


Bengals Seem Headed For the Bottom Again
In 1989, Paul Brown, the venerable Cincinnati Bengals coach and founder, talked about the night before his Bengals met the San Francisco 49ers in Super Bowl XXIII in Miami.
There had been riots in Miami earlier in the week and less than 24 hours before the game running back Stanley Wilson was missing.
Later, Wilson was found in a hotel having relapsed into a cocaine-induced spree.
"The riots were enough of a distraction," Brown said afterward.
"And then the thing with Stanley, it devastated us. How could that happen the night before the biggest game in all of our lives? We just didn't understand it and we never will. It hurt our team's psyche and it hurt us on the field. Stanley was our short-yardage guy, our goal-line guy, and it changed the way we had planned to play the game. It changed everything."


Looking to a Neighbor, New York Can See Keno Concerns
Pete Taylor began his day off as he often does: He sat down at a small table in the Elbow Room bar here just before noon today, slowly sipping a Molson Light and keeping his eyes fixed on the color video monitor on a shelf above the jukebox.
Some like casinos or the horses, but Mr.
Taylor is a fan of Keno, the fast-action video lottery game that has been booming in Massachusetts for a year and a half even though many people here -- including the lottery director himself -- eye it with worry.


James Truitte, 72, a Dancer, Teacher and Historian, Dies
James Truitte, a lead dancer with the companies of Lester Horton and Alvin Ailey and an authority on Horton's technique and choreography, was found dead on Monday at his home in Cincinnati.
He was 72.
A spokeswoman for the Cincinnati coroner's office said yesterday that the cause of death had not been established.


Two-Year-Old Child Survives a Five-Story Fall
A 2-year-old boy survived a fall from a fifth-floor window in a Brooklyn housing project yesterday when he missed a concrete curb and instead landed on a soft, grassy embankment, the police said.
Neighbors who saw the boy's fall and physicians who treated him later at Staten Island University Hospital called his survival miraculous and attributed it to the fact that the ground below was unusually soft despite the recent absence of rain.


A Void in School Budgets: Parents; Districts Struggle With Cuts, but Many Voices Go Unheard
Just before 8 P.M. on Aug. 3, Sandy Brawer stared with bloodshot eyes at his audience, pointed to a thick packet of white papers and said, "I want to clearly say we have a big problem here." Then Mr.
Brawer, director of operations for Community School District 27 in south Queens, patted the pack of Parliaments in his shirt pocket and revealed he had started smoking again.
Thirty hours before, a messenger had arrived with the latest bad-news bulletin from the Board of Education: District 27, the third largest in New York City, with 33,000 students jammed into 36 schools, would have to reduce its budget by $1 million more than expected, bringing the total city-mandated cuts to a seemingly impossible $4.3 million.
Mr.
Brawer had spent most of those 30 hours locked in his office in Ozone Park, poring over the grim, 250-page memorandum and listing the unpleasant options.


Gary Hart Considering a Return to the Political Wars
Calculating that voters are suffering from scandal fatigue, Gary Hart has sent up trial balloons for a political comeback, eight years after the Donna Rice episode dispatched him from the Presidential campaign trail to obscurity.
"The whole political world has grown up," the Colorado Democrat told The Denver Post, baring his ambitions to run to regain his old seat in the United States Senate.


More Refugees Flee From Camps in Zaire
More than 130,000 frightened refugees were believed to be hiding in the parched hills and woodlands near Zaire's border as Zairian soldiers deported hundreds to Rwanda and Burundi today.
Since the round-up began on Saturday, more than 12,000 refugees have been expelled from camps inside Zaire, aid officials estimated.
About 1,700 refugees were sent across the border by midafternoon, but officials doubted that the lower number signaled any change in Zaire's policy.


Suspension Of Physician Partly Lifted
A Manhattan gynecologist suspended from practicing medicine over his handling of abortions has been partly reinstated by a judge, prompting a furious protest yesterday from the State Health Commissioner.
Dr.
Herbert Schwarz, who had been suspended on Aug. 16 by the Health Commissioner, Barbara A. DeBuono, was told on Tuesday by Justice Richard B. Lowe 3d of State Supreme Court in Manhattan that he could resume his practice -- but not perform abortions -- pending a Sept. 13 court hearing.


Westvaco Corp.(W,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


National Trustco reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


Officials Discount Lead on Leg Found in the Bombing Rubble
The combat boot on a leg found deep in the rubble of the Federal Building here is too small to fit a local man who has not been seen since the building was bombed on April 19.
Last weekend, Roberta Bennett, 60, said she believed that the limb could belong to her son, Sidney McCallum, 29, who was dropped off by friends at the Federal Building to go to the Social Security office shortly before the explosion, which killed 168 people.
Mr.
McCallum fits the general description of the unidentified victim that was drawn by the state Medical Examiner's office from its physical analysis of the limb.


Novell Inc.(NOVL,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 29


Croatia's Constitution Protects Croatia's Serbs; Nazi Germany's Ally
To the Editor:
The letter of Nenad Porges, the Croatian Minister Counselor ("Croatia Had to Restore the Rule of Law," Aug. 17), errs in citing "Dr. Harold Tumer," who actually was Staatsrat (state councilor) Harald Turner, the source of the notorious statement of 1942 that Serbia was the only country where the Jewish and Gypsy questions were "solved." In contrasting the fate of Jews in Croatia and Serbia during World War II, the letter is misleading.


Sports of The Times; Pssst! In August, It's the Mets
SO you're sitting there waiting for the late-night scores from the West Coast when those internal baseball voices start battling it out, again.
The argument, not surprisingly, revolves around the state of the sport in New York.
Just before July ended, the Yankees, seemingly ready to exchange the pretenders' tag for that of a contender, pulled off two megatrades to bring in David Cone and Ruben Sierra.
They then promoted Darryl Strawberry to bulk up for an August run at first-place Boston in the American League East.


Man Arrested In Shooting Linked to Bias
Robert Harrington, a 39-year-old white man and longtime New Rochelle resident, didn't hide the rage he felt at seeing black families move onto his block.
Neighbors described him as a brooding loner who would shout racial insults from his window and carry a gun openly, as if waiting to make a last stand.
But none of his neighbors in this racially integrated suburb had any idea what lay behind the doors of his apartment.
Not until Tuesday night, when about two dozen police officers stormed Mr.
Harrington's apartment and discovered what they described as an arsenal of handguns, rifles and military-style knives, as well as fuses, flash powder, pipes and other bomb-making ingredients.


Report of Honda-Mitsubishi Talks Is Denied
The Honda Motor Company and the Mitsubishi Motors Corporation today strongly denied a magazine report that they were discussing a merger.
"There is no such thing, nothing at all," a spokesman for Honda, Yasu Wada, said.


Novell Inc.(NOVL,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 29


CHRONICLE
Last September, Vitas Gerulaitis, the tennis player, died at 40 of carbon monoxide poisoning at a house in Southampton, L.I.
On Sunday PETE SAMPRAS, JIMMY CONNORS, JOHN McENROE, CHRIS EVERT, BJORN BORG and GUILLERMO VILAS are planning to attend "A Gala Night for Vitas" party at the Plaza.


Why the Northwest Wants Its Leaded Gas
To the Editor:
Re your article on the Great Lakes Chemical Corporation's discovering profits in lead additives for gasoline (Business Day, Aug. 17):


Child Dies in Brooklyn Pool Amid 10 Lifeguards
A 5-year-old girl was found unconscious in a city pool in Brooklyn yesterday afternoon and died shortly afterward, police and parks officials said.
Ten lifeguards were on duty at the Betsy Head Pool, an Olympic-size outdoor pool at Hopkinson, Livonia and Dumont Avenues in Brownsville, but it was a 17-year-old girl who discovered Kinchata Gooden submerged, face down and unconscious, at the bottom of four feet of water, officials said.
She was pronounced dead on arrival at the Brookdale Hospital Medical Center.


International Briefs; Smurfit's Profit Surges
Jefferson Smurfit, Ireland's largest industrial company, posted a fourfold rise in half-year profit yesterday.
The company said pretax profit soared to 210 million Irish pounds ($330 million) from 44.6 million.
Smurfit's results outstripped market expectations.
Linerboard prices, a key factor in Smurfit's profitability and that of its United States subsidiary, the Jefferson Smurfit Corporation, have surged about 60 percent in the last two years. (Reuters)


COMPANY BRIEFS
JOHNSTOWN AMERICA INDUSTRIES INC., Chicago, which makes freight cars and other equipment for the transportation industry, completed its acquisition of Truck Components Inc., Rockford, Ill., for $250 million.
An investment partnership controlled by Castle-Harlan Inc. owned 49 percent of Truck Components.
THERMO ECOTEK CORP., Waltham, Mass., said it planned to spend $45 million for a controlling interest in a KFX Inc. plant that makes coal products and for a 7 percent stake in KFX, which is based in Denver.


Treasury Securities Prices Down for 2d Straight Day
Prices of Treasury securities sagged for a second consecutive session yesterday, dragged down by a disappointing five-year note auction.
The price of the 30-year bond fell 9/32 , to 9919/32 .
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction from its price, rose to 6.91 percent from 6.89 percent on Tuesday.


'Wild Bill' Davis, Bluesy Jazz Organist And Arranger, 77
William Strethen (Wild Bill) Davis, a leading jazz arranger, pianist and organist, died last Thursday in Moorestown, N.J.
He was 77.
The cause was a stroke, said his daughter, Kathryn Malvern.


The Rule on Red Lights Is Not Always Followed
When does a red light not mean stop? In the subways, maybe more often than it should.
For the fourth time in five years, a rear-end subway crash is being blamed on the ability of train operators to go through red lights, and transit officials are beginning to admit that perhaps they have not done enough to curtail the practice.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.69
5.68
4.64
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.41
5.44
4.52
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.42
5.43
4.86
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.57
6.55
7.20
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.91
6.89
7.46
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.80
7.78
8.31
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.28
6.28
6.39
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


INSIDE
Escalating Budget War
Anticipating a possible budget deadlock when congress returns to work next month, Federal agencies are preparing for a shutdown.
Page B15. 2 Western Utilities to Merge
Two large electric companies have agreed to merge, creating a $3.2 billion company that would stretch from Texas to Wyoming.
Page D1.
Constituents Disappointed
In his district in South Chicago, people mourned the downfall of Representative Mel Reynolds, who was convicted of sexual abuse.
Page A16.


Before the Storms


WLR Foods Inc.(WLRF,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 1


Simpson Defense Tries to Show Existence of a Second Killer
Lawyers for O. J. Simpson focused today on a series of faint parallel lines -- on the walkway outside Nicole Brown Simpson's house, on an envelope, on a piece of paper found nearby and on Ronald L. Goldman's bloody blue jeans -- in their effort to prove the existence of a second killer.
Mr.
Simpson's star expert witness, Dr.
Henry C. Lee of the Connecticut State Police, would say only that one of the marks could be a shoe print.
But the defense lawyer questioning him, Barry L. Scheck, extrapolated from that, suggesting that a second assailant walked through the crime scene and kicked Mr.
Goldman during a prolonged struggle.


Investigators Say Propeller Blade Snapped Before Plane Crashed
Federal investigators searching for clues in Monday's crash of a twin-engine turboprop near Atlanta said yesterday that a propeller blade appeared to have snapped before the pilots lost control of the plane.
An abnormality had been found in the propeller blade during an inspection a year ago, but records show that it had been corrected, John Hammerschmidt, a member of the safety board, said yesterday.


Reassembling a Career From Pieces of the Past
"I sure wasted a lot of my time," said Brian Wilson, the former leader of the Beach Boys, seemingly on the verge of tears in a recent telephone conversation from his home in California.
"I guess you could say I've blown my life off."
Asked what he planned to do with the rest of his life, he sighed heavily and said slowly in his slurred voice, "Try to pick up the pieces and start again."


Software makes strange bedfellows in Britain as Microsoft and Murdoch team to push Windows 95.
IN the computer software business, the Microsoft Corporation is not known for treading lightly.
In the newspaper business, Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation is not known for keeping a low profile.
And together they have cooked up a promotion for the British introduction of Microsoft's Windows 95 software that stands out even among the tidal waves of hype generated by the product.
In a marketing deal that appears to have no parallel, the News Corporation is giving away copies of its British flagship paper, The Times of London, here today.
The paper is printing 1.5 million copies, 845,000 more than it usually sells.


In Hardware, the Useful (and Less So)
It's not as glitzy as a consumer electronics show, not as mouthwatering as the annual gatherings of the supermarket or restaurant industries, and not as much fun as a toy fair or sporting goods convention.
But the annual trade show of the hardware industry is hard to beat for sheer variety.
This year's show, which ended its four-day run at the cavernous McCormick Place convention center on Aug. 16, attracted more than 2,600 exhibitors with 250,000 products.
They ranged from age-old basics like hammers to the latest in remote-controlled entertainment, lighting and security gizmos.


Morgan Keegan Inc.(MOR,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 31


School Board to Pay $100,000 For 7th Safety Study Since 1971
The Board of Education plans to spend $100,000 to hire former Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly and a team of consultants to investigate school security, a move Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani sharply criticized yesterday.
The latest review would be the seventh study -- along with a soon-to-be-released state audit -- to examine the safety division since 1971.
Mr.
Giuliani called the study, which would be completed by the consulting firm of Deloitte &amp; Touche by Nov. 1, "one of the most absurd things that I've heard about in a long time in New York City."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Windows 95 Is Here!
Windows 95 Is Here!
If you need to ask what the software world is talking about today, stick to a quill pen.
All the fuss is about Windows 95, which Microsoft has bestowed on (it hopes) a grateful world with hoopla worthy of a coronation: midnight pizzas, colored lights on the Empire State Building, balloons the world over, and hype, hype, hype.
And it's all for a product that, in essence, is a sophisticated enabler of other software.  [ Page A1. ] And then there's piracy.
Before the official Windows 95 hit the shelves, "Pete the Pirate" said on Dutch television that he had 50,000 bootleg copies for sale.
Maybe, maybe not.
But since a final version of the software has already appeared on computer bulletin boards, high-quality counterfeit copies could hit the street within weeks.  [ D6. ] Even with all the hype, this stands out as a one-of-a-kind marketing blast: The Times of London is being given away today in a doubled press run, courtesy of Microsoft, which also paid for a supplement with ads and articles about the software.
Advertising.  [ D6. ] New Team at Creative Artists  Creative Artists named a four-man management team to run the agency, following weeks of uncertainty and turmoil after the departures of its chairman, Michael Ovitz, and president, Ron Meyer.  [ C11. ] A Snag for Goldman, Sachs?
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company could find itself handicapped in the battle for Rockefeller Center, as a result of a loophole in a loan agreement.
New Analysis.  [ D5. ] A German Rate Is Trimmed  Germany's central bank, the Bundesbank, slightly reduced its repo rate, a widely watched money market rate, rekindling periodic speculation that it might next lower the discount rate.  [ D4. ] Tire Price-Fixing Inquiry  Domestic tire makers are facing an investigation by the Justice Department into possible price-fixing.
Goodyear disclosed the investigation in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.  [ D2. ] Canary Wharf Sale: Not Yet  Yes, Canary Wharf's bank owners have made progress in talks with Paul Reichmann, the Canadian developer, but no, bankers insist, there's no deal to sell the London complex to him yet.
Mr.


Federal Agencies Are Planning a Shutdown in the Event of a Budget Deadlock
Raising a warning flag about a possible budget deadlock when Congress returns next month, the White House said today that Federal agencies were preparing plans to shut down most operations in October should President Clinton and Republicans deadlock over a budget for the next fiscal year.
The order to prepare for closings came in a memorandum issued today by Mr.
Clinton's budget director, Alice M. Rivlin, who said Administration officials "very much don't want it to happen" and were willing to negotiate with Republicans to avoid it.


Navratilova Steps Down From WTA Posts
Calling herself too much of an activist to be a banner politician, MARTINA NAVRATILOVA announced yesterday that she will not seek another term as president of the WTA Tour Players Association and is also resigning her spot on the tour's board of directors.
"I gave the job more time than I thought I would and not as much as it deserves," she said.
Elected a year ago, Navratilova had two main goals on her agenda: the return of MONICA SELES and the acquisition of a title sponsor for the women's game.


International Briefs; A Shift at Tetra Laval
The Swedish brothers Hans and Gad Rausing, founders of Tetra Pak and among the richest men in the world, have changed control over the family company Tetra Laval.
Gad Rausing, with his children Kirsten, Finn and Joern, will take over control and responsibility for Tetra Laval from Hans Rausing.
Hans Rausing, 69, has spent the last 40 years as chairman or president of the company and wished to withdraw, according to a company statement.
Tetra Laval also said that Hans Rausing's children were busy pursuing careers elsewhere. (Dow Jones)


Royal Oak Mines (RYO,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


U.S. Bid to Topple Iraqi Falters, Lacking Support in Arab World
Two weeks after the defection of two top aides of President Saddam Hussein, Washington's hope of seizing the opportunity to weaken or topple the Iraqi Government is rapidly receding.
For one thing, Iraqi and Arab officials say, President Hussein has moved ruthlessly to consolidate his remaining power, arresting hundreds and shuffling his personal security apparatus.


Man Ruled Fit To Face Trial In Killing of 2
The man charged with murder in the deaths of two receptionists at abortion clinics in Brookline, Mass., last December was ruled competent today to stand trial.
The ruling was made by Judge Barbara Dortch-Okara of Norfolk Superior Court here.
Judge Dortch-Okara did not set a trial date for the man, John C. Salvi 3d, but did say December was the earliest a trial could begin.


BLUE CROSS OF CALIFORNIA SAYS DEAL WILL BE APPROVED
Blue Cross of California and its Wellpoint Health Networks unit said yesterday that they had received assurance from the California Department of Corporations of approval of the merger of Wellpoint with Health Systems International Inc.
The transaction being reviewed by the state agency also includes the recapitalization of Wellpoint and Blue Cross of California's proposed public benefit plan.
In April, Wellpoint and Health Systems, of Pueblo, Colo., reached agreement on the $1.8 billion deal.
Blue Cross said in a statement that it expected final approval around Sept. 7. (Dow Jones)


The Mentally Retarded Live Productively Outside Institutions
To the Editor:
"Community Treatment of the Retarded" (editorial, Aug. 17) requires clarification.


It's Not Easy Being the Third Wheel
She was already a chronic sufferer of the tennis version of the Dangerfield Syndrome, and now, with Monica Seles back in the fray, Arantxa Sanchez Vicario's role as the durable understudy to Steffi Graf has been downgraded a notch.
Now Sanchez Vicario is literally the third wheel of the disparate troika atop women's tennis.
At next week's United States Open, Graf and Seles are seeded ahead of Sanchez Vicario, who just happens to be that Grand Slam's defending champion.
She is attempting to rise above the perceived insult.


Rijo Undergoes Major Elbow Surgery
JOSE RIJO has undergone the elbow surgery that he dreaded for months, and the Cincinnati Reds' pitcher's career is on hold for at least nine months and possibly longer.
The right-hander, 30, was hampered all season by pain from a bone fragment in his elbow ligament.
He tried to cure the problem with rest before undergoing the operation by the Birmingham, Ala., orthopedic surgeon Dr.
JAMES ANDREWS.


International Briefs; Fokker to Cut Jobs
Fokker N.V., the Dutch aircraft maker, said yesterday that it expected to cut jobs beyond the reductions already being carried out.
A company spokesman, Leo Steijn, said he could not say how many jobs would be slashed.
He said job reductions were likely to come at Fokker's supporting services because the company could not afford to reduce jobs further on the production side.
In February, Fokker announced it would slash 1,760 jobs, a reorganization that should be completed next year.
The company will then employ about 6,500 workers. (Bloomberg Business News)


The School Cuts Get Painful
The State Education Department looks like a nitpicker in rejecting the New York City Board of Education's plan to close its budget gap by allowing shorter elementary school days.
State officials acknowledge that city schools would still be providing more than the minimum number of hours of instruction required per week.
But they complain that, on one or two days a week, many schools might fall below the state's minimum daily requirement for hours of classroom instruction.
That seems like mindless quibbling.
If the best way out of the budget crisis is to reduce the hours of instruction, surely it makes little difference if the reduction is concentrated on one or two days or spread out in lesser amounts over the entire week.
Indeed, it might be far more efficient, economically and educationally, to concentrate the reductions.


HOST MARRIOTT SELLS 16 HOTELS AND BUYS 2
Continuing to shift the focus of its hotel assets to full-service operations, the Host Marriott Corporation said yesterday that it had sold 16 Courtyard hotels to Hospitality Properties Trust of Newton, Mass., for $150 million but would lease back the properties.
Host Marriott, which is based in Bethesda, Md., also said it had purchased the Dallas-Fort Worth Airport Marriott for $44 million and the Plaza San Antonio Hotel for $30 million.
The seller was not named.
Under its agreement with Hospitality Properties, Host Marriott said it would pay an annual base rent of about $15 million, as well as 5 percent of any increase in sales, for the Courtyards, which have limited service. (Dow Jones)


New Shopping Mall Planned
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey announced yesterday that it sold 25 acres of vacant land for $10 million to Ikea, the home furnishings retail chain.
Ikea plans to turn the site, adjacent to its store, into a 350,000-square-foot shopping mall for several retail businesses.
The new retail center would create 800 permanent jobs and 500 temporary construction jobs, said Mayor J. Christian Bollwage of Elizabeth.


Toll Brothers Inc.(TOL,N) reports earnings for 3rd qtr to April 30


Sega Denies Any Plan to Merge With 3DO
Sega Enterprises Ltd. today denied speculation that it had plans to acquire the 3DO Company, whose shares rose nearly 9 percent following a report that the two companies were in merger talks.
"We can say with confidence that Sega Enterprises has no intention of buying 3DO," said Lee McEnany, a spokeswoman for Sega of America, the Japanese company's North American subsidiary.
An article in The San Francisco Chronicle today reported that Sega was in talks to buy all or part of 3DO.


Standex International (SXI,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Insurer's Account Goes to Ogilvy
The American International Group, an international insurance company in New York, said yesterday that it had turned its account over to Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, part of the WPP Group.
The account had been handled for almost a decade by the New York office of Bozell Worldwide, a unit of Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt, and a predecessor, Bozell &amp; Jacobs.
The billings were estimated at $15 million.
Ogilvy New York was awarded the account, which also includes handling advertising in certain overseas markets, after an eight-month review that also included Bozell and Grey Advertising in New York.


Report Cards for Administrators
Bills to require schools to issue report cards on their own performance and to limit school administrative costs were signed into law yesterday by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman.
New Jersey now has the highest average administrative cost per student in the nation -- $1,700.
Under the new law, state aid can be withheld from school districts that exceed that average by more than 30 percent, and schools holding the line on administrative costs will be financially rewarded.
The report cards, to be produced starting this fall, will include test results, attendance figures, dropout rates, teacher-student ratio and percentage of students in advanced placement courses.


BIDERMANN TO SELL RALPH LAUREN WOMENSWEAR ASSETS
Bidermann International S.A. of Paris said yesterday that its United States unit would sell the principal assets of its Ralph Lauren Womenswear subsidiary to the Polo/Ralph Lauren Corporation for undisclosed terms.
The company said the sale by Bidermann Industries USA was scheduled to close by the end of September, though it remained subject to approval by the Federal Bankruptcy Court administering the Chapter 11 reorganization of Bidermann Industries.
Bidermann International makes and distributes men's and women's designer and brand-name apparel. (Bloomberg Business News)


Sizzler Intl.(SZ,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 23


Preaching Nonviolence While Jazzing Up Rap
For a man with a mission, it never hurts to have an overqualified band.
Guru, who brought his Jazzmatazz II to the Supper Club on Tuesday night, has two ambitions.
One is to bring a sense of responsibility to rap; the other is to merge jazz with hip-hop.
Guru, a former caseworker, is troubled by both violence in the streets and those who glorify it.
His resolute, clearly declaimed raps acknowledge the frustrations of urban youth but insist that violence is no solution: "We can't continue to kill ourselves."


Adele Simpson, 91, a Designer And Postwar Fashion Leader
Adele Simpson, an important player in the postwar fashion movement, died yesterday at her home in Greenwich, Conn.
She was 91.
Mrs.
Simpson took French couture and gave it an American ready-to-wear interpretation.
Her color-coordinated dresses and jackets and well-cut coats in fine fabrics found favor among well-heeled women of her time in search of classic clothes that did not cost a month's rent.


Jets Find Another Peg to Fill Lineup Hole
It's not chaos, but it's not paradise either for the Jets, who play their final preseason game Friday night without their starting middle linebacker, or center, and, yes, still no tested wide receiver.
But it does appear that Coach Rich Kotite has decided on his No. 1 runner.
He will be Ron Moore, who had been acquired from Phoenix in the draft-time trade for Rob Moore.


Clinton Eulogizes 3 Diplomats and Names New Team for Bosnia
The Clinton Administration sought to restart its stalled Bosnia peace plan today, as President Clinton named a new team of envoys and eulogized the three men they will replace, diplomats whose deaths on a rain-soaked road outside Sarajevo last Saturday cast a pall over the initiative's future.
After a memorial service today for the three officials, Mr.
Clinton ordered his top Bosnia envoy, Richard Holbrooke, to return to Europe on Sunday with the new team to press the Administration's plan, which would redraw the map of Bosnia.


Sabres Reach Multiyear Pact With Ray
The Buffalo Sabres have agreed on a multiyear contract with left wing ROB RAY, the team's career leader in penalty minutes.
Financial terms were not disclosed.


Dodgers Finish Sweep On Martinez's Shutout
Dodgers 5, Expos 0
Mike Piazza hit his fourth homer in three games and Ramon Martinez threw a five-hitter as the Los Angeles Dodgers completed their first sweep in Montreal since 1980 with a 5-0 victory over the Expos last night.
The Dodgers, who dropped four straight to start their 11-game road trip, hit 8 homers and collected 35 hits in the three-game series.


France's Havas Seen in Talks on Aiding a CBS Bid by Turner
Turner Broadcasting System has been in discussions with Havas S.A., the giant French media and advertising company, about a possible $1 billion Havas investment in Turner's potential takeover bid for CBS Inc., according to two people familiar with the discussions.
Ted Turner, the chairman and president of Turner Broadcasting, has been seeking ways to finance a bid that would top the Westinghouse Electric Corporation's $5.4 billion offer for CBS.


Ford's New Dashboard: Is It a Better Idea?
IT would be a challenging assignment for any designer: into a space a fraction of the size of a small bathroom, cram a bunch of gauges, a network of ducts for hot or cold air, a pair of air bags, a set of sophisticated audio components, a digital clock, several miles of electrical wire and the knobs, buttons and switches to turn it all on and off or move it up and down.
And don't forget the big "easys" -- everything has to be easy to reach and easy to read.


Op Art Inspiration


Pine Barrens Forest Fire on L.I. Is Under Control
Fighting fatigue, heat and smoke, firefighters brought a brush fire under control today that had scorched more than two-thirds of a 5,000-acre state forest preserve during the last three days.
Gov.
George E. Pataki took a helicopter tour of the Pine Barrens forest, praising the 1,200 firefighters who came from all parts of Long Island to battle the stubborn blaze.


RESULTS PLUS
LITTLE LEAGUE  Toms River Is Eliminated
Matt Campbell and Patrick Rooney combined on a four-hitter and each hit a homer as Yorba Linda, Calif., eliminated Toms River, N.J., 8-3, yesterday to advance to the United States final of the Little League World Series at Williamsport, Pa.
Today, Yorba Linda will get a rematch with Spring, Tex., which beat the California team on Tuesday.
The international final will feature Taiwan against the Dominican Republic, which beat Saudi Arabia, 11-1, yesterday.
Toms River hadn't seen many pitchers with curveballs.
"Their pitching wasn't overpowering, but at this level, if you can mix it up, you can be pretty effective," Manager Mike Gaynor said. (AP)


Lack of Controllers Limits Some Flights
Some helicopters and charter planes were restricted from flying over Manhattan for several hours last Thursday and Friday because of a temporary shortage of air traffic controllers at La Guardia Airport, aviation officials said yesterday.
An official of the union that represents the controllers said such disruptions would probably occur again in coming weeks.
But a Federal Aviation Administration official said that the problems were isolated and were not likely to recur.


Dunking for $1 Million
In a potentially more competitive pay-per-view match than Mike Tyson versus Peter McNeeley, Shaquille O'Neal and Hakeem Olajuwon will play one on one for $1 million on Sept. 30 at the Trump Taj Mahal in Atlantic City.
The players will square off on Showtime Event Television -- at a retail price of $19.95 to $29.95 -- as part of Taco Bell's promotion of the two All-Star centers.
The chain is putting up the prize money and will spend about twice that to promote the event.


Progress, but No Canary Wharf Deal Yet
The banks that own the huge Canary Wharf office complex in London have made progress in their negotiations to sell it to a group led by the Canadian developer Paul Reichmann, people involved in the talks said.
But bankers denied reports in The Wall Street Journal today and in British newspapers earlier that the banks had reached an agreement in principle to sell the development to Mr.
Reichmann.
The Canadian businessman built the project, but it was seized by lenders when Mr.
Reichmann's family company, Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., became bankrupt in 1992.


Nikon Is Sued by Barkley Over Ad Photo
CHARLES BARKLEY has filed a lawsuit against Nikon, charging that the company used an unauthorized photograph of him in a prominent ad.
The Phoenix Suns forward contends he never gave Nikon permission to use his photograph to sell its cameras.
Nikon could not be reached for comment on the suit, filed in United States District Court in Manhattan on Monday. (AP)


International Briefs; Ford Layoff in Brazil
With sales sluggish, the truck division of Ford Motor Company's Brazilian subsidiary in Sao Paolo said yesterday that it would lay off 800 of its 3,000 workers.
The announcement was made a day after General Motors said it had laid off 1,050 assembly line workers at its two plants in the state of Sao Paulo.
Ford said it expected to first lay off 260 workers who had been hired on a temporary basis and whose contracts expired in December.
A further 290 would be let go in September and 250 in October.
A spokesman also said Ford would do away with the night shift and reduce its monthly output from 140 trucks to 110.(AP)


Royal Oak Mines (RYO,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


SANTA FE MERGER WITH BURLINGTON NORTHERN IS CLEARED
The Santa Fe Pacific Corporation of Schaumburg, Ill., and Burlington Northern Inc. of Fort Worth said yesterday that they had received approval of their $4 billion merger from the Interstate Commerce Commission.
The merged company, to be called the Burlington Northern Santa Fe Corporation, will be the nation's largest railroad, with more than 35,000 miles of track in the United States and Canada.
The agency's decision imposed conditions intended to prevent competitive harm that could otherwise result from the merger, the companies said.
The conditions include trackage rights and access rights. (Reuters)


Taxis Need Seat Belts
To the Editor:
City Councilman Andrew S. Eristoff is credited with coming up with the concept of the "Taxi Rider's Bill of Rights" (news article, Aug. 18).
He has, unfortunately, left out the need for complying with New York State law, which mandates that drivers of cars and their passengers wear shoulder harnesses and seat belts.
For their own safety, consumers should demand as a "right" that all cab drivers wear their shoulder harnesses and seat belts and that all passengers have them available.


Regis Corp.(RGIS,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Mourning Retired Officer Who Put Duty First
As the family of a slain retired police detective gathered beside his flower-bedecked coffin yesterday -- a police honor guard standing by at attention -- the police announced that a suspect had been arrested in a Bronx grocery store robbery that turned fatal Friday night when the former officer, in effect, placed himself back on active duty.
Friends and relatives said that Detective Oswald Potter, 62, a graying presence of a man at 6 feet 4 inches and 250 pounds, had never stopped being a policeman, particularly in his neighborhood, despite having retired in 1982 after 25 years on the force.
He was always there for the children in the Eastchester Houses, the city housing project where he had lived since the mid-1950's, constantly steering them away from trouble.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-15  CHINA TO EXPEL AMERICAN
A Chinese court convicted an American human rights activist of spying and other charges and sentenced him to 15 years in prison.
But the American, Harry Wu, will be expelled from China instead, the court ruled.
A1  IRAQI LEADER KEEPS GRIP ON POWER
Two weeks after the defection of two top aides of President Saddam Hussein, Washington's hope of seizing the opportunity to weaken or topple the Iraqi Government is rapidly receding.
A1  ISRAEL HOLDS BOMB SUSPECTS
Israel said that it had captured members of the militant Islamic group Hamas whom they suspect of organizing two bus bombings, but that two Hamas leaders primarily responsible for the bombing campaign remain free.
A1  TAIWAN LEADER ENTERS ELECTION
Defying China and trying to rally his divided Nationalist Party, President Lee Teng-hui announced that he will run in Taiwan's first democratic presidential election.
A2  BRAWL INFLAMES U.S.-KOREAN TIES
A brawl in a Seoul subway has added to an outcry in South Korea against what many Koreans perceive as a wave of violence by American soldiers.
A3  U.S.
TRIES TO REVIVE BOSNIA PLAN
The U.S. sought to restart its peace plan as President Clinton named new envoys to replace the three diplomats killed outside Sarajevo last Saturday.
Their deaths cast a pall over the plan's future.
A5  REFUGEES DEPORTED FROM ZAIRE
More than 130,000 refugees were believed to be hiding near Zaire's border as Zairian soldiers deported hundreds of others to Rwanda and Burundi.
A10  An American journalist kidnapped in Colombia finds freedom.
A7  Italy's star witness against the Mafia refuses to lie low.
A9  Killings by youngsters in Canada are on the rise.
A10  Vladivostok Journal: Russians know where stablity is found.
A4  National A16-21, B12-15  A SENATOR'S INFLUENCE
Some Republicans in Congress are using their power to limit actions by Federal agencies, as is shown by Senator Frank Murkowski's actions in an Alaska case.
A1  NEW FACE OF FARM WORKERS
Mixtec Indians from the southern Mexican state of Oaxaca, along with an influx of indigenous groups from Central and South America, are changing the face of the United States' farm labor force.
A1  REACTION TO A GUILTY VERDICT
On the crumbling sidewalks along South Halsted Street in Chicago, people greeted with a sense of mourning the downfall of Representative Mel Reynolds.
A16  GARY HART CONSIDERS A RETURN
Gary Hart, the onetime Presidential candidate, is considering trying for a return to Washington.
A16  CLEAR DRUG LABELS PROPOSED
The F.D.A. proposed that patients get clear and simple information sheets about every drug with every new prescription.
A21  DOUBTS ABOUT LEG AT BOMB SITE
The boot on a leg found in the rubble of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City is too small to fit a local man who has not been seen since the building was bombed.
A16  NEW FOCUS ON SIMPSON EVIDENCE
O.J.
Simpson's lawyers focused on faint lines observed on items at the crime scene to try to prove the existence of a second killer.
B12  THREAT OF FEDERAL SHUTDOWN
The White House said Federal agencies were drafting plans to shut down most operations in October should the President and Republicans deadlock over a budget.
B15  STUDY OF MALE AND FEMALE VOTERS
A new study argued that the disparity between male and female voters is being blown out of proportion, and found more significant differences between other groups.
B15  Air crash investigation focuses on a snapped propeller blade.
A17  A man was ruled competent to be tried in killings at two clinics.
B14  Metro Digest B1  REGION'S RAINFALL BELOW NORMAL
Rainfall for 1995 is far below normal throughout the region, and in Manhattan the month of August is on the verge of becoming the driest since the National Weather Service began tracking monthly rainfall in Central Park in 1869.
A1  AMID FRENZY, WINDOWS 95 ARRIVES
With free midnight pizzas on Long Island, free newspapers in London and special colored lights on the Empire State Building, Microsoft let loose with the splashiest, most expensive launch of a computer product in history.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C10-22  Dorothea Tanning, artist and the wife of Max Ernst.
C11  Creative Artists Agency's new team.
C11  Brian Wilson's comeback.
C11  Music: Guru's rap-jazz mix.
C15  Books: "Friends in High Places," on Clark Clifford.
C20  Television: Debating restraint on terror.
C20  The Home Section C1-8  Making form follow function . . . and function follow form.
C1  Ford's new dashboard: it is a better idea?
C1  No dangerous curves.
C6  At home with Elia Kazan: Relishing the role of outsider.
C1  English Gardeners: A quiet revolution happened here.
C1  In hardware, the useful (and less so).
C2  Currents C3  Window treatments: A Microsoft makeover.
C5  Garden Q. &amp; A.  C7  Sports B16-24  Baseball: A's complete sweep of Yanks.
B17  Mets lose amid controversy.
B17  Rizzuto says he's definitely done.
B19  Basketball: More anger for dissidents in N.B.A.
B20  Columns: Smith on the Mets B17  On Pro Football B22  Football: Giants' Sherrard expects to play.
B22 Horse Racing: Cordero considers comeback.
B22  Tennis: Sanchez a third wheel now.
B17  Obituaries D21  James Truitte, dancer and teacher.
Adele Simpson, designer and leader in the postwar fashion movement.
Alice Greenough Orr, former rodeo queen of the bronc riders.
"Wild Bill" Davis, jazz arranger and pianist.
Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials  The school cuts get painful.
Don't take Iraq's word for it.
Tears in high places.
Letters  Maureen Dowd: Will Jane nix pix?
Allan Luks: Advice from welfare mothers.
Theodore J. Lowi: It's time for a third party.
But we won't get one.
Chronicle B4 Bridge C10 Crossword C10


Norstan Inc.(NRRD,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 29


Fines for Tarango Increase to $63,000
The cost to JEFF TARANGO for his outburst at Wimbledon has risen to $63,000.
The ATP Tour fined Tarango $20,000 yesterday and suspended him for three weeks for post-match remarks that tour officials called "conduct contrary to the integrity of the game."
One day earlier, the International Tennis Federation's Grand Slam Committee suspended the American from two Grand Slam tournaments, including next year's Wimbledon, and fined him $28,256.
He had been fined $15,500 at the time of his outburst.
But Tarango will play in the United States Open while he appeals.


Accounts
Tambrands Inc., White Plains, to Taylor, Dougherty &amp; Partners, Harrison, N.Y., to handle its marketing account, previously handled by various agencies on a project basis.
The billings were estimated at $2 million to $5 million.
South Sea Pearl Consortium, Hong Kong, to Ziccardi &amp; Partners, New York, as the first agency to handle advertising for the organization, which promotes South Sea pearls.
The billings were not disclosed.


A Team To Run Agency Ovitz Built
After weeks of uncertainty and turmoil after the departures of its chairman, Michael Ovitz, and president, Ron Meyer, the Creative Artists Agency today announced the appointment of a four-man management team to run the agency.
Once viewed as a fortress of stability, Creative Artists -- whose client list includes some of the biggest names in Hollywood -- has been racked in recent weeks by internal dissension that pitted a group of ferociously ambitious Young Turks against older agents and left others feeling bypassed and angry.
For the first time, the agency that was held together with an iron grip by Mr.
Ovitz and Mr.
Meyer seemed shaky.


Niuta Titus, 82; Gave to Culture and Medicine
Niuta Titus, whose philanthropy fostered culture and medical research, died on Tuesday in Gstaad, Switzerland, while on vacation.
Mrs.
Titus, who lived in Manhattan, was 82.
With her husband, Roy V. Titus, the former chairman of the Helena Rubinstein cosmetics empire, who died in 1989, Mrs.
Titus supported endeavors like the film program at the Museum of Modern Art, biochemistry at Duke University and ophthalmological research at the Wilmer Institute at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine.


Calendar: Tours, Talks, Textiles and a Day Trip
Transformation  Brooklyn Center for the Urban Environment; (718) 788-8549.
On Sunday at 1 P.M.
Marvin Gelfand, an urban historian, will lead a tour of Williamsburg, the Brooklyn neighborhood that was transformed by completion of the Williamsburg Bridge in 1903.
The tour will include mansions on Bedford Avenue, examples of cast-iron buildings designed by Helme &amp; Huberty and an early public library built by Andrew Carnegie.
Participants will meet at Broadway and Marcy Avenue, under the elevated J, M and Z subway trains.
Fee, $8; members, $6; children 12 and younger and those 65 and older, $3.


Now, an Anti-Mafia Witness Is Taken for a Cruise, Not a Ride
The man whose testimony has convicted many mafiosi here and in the United States and who will be the star witness against former Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti, is not lying low in the weeks before the trial.
Instead, he has been mamboing in the ballroom of a cruise ship and sunbathing at pool side, much to the delight of the paparazzi.
The Italian Government, however, was less amused by the antics of its witness, Tommaso Buscetta, 67.
So as the cruise ship Monterey steamed toward Catania in Mr.
Buscetta's native Sicily Tuesday night, Government agents swooped down in a helicopter to take him off the ship.


Vladivostok Journal; Beware the Floor Lady (She Barks and Can Bite)
These last few years have not been easy on Russia.
First, the wall came down.
Then they ditched Communism altogether.
Thinking about the future gives people headaches and thinking about the past can make them cry.
People want a little continuity in their lives.
A little stability.
And if they'll just check into a hotel, they can still get it.
Because that's where they will find the floor ladies, the often gruff and unflappably stolid women who guard the keys and the morals of nearly every hotel floor in the country.


Taiwan President Throws His Hat in a Powder Keg
Shouting defiance of mainland China and calling on his divided Nationalist Party to rally around him, President Lee Teng-hui announced today that he would run in the island's first democratic presidential election.
Facing nearly 2,000 delegates of the Nationalist Party, whose forces fled mainland China in 1949, Mr.
Lee, 72, embarked on a political campaign that is likely to further inflame relations with Beijing.


This Land Is My Land . . .
"You have to see it from the air," Ross Perot Jr. said, striding toward his Bell Long Ranger 206L, a seven-seat helicopter like the one he flew around the world.
And so, with crisp military efficiency, he lifted off from the roof of a parking garage here to survey his real estate domain.
In a patter as constant as the beating of the propeller blades, Mr.
Perot spent an hour pointing at swaths of homes and golf courses here; warehouses, rail yards, factories and an airport there; and, up on the horizon, buffalo and longhorn herds on his ranch.


In Congressman's District, Conviction Evokes Regret
This is a South Side neighborhood as jagged as broken glass, where salvation is offered in darkened taverns and storefront churches, but scarcely anywhere else.
And yet, many people here found hope in the example of Mel Reynolds, a homeboy who achieved political stardom.
Here was a Rhodes Scholar who had known the sting of the hot sun in Mississippi cotton fields, who had known the sting of poverty in Chicago public housing.


Will the 'King of Saratoga' Ride Again?
At the age of 52, contemplating a final-fling comeback after three and a half years out of the saddle, this is how Angel Cordero Jr. reasons things out these days: "I see they have baseball players coming back all the time. Pele came back in soccer. Mike Tyson came back, and you tell me how much money he got. In every other sport but racing, they bring the hero back."
"The public," he went on, "is writing me letters to come back."


Moving From Fifth Avenue to Birmingham


CHINESE CONVICT HARRY WU AS SPY AND ORDER HIM OUT
China announced early today that a court in the central city of Wuhan had found Harry Wu, the Chinese-American human rights activist, guilty of spying and sentenced him to 15 years, but added that he would be expelled "as punishment" for his crimes.
If Mr.
Wu is able to leave China soon, the move could clear the way for a significant improvement in Chinese-American relations.


David Skipsey, Museum Conservator, 29
David Skipsey, associate conservator of paintings at the Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco, died on Monday after being hit by a car while riding his bicycle home from work.
He was 29 and lived in San Francisco.
From September 1990 to February of this year, Mr.
Skipsey was assistant conservator of paintings at the Philadelphia Museum of Art, which reported his death yesterday.
He was reared in Tynemouth, England, trained at the Courtauld Institute in London and came to Philadelphia in 1990 on a grant from the Mellon Foundation.


Correction
A report in the Guide column in the Long Island Weekly on Sunday about the Long Island Seafood Festival and Crafts Fair omitted the dates.
It will be on Saturday and Sunday from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. at the Long Island Maritime Museum on West Avenue in West Sayville.


Economic Scene; In the Middle East, water policy doesn't have to be divisive.
IF Israelis and Palestinians ever settle on a division of land, they will be forced to confront the one issue that is truly intractable in this harsh, dry place: water rights.
Or so goes the conventional wisdom.
But Franklin M. Fisher, an economist at M.I.T. and a consultant to the Institute for Social and Economic Policy in the Middle East at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government, argues that it is dead wrong.
Mr.
Fisher, reporting on the results of the nearly completed Harvard Middle East Water Project, says the actual value of the water now in dispute is at most $110 million a year -- a trivial sum for a region that has spent tens of billions of dollars on arms in the last few decades.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Signed Greg Wooten, pitcher. National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Placed Eric Anthony, outfielder-first baseman, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Johnny Ruffin, pitcher, from Indianapolis of the American Association.


A Pastiche From Beyond The Patio
ALTHOUGH not as mercurial as, say, hemlines or dance steps, home decorating fashion seems to ebb and flow -- from sleek to shabby, slick to twiggy.
This year there seems to be plenty of inspiration coming right out of the garden.
At least, that's the way it looked at last week's Accent on Design Show at the New York International Gift Fair, a five-day semiannual trade show at the Jacob K. Javits Center.


A New Wave of Immigrants On Farming's Lowest Rung
It is still and silent and unbearably hot here in the heart of raisin country.
Migrant farm workers who have gathered from around the state and from Mexico sit motionless in the shade as the hard yellow grapes, in thousands of acres of vineyards, grow sweeter and heavier on the vine, almost ready for the clamor of the harvest.
The grape harvest is an autumn ritual as old as California, but there is a change.
Most of the migrant workers here in Madera do not speak Spanish.
They are Mixtec Indians from the southern Mexican state of Oaxaca, who, along with an influx of indigenous groups from Central and South America, are changing the face of America's farm labor force.


N.F.L TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Philadelphia Eagles
Defensive tackle Rhett Hall was in fair condition yesterday at a Philadelphia hospital after doctors discovered multiple blood clots on his lungs.
A team spokesman, Ron Howard, said Hall, 26, felt shortness of breath Monday and was taken to Thomas Jefferson University Hospital after a team physician, John McShane, determined he had a pulse rate that was twice what it should have been.


UAP Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Cameron Ashley (CMSH,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


No Dangerous Curves
WHAT a difference a decade makes.
The first Ford Taurus rolled off the assembly line in mid-1985 for the 1986 model year with a look that was distinctly different from American cars of its time: round where General Motors cars were wedge-shaped, fuller where Chryslers had been nipped and tucked.


Interwoven Destinies As Artist and Wife
In 1942, Dorothea Tanning gave the title "Birthday" to what she regarded as her first mature painting, a portrait of herself bare-breasted, standing in a maze of open doorways with a griffin at her feet.
Nearly half a century later she gave the same title to her first book, an autobiography.
"Sometimes we have more than one day on which we're born," Ms.
Tanning said during an interview in the studio of her big Greenwich Village apartment.
"Sometimes something happens in the middle of your life that makes you feel as if you're just born, a turning point, a birthday. We can all have more than one birthday." She laughs.
"We just shouldn't have too many."
Tomorrow, Ms.
Tanning celebrates her 85th.
To mark the occasion, George Braziller Inc. is soon to publish a book about her, with essays by Jean Christophe Bailly, Robert C. Morgan and John Russell, along with tributary poems by her late friends James Merrill and John Cage.
Ms.
Tanning, the liveliest and most plainspoken explicator of her own rich life, has written an afterword that she says is "meant to put things straight." Like what?
"For one thing," she says, "like why I chose to spend 28 years living in another country, which some people seem to think is suspect, a betrayal."


Bridge
Bidding ideas, like cultural products, regularly spread from the United States to other parts of the world.
The converse is rarely true, but a few American players have recently adopted a Swedish system.
It uses a one-club opening that is either a strong-club hand, with 16 high-card points or more, or a balanced hand with 10-12 points.
In the diagramed example from the Cavendish Invitational Pairs earlier this year, the strong variety was indicated when South rebid one heart, leading to the normal contract of four hearts.


Sherrard Expects To Play
When Giants wide receiver Mike Sherrard took the field earlier this week, he was surprised by how quickly he was able to get some of that timing back after missing three weeks of practice.
He had a few drops early but he soon looked like the Sherrard of old: a lanky, talented receiver who, when healthy, is a big-time game breaker.
Sherrard, as well as his fellow starter Chris Calloway, has missed all of preseason with a pulled hamstring but will play this week against the Carolina Panthers.


Athletic Director at Alabama Resigns
The Alabama athletic director, HOOTIE INGRAM, resigned yesterday after having been rebuked by the National Collegiate Athletic Association for his part in the university's being placed on probation for the first time.
Ingram said he could no longer be an asset to the school, where he has been athletic director for six years.
He will spend the final two years of his contract overseeing the expansion of the football stadium.


Uni-Select reports earnings for 2nd qtr to Jun 30


Saatchi to Handle More P.&amp; G. Brands
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company in Cincinnati said yesterday that it had further expanded its relationship with the New York office of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide by awarding the agency responsibilities for introducing Tide Treatments, a line of laundry treatment products, and Ultra Bonux, a detergent to be priced below brands like Tide.
The billings were not disclosed.
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, a unit of Cordiant P.L.C., which handles advertising for P.&amp; G. brands like Tide, Cascade automatic dishwashing detergent and Comet cleanser, was awarded the responsibilities without a review.


ANOTHER REINSURER'S INITIAL OFFERING RUNS INTO TROUBLE
Risk Capital Holdings Inc. delayed its first-time sale of stock yesterday as investors rejected shares of a reinsurance company for the second time this month.
Risk Capital postponed its initial public offering until after Labor Day, Sept. 4, citing market conditions.
The postponement came one day after Risk Capital cut its offering by $40 million, or 14 percent, to $240 million.
Last week Normandy America Inc. surprised Wall Street by withdrawing its $180 million initial offering a day after its shares began trading, as the price plunged amid doubts about Normandy's management.
Risk Capital's business plan called for it to invest the money raised in the stock offering in many of the insurance companies to which it issued reinsurance.
Analysts said that would concentrate the company's risk. (Bloomberg Business News)


F.D.A. Seeks Clear Information Inserts With Prescription Drugs
The Food and Drug Administration, which two years ago simplified food labels, is now seeking to do the same for drugs.
The agency today proposed that patients get clear and simple information sheets about every drug with every new prescription.
For about half of the more than 900 million new prescriptions written in the United States each year, patients get no package information about side effects or the dangers of combining the drugs with others.


Toll Brothers Inc.(TOL,N) reports earnings for 3rd qtr to April 30


Chief Named at Disney On-Line Unit
The Disney Publishing subsidiary of the Walt Disney Company in New York said yesterday that Jake Winebaum, president of its magazine division, would leave to become president of the new Disney Online division of another Disney enterprise, Disney Interactive.
As a result, Disney Magazine Publishing has been reorganized into three units headed by new vice presidents and group publishers.
Mr.
Winebaum, 36, will be based in Burbank, Calif., and will be responsible for developing Disney's new on-line computer service, for which there is no start-up date, and supervising the expansion of the company's presence on the Internet.
He will report to Steve McBeth, president of Disney Interactive in Burbank.


3 Injured in Motorcycle Chase
A Paterson man and woman and a Port Authority police officer were injured early yesterday morning after a police chase.
The man and woman, riding a stolen motorcycle, were being pursued by Paterson housing police when their vehicle rammed a patrol car at the entrance to the George Washington Bridge, the authorities said.
The man, Christopher Williams, 24, and the woman, Rasheeda Williams, 18, were hospitalized in stable condition last night.
Officer Gary Griffith, who was in the patrol car, was treated and released.
Officials said that Mr.
Williams was charged with theft of movable property and eluding the police after he refused to pull over.
They said the couple would also be charged with aggravated assault of a police officer.
TERRY PRISTIN


Alice Orr, 93, Top Bronc Rider and Rodeo Star
Alice Greenough Orr, who broke horses as a youngster on a Montana ranch, delivered mail through snowdrifts on horseback as a teen-ager and later reigned for two decades as the rodeo queen of the bronc riders, died on Sunday at her home in Tucson, Ariz.
She was 93 and a member of both the Cowboy and the Cowgirl Halls of Fame.
In a career that took her from the wilds of Montana to Madison Square Garden and the capitals of Europe, Mrs.
Orr was always at home on a horse.
If it was bucking, so much the better.


Tears in High Places
Especially under Republicans, the White House has long been thought to be a preserve of machismo and unfeeling resolve.
Now Marlin Fitzwater reminds us what a lachrymose place it was before President Clinton came along.
Three chiefs of staff under Presidents Reagan and Bush wept upon being forced to resign, the former Presidential spokesman reports in his new book.
Then there was the moment that Mr.
Fitzwater, Mr.
Bush and James A. Baker 3d bade farewell to the Gipper in 1989.
All three cried.
"We just couldn't help it," Mr.
Fitzwater says.
"Our lives had been so intertwined with Ronald Reagan's."
It is surprising that Mr.
Fitzwater, a stolid man who genuinely admired both his bosses, would write a weep-and-tell memoir.
Nevertheless, as the next Presidential campaign heats up, it is useful to be reminded that people in high places share the same emotions and frailties as the rest of us.


People
Orson Munn, Peter Rabot and Ron Hatcher, former senior executives at Burkhardt &amp; Christy, New York, now Christy MacDougall Mitchell, and Jan Zlotnick, former creative director at McQueeny Davis Kohm &amp; Partners, Morristown, N.J., have formed Toolbox Communications, New York.


QUESTIONS ABOUT CALDOR'S FINANCES HURT ITS STOCK
The shares of the Caldor Corporation fell more than 10 percent yesterday because of renewed concerns about the company's financial health.
The decline began when Caldor told analysts that its sales for August in stores open at least a year -- a common measure of retail activity -- could fall 7 percent or more from August 1994.
Asserting that its cash reserves were adequate, Caldor, based in Norwalk, Conn., said it was continuing to receive shipments of merchandise without interruption.
But an executive at a factoring firm, which specializes in financing for retailers, said he had cut off credit for Caldor merchandise after hearing that two other factors had done so.
Caldor's stock ended the day at $10.25 on the New York Stock Exchange, down $1.25 a share. (Dow Jones)


Survey Raises Estimate On Toddler Vaccinations
A national survey has found that more toddlers are being properly vaccinated than had been previously believed but that a quarter of them still do not have adequate protection.
The Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta said today that for the first time, the survey had measured childhood vaccination rates in each state, the District of Columbia and 27 urban areas believed to be at high risk of having low vaccination rates.
In spite of improvements found by the survey, the C.D.C. said more effort was needed to protect against common childhood diseases.


Home Video
In summer, people normally rent a lot of movies on tape, but not this summer.
Industry figures show that rentals are down.
In many areas, the weather hasn't helped (home video needs rain), but this year dealers blame the movie theaters.
"There are so many box-office hits," says Peter Margo, the executive vice president of Palmer Video, the large New York chain.
Mr.
Margo notes that in addition to the two biggest theater draws, "Apollo 13" and "Batman Forever," the competition for video stores is coming from an unusually large number of movies in theaters that are making from $30 million to $70 million at the box office.


An Objection to Whitman Video
For $15, anyone can have a 52-minute video of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman talking about Republicans capturing the White House in 1996.
The tape is being offered by the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace, in Yorba Linda, Calif., where Governor Whitman gave a speech last spring.
But Democrats have a problem with that.
In a letter sent yesterday to Chuck Haytaian, Chairman of the Republican State Committee, Richard J. Codey of West Orange, the Assistant Senate Minority Leader, said that taxpayers, who picked up the tab for the Governor to travel cross-country to make the speech, should not have had to pay for something so blatantly campaign-related.
A spokeswoman for the Governor, Becky Taylor, said: "Our position on this was that this was not a political event."


Wilson Tries to Put Life in Presidential Bid
After a lackluster summer start-up for his Presidential drive, Gov.
Pete Wilson of California today sought to burst into the consciousness of Republican primary voters by announcing his campaign's first television commercial.
The commercial, which Wilson aides said would be broadcast in New Hampshire beginning on Monday and in other pivotal primary states in subsequent weeks and months, is devoted to the Governor's four signature issues.
He calls for a crackdown on illegal immigration, tougher laws against career criminals and an end to racial preferences, and he touts his experience as a budget cutter.
It is being timed to reinforce Mr.
Wilson's message during an eight-state announcement tour that begins on Monday at the Statue of Liberty.


Guitarist's Repertory Of Songs and Gunfire
Robert Rodriguez originally meant to leave the hero of "El Mariachi" shot in the hand, with a wound so dire that the Mariachi's musical career would be over.
Then along came Columbia Pictures, trumpeting Mr.
Rodriguez's $7,000 Spanish-language home movie as a triumph of ingenuity and, incidentally, making sure the Mariachi would enjoy a magical recovery and go on to play his guitar in style.
So in a sequel called "Desperado" (made for roughly 1,000 times the first film's shooting cost), here is Antonio Banderas, taking on the hero's role and looking his red-hot best.
Mr.
Banderas is shown off during an opening title sequence that finds him striding atop a nightclub bar in tight, silver-studded black.
This limber, long-haired new Mariachi cuts an even more dashing figure thanks to a guitar-shaped wall of light bulbs beaming behind him and Los Lobos on the soundtrack, making the music soar.
Progress can be a wonderful thing.


Workers Rupture Gas Pipeline
A Public Service Electric and Gas Company crew installing street light poles accidentally struck a six-inch gas pipeline and ruptured it yesterday.
There was no fire or explosion and no injuries were reported, but residents from 30 apartments in the Edison Tyler Estates complex were evacuated for about two hours, The A.P. reported.


Players Biting Hand That Fed Them
Some of the staunchest supporters of the National Basketball Association's tentative labor agreement are players who benefited from contract-negotiating rules that would not exist under the new agreement.
"Some of the things I've done with my contract I wouldn't be able to do now," Karl Malone of the Utah Jazz, one of those players, acknowledged.
"But this isn't all about that. I feel with this new agreement, I can be compensated properly."


Alfred Eisenstaedt, Photographer of the Defining Moment, Is Dead at 96
Alfred Eisenstaedt, the German-born photographer whose pioneering images for Life magazine helped define American photojournalism, died on Wednesday while vacationing on Martha's Vineyard in Massachusetts.
He was 96 and lived in Manhattan.
Over a career that lasted more than 50 years, Mr.
Eisenstaedt became famous as the quintessential Life photographer, producing more than 2,500 picture stories and 90 covers for the magazine.
He was especially renowned for his ability to capture memorable images of important people in the news, including statesmen, movie stars and artists.


Publicis/Bloom Gets A Perrier Account
The Perrier Group of America in Greenwich, Conn., owned by Nestle S.A., has named the Publicis/Bloom unit of Publicis S.A. in New York to handle the introduction of Valvert, the first noncarbonated water to carry the Perrier name.
The billings were not disclosed.


Council Overrides Giuliani On Veto of Pathmark Plan
In another rebuke to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, the City Council voted yesterday to override the Mayor's veto of a plan to build a giant Pathmark store in Queens -- including a deal under which the company would donate more than $400,000 to other merchants.
It was the fifth time the Council has overridden a mayoral veto since Mr.
Giuliani took office.
The vote was 40 to 2, with one abstention.


WCI Steel (WRN,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to July 31


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Acquired Mike Aldrete, outfielder-first baseman, from the Oakland Athletics for Demond Smith, outfielder.


Editorial Notebook; A True Russian Fable
Like Boris Yeltsin, Eduard Rossel has risen from the ruins of the Soviet Union to play an important role in the development of a democratic Russia.
Like Mr.
Yeltsin, he has confounded former comrades in the Communist Party by recasting himself as a populist and defying their efforts to garrote his political career.
The stinging irony of Mr.
Rossel's survival is that the former Communist who has tried hardest to disable him is Mr.
Yeltsin, his hometown colleague during the Soviet era.
The paths of these two men, which tell so much about the contemporary political life of Russia, crossed again this week when Mr.
Rossel was elected governor of Sverdlovsk Oblast, a resource-rich industrial region in central Russia.
This rugged area, which straddles Europe and Asia, is Mr.
Yeltsin's political home base and the place where he and Mr.
Rossel worked together for decades as Communist officials.


California Dam Won't Benefit Recreation
To the Editor:
Marc Reisner's description of Representative John Doolittle's love affair with the Auburn Dam ("Concrete for America? Count Him In!" Op-Ed, Aug. 20) may have left the impression that the dam would create recreation benefits.
Mr.
Doolittle hints at this, but nothing could be further from the truth.
The reservoir would fluctuate hundreds of feet each year, making it virtually unusable by recreationists.
The canyons it would inundate are already used by nearly a million visitors a year.
They are one of the most popular recreation areas in central California.
GERALD H. MERAL  Sacramento, Calif., Aug. 21, 1995 The writer is former deputy director of the California Department of Water Resources.


Fires Race Across Eastern L.I., Destroying Homes
As many as 12 homes, a lumberyard and other businesses and the Long Island Rail Road station in Westhampton, L.I., were destroyed yesterday by an explosive windblown fire that devoured thousands of acres of woods and scrub pine and threatened an airport and more populated summer resort areas of Suffolk County's South Shore.
Firefighters exhausted from a three-day battle with flames that had scorched a huge tract of Long Island's Pine Barrens on the North Shore, 20 miles northwest of yesterday's fire, were rushed into the new battle against flames that leaped highways and raced through wooded sections to residential and business areas of Westhampton and threatened Westhampton Beach.


Head-Banging Isn't Always Confined to Ring
The Nov. 4 pay-per-view war between TVKO's Evander Holyfield-Riddick Bowe bout and KingVision/Showtime Event Television's Mike Tyson-Buster Mathis Jr. fight is getting good and nasty and personal.
What filthy fun.
"I foresee Chernobyl," said Seth Abraham, president of Time Warner Sports, the parent of TVKO and HBO Sports.
He has staked out his position: he will not move his fight to another date; Showtime and its partner, the MGM Grand, cannot persuade Don King to do so and John Horne, Tyson's co-manager, not King, refuses to see how much more money can be made by moving Tyson-Mathis Jr. to December.


Officer Investigated in Slaying of Woman
A police officer in the Bronx is under investigation in the weekend shooting death of a pregnant woman believed to have been his girlfriend, a senior police official said yesterday.
The officer, Anthony Nieves, 30, of the 41st Precinct, was placed on desk duty yesterday, his gun and shield having been taken from him earlier, a police spokesman, Doram Tamari, said.


Guilty Plea By Murderer Represents About-Face
With jury selection about to begin in his second murder trial, Joel Rifkin, the unemployed landscaper who has confessed to killing 17 women, pleaded guilty today to strangling two women in early 1993 and burying their bodies in shallow graves on the East End of Long Island.
The plea was a surprise turnabout by Mr.
Rifkin and his lawyers, who for the last year have said they would pursue an insanity defense supported by hypnosis and a theory that he killed because, as an adopted child, he suffered irreparable psychological harm.


Ex-Cadet's Actions Didn't Match Her Words
To the Editor:
I am writing in response to Shannon Faulkner's failed attempt to join the cadet ranks at The Citadel (front page, Aug. 19).
I applaud her effort in gaining recognition from the women's equality movement.
Ms.
Faulkner's drive and persistence in challenging the outdated "men only" policy at a public, federally funded institution are respectable.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
5.68
4.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.33
5.41
4.52
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.33
5.42
4.86
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.45
6.57
7.26
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.81
6.91
7.53
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.70
7.80
8.38
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.25
6.28
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Sales Seem Brisk As Windows 95 Hits the Shelves
Now comes the $150 million question: Will the dogs eat the dog food?
That's what the software developers at the Microsoft Corporation traditionally ask themselves when a new program finally hits the market.
And in the case of Windows 95, which went on sale today backed by a $150 million global marketing campaign, the early signs were promising.


Hudson's Bay Co. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


Abroad at Home; Stranger Than Fiction
The great libel case of Jeffrey Masson against Janet Malcolm has taken a surprising new turn.
It throws fresh light on a legal saga that has gone on for more than a decade.
And it carries some important lessons for our law of libel and, especially, the judges who administer it.
The story has to be told from the beginning.
In 1980 Mr.
Masson, a psychoanalyst, was appointed projects director of the Sigmund Freud Archive.
Soon he said publicly that Freud had twisted his findings for reasons of personal gain.
The Archive fired him.
He sued; a board member paid him off to settle the case.


An Obstacle Removed; China's Ouster of Wu Helps Make Route To Better Relations a Little Less Bumpy
China's expulsion of Harry Wu today is the first good news in months for the dangerously deteriorating relationship between Washington and Beijing, and it opens the way for Hillary Rodham Clinton to travel to an international women's conference in Beijing next month.
But the resolution of the crisis surrounding Mr.
Wu, a Chinese-born American citizen arrested and convicted on spying charges, leaves several difficult questions unresolved, and the search for answers will be complicated by the tangled internal politics of China, Taiwan and the United States.


Teacher Is Charged in 3 Attempted Kidnappings
A teacher from an exclusive New England preparatory school has been arrested and charged with three counts of attempted kidnapping, the police in Farmington, N.H., said today.
The teacher, David Cobb, 59, an English teacher at Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass., was arrested at his summer home in Gilford, N.H., early Wednesday morning.


INSIDE
Crime Ring-Sweatshop Link
Organized crime rings may be bringing foreigners into Southern California to work in garment-industry sweatshops.
Page A16.
Diller Seeks a TV Network
Barry Diller, who helped develop the Fox Network, has decided to build his own network and is seeking control of a chain of stations.
Page D1.
Riley Wanted Out Early
Pat Riley was laying the groundwork to become the next coach of the Heat 10 days before he sent his resignation to the Knicks.
Page B9.
Vatican Delegate to China
The Vatican chose a U.S. woman to lead its delegation to a conference on women in China.
Page A3.


Tarango Takes a Walk, And Problems Follow
It has been nearly two months since Jeff Tarango became famous, not for winning Wimbledon but for walking away from it.
During that span, he has kept playing tennis and has grudgingly postponed the addition of a second story on his house in the Los Angeles area.
"A lot of things have been put on hold," Tarango said yesterday after practicing with Goran Ivanisevic at the National Tennis Center in preparation for next week's United States Open.


2 Rival Videodisk Groups In Talks on Single Format
The two camps developing competing digital videodisk formats have begun negotiations to unify their formats in an effort to prevent a costly war over a standard like the VCR battle of 1980's.
The Sony Corporation and Philips Electronics, which jointly developed one system, approached the other camp, led by the Toshiba Corporation and Time Warner Inc. in the last 10 days, after an influential computer industry committee again urged the two sides to seek a compromise.


In America; Bradley Takes Stock
When I asked Bill Bradley directly if he wanted to be President, he hesitated briefly, then said: "At some time. Yes."
He would not say when or how he might make his move, insisting that those questions were "premature." The cerebral and highly respected Senator from New Jersey, who has already announced he will not seek a fourth term, has not yet mapped the most efficacious route to the White House.
An independent run in '96?
An alliance with Colin Powell?
A run for the Democratic nomination in 2000?


School Board And Giuliani Clash Again
With the state officially closing the door on a request by the New York City Board of Education to use a shortened elementary school day as a cost-saving measure, tensions between the board and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani boiled over yesterday, heightening the atmosphere of turmoil less than two weeks before school starts.
The cordiality displayed between the Mayor and the board after two meetings last week evaporated during another meeting yesterday as the Mayor rebuked the board for its decision to hire a private consulting company and a former Police Commissioner, Raymond Kelly, to study school security -- the seventh such study in 25 years.


Shoe Carnival Inc.(SCVL,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Mets Think Pitcher Needs Rest
The Mets want Juan Acevedo rested and ready for what they hope will be his first extended season in the major leagues in 1996.
So, he will see only a minimum amount of action for the remainder of the minor league season.
Acquired from the Colorado Rockies in the July 31 trade for Bret Saberhagen, Acevedo, a right-hander, left his only start at Class AAA Norfolk recently after suffering a pulled rib-cage muscle.
That injury occurred after Acevedo missed his first scheduled start because of tendinitis in his pitching elbow.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Durable Goods Orders Fall, Signaling Broad Weakness  Durable goods orders fell 1.7 percent in July, the Commerce Department said, signaling that factories were far from showing the strength that has been popping up in some other parts of the economy.
More than 75 percent of July's slide came in the auto industry, but analysts saw some broad weakness, as well.
First-time claims for unemployment benefits climbed by 10,000, to 348,000, for the third straight weekly rise.
Disks the size of a musical compact disk can store a two-hour movie and be used by the computer industry to store vast quantities of data, sound and images.  [ D5. ] U.S.
Raids 3 More Sweatshops  Three Los Angeles sweatshops were raided by immigration officials, who found 56 illegal immigrants, mostly Thais who were apparently recruited to cut and sew garments destined for American department stores, possibly including J. C. Penney.
It was the second time this month that raids had turned up evidence that organized-crime rings were bringing in foreign workers illegally -- and Presidential politics quickly reared its relentless head.  [ A1. ] Microsoft's Virtual Blast  The place was Redmond, Wash.
The jokes were by Jay Leno.
The Windows 95 theme song was sung by Mick Jagger.
It was a beautiful day on Lake Bill.
And all you had to do to join Microsoft's party was, of course, log on and head for the Internet.  [ D4. ] Oh, Have a Coke, Bill  Bill Gates wants a Coke.
He walks to a Coke machine -- past a screen displaying, naturally, Windows 95 -- but has no money.
And so on, in a new TV commercial.
Windows promotion continues.  [ D4. ] Technology Stocks Fall  Technology stocks fell -- even Microsoft, on glorious Windows 95 Day, lost $1.75 -- pushing the Nasdaq down 7.26 points.
The Dow industrials edged down 4.23 to 4,580.62.  [ D6. ] Matsushita Loss Tied to MCA  Matsushita lost $1.5 billion for the quarter, it said; without the sale of MCA, it would have had a profit.
In dollars, it made about $1 billion on MCA.
But the dollar fell steeply while the Japanese company owned MCA.  [ D16. ] What Makes Polaroid Run?
Polaroid shares have been hitting new highs, perhaps because investors subscribe to the theory that if a stock's down long enough, it's got nowhere to go but up.
But most analysts are skeptical.
Market Place.  [ D6. ] Ads, the Old-Fashioned Way  "They make money the old-fashioned way. They earn it." Thus spake John Houseman for Smith Barney from 1979 to 1986, and though Houseman died in 1988, the words in ads created by Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York lived on in people's memory.
So McCann-Erickson is reviving them.
"It's a timeless message," a McCann executive said.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D5. ] Ceridian to Acquire Comdata  Ceridian, which has huge banks of computers, will acquire Comdata Holdings for $900 million in stock.
Comdata provides cash and data for gamblers and truckers.  [ D4. ] Boca Will Not Buy Hayes  Boca Research abandoned talks to buy Hayes Microcomputer, once the leading modem maker, now in bankruptcy.  [ D6. ]


Treasury Securities' Prices Rise
The latest Government reports suggesting that the economy is slowing enough to contain inflation turned bears into raging bulls yesterday and sent the prices of Treasury securities sharply higher.
Adding to the market's upward direction were sizable rate cuts by Germany's central bank.
Bond prices rallied after the Commerce Department reported a surprising decline of 1.7 percent in July durable goods orders.
The drop for big-ticket items as diverse as washers and automobiles compared with the previous month's decline of 0.3 percent.
The report contrasted with expectations of a 1.2 percent gain.
While the report spelled some disappointment for the economy, it was good news for bonds, because it again raised expectations of another rate cut by the Fed this year, possibly at its next monetary meeting, analysts said.


Rose May Be Next Islander Announcer
SportsChannel is expected to hire HOWIE ROSE, WFAN's Rangers' announcer, to replace JIGGS McDONALD as the voice of the Islanders.
The MSG Network, which controls the WFAN deal, is now pursuing KENNY ALBERT to replace Rose.
MSG will not meet SportsChannel's three-year offer.
The job could align Rose as a future Mets announcer.
Albert has two years left on his contract with Home Team Sports to call 30 Washington Capitals games and other games.
He also calls pro football and hockey for Fox.


Stolen Chagall Has Jury Weighing Tycoon's Fate
For a week, a jury in Federal District Court in Manhattan has stared at a precious Marc Chagall painting stolen a quarter-century ago, weighing the fate of a Long Island businessman who says he did not know the canvas was stolen when he bought it.
If the painting could speak, prosecutors say, it would have a strange tale to tell, one involving a professional thief with ties to organized crime, a duplicitous Mexican sculptor who dealt in stolen works and a self-made millionaire who, living the Great Gatsby dream on Long Island, coveted the painting above all else.


Corrections
A picture caption on Wednesday with the About New York column, describing a series of photographs taken by Oded Zeldin of people making funny faces in Central Park, misidentified two men shown.
The man with one hand on top of his head was Piotr Olszewski; the man with one eye open wide was Jay Glazer.


A Rolling Tour Of New York City
A GEOGRAPHER or surveyor might dispute the topographic precision, but for all wheelchairs the apex of New York City lies squarely at Fifth Avenue and 89th Street.
Through the heavy front glass doors and up an arty sliver of an elevator to the sixth floor and you are there: at the four-wheel, no-walking summit of Manhattan and the most spectacular (if not the largest) indoor wheelchair ramp in the Western Hemisphere.
I like to think of it as Frank Lloyd Wright's personal gift to me and my manual titanium-frame wheelchair but there is no firm evidence that he ever intended his masterpiece, the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, to be a monument to wheelchair travel.
At the Guggenheim, the wheelchairs rule in descent, although trying to experience velocity for its own sake can get you a stern admonishment or worse from the radio-toting Guggenheim art cops.


International Briefs; Fujitsu to Invest $620 Million on Screens
Fujitsu Ltd. said yesterday that it would spend 20 billion yen this year and a further 40 billion yen later to mass produce 42-inch, flat-panel television screens.
The total would be the equivalent of about $620 million.


Sanderson Farms Inc.(SAFM,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


Pushing Mope-Rock With Punk Muscle
When Rob Dickinson sang "I destroy myself," during Catherine Wheel's set at Irving Plaza on Wednesday night, it was impossible to tell whether he was brooding or boasting.
Catherine Wheel, which formed in 1990 in Yarmouth, England, puts punk-rock muscle behind mope-rock sullenness.
The songs are one part self-laceration and one part egomania; the singer's misery also convinces him that he's fully alive.
And, of course, no matter how miserable he becomes, he's also a romantic; as he sang in "Shocking," a pop ballad with a hard-rock undertow, "Why can't you believe that you're breaking my heart?"
In current rock attitudinizing, pop's delights -- catchy guitar licks, tuneful reprises -- are permissible if the songs kick hard and don't admit they're having too much fun.
On two albums before its current one, "Happy Days" (Mercury), many of Catherine Wheel's songs floated into a dazed introspection and solipsism, but now the band gets angry as well as depressed.
Now and then, it also allows a viewpoint outside the singer's own; "Judy Staring at the Sun," it admits someone else suffers.





NEW MANAGERS NAMED AT FIDELITY INVESTMENTS
Three months after becoming the head of Fidelity Investments' bond mutual fund department, Fred J. Henning Jr. named new portfolio managers yesterday at 21 of the group's 59 fixed-income funds.
Mr.
Henning, who has vowed to make the funds in the $25 billion group more predictable and less risky, also outlined a new management structure.
Anne Punzak, the highly successful manager of the Fidelity Aggressive Tax-Free fund, was named director of tax-exempt fixed-income research.
Mark Rzepczynski, a senior analyst, will become director of taxable-bond research.
The directors will report, respectively, to Boyce I. Greer, who was named acting head of tax-exempt funds, and Dwight Churchill, who continues as head of the taxable-funds group.
Fidelity's parent is the FMR Corporation.


Buttrey Food &amp; Drug StoresCo. reports earnings for 2d qtr to July 29


CHRONICLE
In Washington, even summer reading can get you in trouble.
TONY BLANKLEY, the press secretary for Speaker Newt Gingrich, spent yesterday apologizing for some complimentary remarks he made about Oliver Cromwell the day before.
An article in The Washington Post on Tuesday noted that Mr.
Blankley was reading "a political biography of Oliver Cromwell and Cromwell's collected speeches." The article quoted Mr.
Blankley as saying that Cromwell was "an intriguing character, a visionary misunderstood both in his time and afterward."


CHC Helicopter (FLYAF,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to July 31


Fire Leaves Homeowners Waiting and Worrying in High School Shelters
Connie Dyson was having dinner with six of her grandchildren at the Westhampton home where she has lived for 35 years when one of her sons rushed in and asked if they had seen it.
At first she didn't know what he was talking about, but as soon as she went outside the answer was clear.
"I couldn't believe all the smoke," said Ms.
Dyson.


Town Square Of Midtown; Drug Dealers' Turf Is Now an Office Oasis
The young professionals were packed in at the outdoor terrace bar at the Bryant Park Cafe, four, five, six deep, hundreds of 20- and 30-something men with their jackets off and ties loosened, women in linen suits or sleeveless dresses.
The temperature was in the 90's, but the socializing was full throttle.
"It's always a madhouse on Thursday," said Nelson Mercado, a park security officer on restaurant detail, standing outside the bar's restraining ropes.


Graphic Industries(GRPH,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


Mexico: Who Was Right?
During debate on the North America Free Trade Agreement, its celebrants promised three things: Our trade surplus with Mexico would grow; scores of thousands of new jobs would be created in the United States; illegal immigration would ease.
Five former Presidents urged its passage, as did the Heritage Foundation, the Brookings Institution, The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, the United States Chamber of Commerce, the Council on Foreign Relations and the Trilateral Commission.


Ralph Hart, 91, Company Chief Who Penetrated Foreign Market
Ralph A. Hart, a company leader who helped both Colgate-Palmolive and Heublein penetrate foreign markets, died on Tuesday in Delray Beach, Fla.
He was 91 and lived in Delray Beach.
Mr.
Hart joined Colgate in Canada in the early 1930's.
A resourceful salesman, he increased the American-owned company's sales of consumer products in foreign markets, starting in Canada and later in India, Australia, Europe and Africa.
In 1951, he was named president of Colgate Palmolive International, a division of the parent company.


Skating in the Rain


The Unspoken Bias
To the Editor:
Headlines such as "Fighting Bias With Bias and Leaving a Rift" (front page, Aug. 21) are part of the reason public support for affirmative action has all but disappeared.
Affirmative action does not use "bias" or favoritism to give minorities an advantage at work or in school.
Affirmative action protects the majority of Americans from the special favors granted to a minority -- white men -- for generations.
White men control more than 90 percent of senior-level management positions in United States corporations.
Can it be true that most other Americans are unqualified for these jobs?
JENIFER URFF, JON WESTERN  New York, Aug. 22, 1995


Sports of The Times; Pat Riley Had Moving On His Mind
IF Pat Riley had really been grandiose, he would have asked for one of those cute little islands in Biscayne Bay, with the drawbridges and the armed guards, and maybe a helicopter to land him on the roof of the Miami Arena to avoid all that messy humanity down below.
Riley has a high opinion of himself.
We already somehow guessed at this, but it is good to be reminded.
The latest proof comes in the letter that was sent to the Miami Heat on June 5 while Riley was still in the employ of the New York Knicks.


The Fuhrman Tapes and the L.A.P.D.
Whatever effect the Mark Fuhrman tapes have on the O. J. Simpson jury, they have major implications for the Los Angeles Police Department.
If Mr.
Fuhrman's recorded remarks portray him as a racist, lawbreaking cop, he stands to lose much of his credibility -- and so does the department that employed him.
Judge Lance Ito is deciding whether any of the tapes and notes of the detective's interviews with a would-be screenwriter can be introduced as evidence to discredit the detective's damaging testimony and fortify the defense claim that Mr.
Simpson is being framed.
Police officials, complaining that the tapes have a demoralizing effect on the force, have quickly begun listening to those tapes also.


Lechters Inc.(LECH,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Juvenile Stakes for the Closing Days
Saratoga turned to the final weekend of its five-and-a-half-week season today with Hennessy, Golden Attraction and Louis Quatorze ready to take the stage in juvenile stakes that could give the earliest line on next year's Kentucky Derby.
The 2-year-old colts will make their appearance on Sunday in the Hopeful Stakes and the 2-year-old fillies will follow on Monday in the Spinaway, the traditional launching pads for careers on the closing days of Saratoga.
And the favorites, as one might have guessed, will be trained by those old rivals from past Triple Crown wars, D. Wayne Lukas and Nick Zito.


2 Computer Modem Makers Abandon Talks on a Merger
Boca Research Inc. said yesterday that it had abandoned negotiations to acquire Hayes Microcomputer Products Inc., the once-leading computer-modem manufacturer that has been operating in bankruptcy since November.
Boca's stock fell $6.50 yesterday, to $23, in heavy Nasdaq trading.
Hayes is privately held.
Boca shares began falling earlier in the week on concern that the acquisition would not go through.


World Within a Fence: A special report.; Palestinians in Gaza Find Freedom's Joy Has Limits
Fifteen months into self-rule, Gaza wears two masks.
The first is the string of end-to-end cafes stretched for miles along the sea that come alive at night with music, gossip and water pipes, and the innumerable concrete skeletons of new buildings rising on every street, down the coast, over former orange groves.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  Anheuser-Busch Cos., St.
Louis, is selling $100 million of notes due in 2005 through Dillon, Read &amp; Co.
The notes are priced at 99.758 to yield 7.034 percent.
Callable in seven years, the issue is rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service and AA- by Standard &amp; Poor's.
Associates Corp., Dallas, a subsidiary of Ford Motor Co., is selling $300 million of notes due in 1998 through CS First Boston Corp.
The notes are priced at 99.932 to yield 6.399 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated Aa3 by Moody's and AA- by S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps.


The Harry Wu Opening
Beijing has wisely decided to halt the damage it was inflicting on Chinese-American relations by the continued detention of Harry Wu.
Late yesterday it put Mr.
Wu, the American human rights activist it seized in June, on a plane to San Francisco.
Before expelling him, the Chinese authorities extracted a humiliating statement of contrition and sentenced him to 15 years' imprisonment for possessing state secrets and posing as a government functionary.
Freeing Harry Wu cannot by itself erase the many serious problems that have developed between the two countries in recent months.
But it will defuse some of the resistance in Congress to Hillary Rodham Clinton's going to next month's United Nations' women's conference in Beijing.
The issue of her attendance at this important international gathering should never have become embroiled in the immediate troubles of the United States-China relationship.


J. S. Garon, 71, Literary Agent Who Saw Talent Others Didn't
Jay S. Garon, a New York literary agent who transformed his career and the world of publishing with a single call to a Mississippi lawyer in 1987, died on Tuesday at St.
Clare's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 71 and had homes in New York, Fire Island and Key West, Fla.
His lawyer and friend Elliot J. Lefkowitz said the cause was a pulmonary embolism.


Lowe Has Pulled Out Of Dunkin' Review
Lowe and Partners/SMS in New York withdrew yesterday from a review for the Dunkin' Donuts account, with billings estimated at $25 million.
Lowe, owned by the Interpublic Group of Companies, cited the press of other business as the reason for the withdrawal.


Renewing Fight on Plane Noise
A group that wants flights at Newark International Airport to avoid populated areas in favor of an ocean route told an Assembly committee yesterday that the Federal Aviation Administration had used inaccurate information in rejecting the group's plan.


Sampras Coach To Miss Open
Pete Sampras, a two-time United States Open champion and Wimbledon's defending champion, confirmed yesterday that his ailing coach, Tim Gullikson, will be unable to join him next week at the Open as the two had planned.
Gullikson was found to have a brain tumor after he collapsed in January while watching Sampras at the Australian Open; two previous fainting spells had been mistakenly attributed to a congenital heart condition.


International Briefs; Nutricia to Acquire Milupa of Germany
The Dutch food company Nutricia N.V. said yesterday that it would pay 820 million marks ($554 million) in cash to buy a German competitor, Milupa A.G., to make it Europe's largest producer of baby food.
The acquisition of Milupa, a unit of the German chemicals and pharmaceuticals producer Altana A.G., would raise Nutricia's annual sales to about 3.5 billion guilders ($2.1 billion).
Last year, Nutricia had sales of about 1.5 billion guilders; Milupa's were about 1 billion.


More Lifeguards Were Urged at Pool Where Girl, 5, Drowned
City health officials recommended more than a decade ago that the Parks Department increase the number of lifeguards at a large public pool in Brooklyn where a young girl drowned on Wednesday, but the recommendation was never adopted.
Under the 1983 recommendation, which came after a drowning incident strikingly similar to this week's, the number of guards on duty would have been increased to at least 15 from 9 during times when the entire 1.25-acre pool was open, as witnesses say it was on Wednesday.


A Demon Finds Himself In a Bad Mood. Uh-Oh.
Long before its apocalyptic finale, in which a demonic Charles Manson-like zombie is supernaturally plummeted into the center of the earth, "Lord of Illusions" has exhausted its capacity to shock or even to excite.
This huffing and puffing mixture of sadistic gore and pseudo-religiosity wants to be the horror-movie version of "The Greatest Show On Earth." Set in the world of illusionists and magicians, it presents its special effects as if they were spectacular stunts in a grand and glittering circus of horrors.
But instead of getting progressively scarier, the tricks seem increasingly strained and silly.
The movie's creepiest moments are all in its opening sequence, set in the Mojave Desert, where Nix (Daniel Von Bargen), a hairy, pot-bellied demonist with a terrible temper, leads a cult of evil.
His glassy-eyed followers, who suggest a ludicrous Cecil B. DeMille fantasy of the Manson family, are writhing, ashen-faced fiends who dress in rags and speak in growls and hisses while finger-painting blood on one another's faces.


Iraqi TV Broadcasts Jordanian's Criticism of Saddam Hussein
For the first time in two decades, Iraqis have heard criticism of their Government repeated on the country's official television network.
Iraqi television broadcast a speech by King Hussein of Jordan on Wednesday in which he vowed to keep open his country's borders with Iraq, but harshly criticized Iraq's policies.


BC Sugar Refinery reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Duckwall-Alco Stores Inc.(DUCK,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 30


Art in Review
'Gazing Back' Shigeko Kubota and Mary Lucier  Whitney Museum of American Art 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street Through Sept. 24
I strongly advise that you read the brochure accompanying this exhibition, especially the essay by Eugenie Tsai, before entering the Whitney's lobby gallery and looking at the actual works.
If not, Mary Lucier's 1983 video installation, "Ohio at Giverny," will merely look like a series of television screens showing alternating views of ponds with water lilies, 19th-century interiors with lace curtains and flowered trellises and cornfields, accompanied by a soundtrack of train whistles, chirping crickets, wind chimes and so forth.
In sum, it will seem like an establishing sequence from cq, they're a companyMerchant-Ivory's as-yet-unmade film biography of Claude Monet.


Waking Up to Dormant Gay Imagery
"Male Desire: Homoerotic Images in 20th-Century American Art" at Mary Ryan Gallery is one of a handful of shows that have emerged from the 25th anniversary of the gay liberation movement last summer.
They have been large and small.
This one is a modest, scattershot affair, mostly of works on paper.
But despite limitations in size (50 pieces) and some questionable curatorial decisions, it offers bare-bones guidelines for the more ambitious projects that one hopes will follow.


JAMES RIVER TO GUARANTEE PENSIONS FOR 8,000 WORKERS
The James River Corporation of Richmond agreed yesterday to guarantee the pensions of 8,000 workers and retirees at 10 paper mills to be spun off by the company.
The employees are due benefits worth $55 million more than the assets of the 12 pension plans that currently cover them, the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation said.
James River, the maker of Dixie cups, is scheduled today to spin off the mills in the United States and Scotland to Crown Vantage Inc., a new corporation based in Oakland, Calif.
The workers in Scotland are not covered by the agreement.


Boston Bancorp reports earnings for 3d qtr to July 31


CHRONICLE
On Labor Day weekend, Cleveland will get a new Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum.
But what's good enough for the museum is apparently not good enough for the Cleveland Browns.
The football team's old syncopated fight song, like something for a Busby Berkeley dance sequence, was originally composed in the 1940's.
Now, it has been updated.
"It was very straight and square," said JOHN MODELL, a music producer in Los Angeles who is the son of Art Modell, the team's owner.
"Rock and roll would have been a cheesy arrangement -- and big band was the only way to go."


Raids Link Organized Crime to Sweatshops
Raids by Federal officials this week have turned up evidence that Asian organized crime rings may be bringing Asian and other foreign workers into Southern California illegally, specifically to work in sweatshops in the area's booming garment manufacturing industry.
This is the second time in three weeks that such evidence has been turned up, Government officials said.
The raids, which were carried out on Wednesday by the Immigration and Naturalization Service, found 56 illegal immigrants at three sweatshops here.
Most were Thais who appear to have been recruited to cut and sew garments destined for major American department stores, Labor Department officials said.
They also said it appeared that some of the garments might have been shipped to J. C. Penney.


Those Who Kiss Her Half-Live to Regret It
As she walks through Times Square, a pale, beautiful young woman in a dramatically elegant black cape, Nadja (Elina Lowensohn) gives new meaning to the idea of New York as the city that never sleeps.
A man she meets in a bar asks about her background.
"Family money," she tells him in her somber voice.
"From Romania." Soon they are making love and he is becoming one of the undead.
"Nadja" is Michael Almereyda's droll and stylish vampire movie, an enjoyable black-and-white fantasy that transplants Dracula's family to contemporary New York and allows them to run across Van Helsing and his own extended family.
Nadja has a vision of her father, the Count, dying.
Soon an ordinary young man named Jim (Martin Donovan) is informed by his wife, Lucy (Galaxy Craze), that he has to bail his uncle out of jail.
The uncle, Professor Van Helsing, has been arrested for murdering a man by putting a stake through his heart.
Van Helsing is played by Peter Fonda in a comic performance that towers over the film.
His hair flows below his shoulders; he wears tweedy jackets.
When he wheels his bicycle into a hallway, bicycle clips attached to his trousers, he has come a long way from "Easy Rider." Van Helsing knows that vampire hunting isn't what it used to be, and neither is Dracula.
"He was like Elvis in the end," he tells Jim.
"The magic was gone."


A Fatherless Boy in Algeria, Like Camus
THE FIRST MAN  By Albert Camus  Translated by David Hapgood. 325 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $23.
When Albert Camus died in a car accident in 1960, a manuscript of his last novel, "Le Premier Homme" ("The First Man"), was found in the wreckage near his body.
The novel was not published in France until last year, for his family worried, as his daughter writes in an editor's note to the American edition, that its publication "might well have given ammunition to those who were saying Camus was through as a writer."


Speech Stirs Speculation of a Gandhi's Return
The widow of Rajiv Gandhi, the former Indian Prime Minister, set off a new round of speculation about a possible re-entry of the Gandhi family into politics with a speech today in which she broke years of public silence on political matters to criticize the Government of Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao.
Sonia Gandhi has long had strained relations with Mr.
Rao, who succeeded her husband as the Congress Party leader when Mr.
Gandhi was killed by a bomb at a political rally in 1991.
Until now, the 49-year-old Mrs.
Gandhi, who is Italian-born, has told friends she wanted no political role for herself or her children.


Robbery Suspect, 17, Is Shot by Off-Duty Officer
An off-duty police officer shot and wounded a teen-ager who allegedly was robbing the officer's nephew Wednesday night in Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn, police officials said.
The teen-ager, 17-year-old Pierre Mosley, apparently fired a shotgun first, neighbors said.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Sheehan Leads by 5 Shots in du Maurier
Gusting winds blew over Beaconsfield Golf Club in Montreal yesterday, but Patty Sheehan sailed right through them.


New Tolerance Sprouts Among Cuban Exiles
When Kenia Serrano Puig, a 21-year-old Communist from Havana, spoke at Florida International University here recently, five police officers shielded her from hecklers in the audience.
She was hissed, called a liar and shouted down.
Her sponsors called the event a success.


Corrections
A chart on Monday with an article about schools in Union City, N.J., misstated the difference between language arts test scores for its students and students in the rest of New Jersey in 1993.
Union City students scored 4.6 percent higher, not 1.8 percent.
The headline on the chart referred incorrectly to the school district involved; the figures were from Union City, in Hudson County, not from Union County.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption yesterday about a service honoring United States diplomats killed in Bosnia misidentified the daughter of one of them in some editions.
The young woman, who was being consoled by President Clinton, was Sarah Frasure, not Virginia Frasure.


Griffey Just Wants To Play Some Ball
Hours before he would become the hero with an exciting ninth-inning home run that stunned the Yankees, Ken Griffey Jr. pulled on a sleeveless T-shirt, shrugged when asked if he would discuss the Mariners' pursuit of a wild-card spot and grudgingly stretched his long and lean body into the personal recliner next to his locker.
His answers about the possibility of reaching the post-season dribbled forth curtly.
His responses to queries about the future of baseball in Seattle flowed more freely.
The scene was strange.
Ten days after Griffey returned from a serious wrist injury earlier than expected and thrust himself into the rejuvenated Mariners' wild-card chase, it was the talk about a new stadium and about his perception of the unappreciative fans that ignited him.
Griffey, who is searching for his first taste of the October spotlight, described a mess.


No Denying Mets' Jones This Time
If there really is such a thing as justice, Chris Jones and the Mets earned a well-deserved portion of it last night at Shea Stadium.
One day after Jones was denied a game-tying home run on a controversial ninth-inning call by an umpire, he gained a dose of revenge by driving in the game-winning run in the ninth inning of the Mets' 5-4 come-from-behind victory over the San Diego Padres.


N.L. Upholds Dodger Forfeit
Leonard Coleman, the National League president, yesterday upheld the umpires' decision to forfeit the Los Angeles Dodgers' game against the St.
Louis Cardinals because fans at Dodger Stadium continuously tossed souvenir baseballs onto the field.


Open Draw Leaves Graf Little Time to Rest Up
It has been a cruel month for Steffi Graf.
First came tax problems, then more back problems and then, inevitably, problems on the tennis court with an opening-round loss to Amanda Coetzer in Toronto.
The United States Open draw yesterday brought Graf no respite.


About Real Estate; New Services for Apartment Hunts
The strong rental market in Manhattan has spawned a variety of apartment-hunting services that use voice mail and faxes to offer listings to prospective renters.
The services cut out real estate brokers and let apartment hunters see listings furnished by landlords.
The customer then calls the rental office, doorman or superintendent to make an appointment.


Lord White, 72, Who Liked Role As a Business Buccaneer, Is Dead
Lord White, a co-founder of the British conglomerate Hanson P.L.C. and one of the most successful takeover artists of the 1970's and 1980's, died on Wednesday at the U.C.L.A.
Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 72.
A spokesman for Hanson said Lord White died of a respiratory ailment.
He had been hospitalized last month after collapsing on a flight from London to Los Angeles.


BEIJING DEPORTS AMERICAN AS SPY AND HE FLIES HOME
Chinese authorities announced early today that they had expelled the American human rights activist Harry Wu, a day after a Chinese court found him guilty of spying and stealing state secrets.
Although the court sentenced him to 15 years in prison, it also specified that Mr.
Wu's punishment include expulsion.
Shortly after midnight local time, the New China News Agency reported that Mr.
Wu had indeed been expelled, and he arrived in California Thursday evening, Pacific daylight time.


At Last, Robeson Enters Hall of Fame
Paul Robeson was the greatest football player of his time.
He was also renowned as an actor, a singer and a scholar.
But he is best known for being what he really was not -- a communist.
For nearly 50 years, Robeson, a former Rutgers player and an all-American in 1917 and 1918, was shunned because of his liberal beliefs and efforts to win equal rights for blacks.


No Headline
"I think it is perfectly ludicrous that I was tortured by this man for five hours and then to have to sit there and answer his ridiculous questions. I think it's crazy." -- JEREMY BROWN, about the man convicted of raping her.  [ A1:1. ]


Disharmony Despite a Common Enemy
The achievement of the Tuskegee air force officers, black pilots in World War II who served their country better than the country had served their people, is a soaring one of commitment and courage.
But tomorrow night's teleplay about them hardly gets off the tarmac.
"The Tuskegee Airmen" is a boys' military story, with a racial spin.
The young recruits who are seen meeting on a train on their way to begin their training are not so much characters as attitudes.
And the whites they encounter split neatly into bad cop-good cop pairs. (You can tell the bad cop by his Southern accent and a habit of referring to black men as "boys.") The posturing and speechifying bring down even such usually reliable actors as Laurence Fishburne, who stars as the hero of the corps, and John Lithgow, who goes through the motions as a racist Senator.
This cliche-bound script is an equal-missed-opportunity employer.


The Spoken Word
MIKEY HALLIDAY, A Different Light Bookstore, 151 West 19th Street, Chelsea.
The novelist reads from his "Daisy Chain: A Collection of Short Stories." Sunday at 3 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 989-4850.
"WORDS AND MUSIC," Piers 25 and 26, at North Moore Street, TriBeCa.
Poetry readings.
Sponsored by the Hudson River Park Conservancy.
Sunday at 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 533-7275.


Daydreams in the Breeze


Dancers Accept Contract
Dancers who performed with the Joffrey Ballet have voted to ratify an agreement with Arpino Ballet, said Alex Dube, the administrator for dance at the American Guild of Musical Artists, the dancers' union.
The agreement with Arpino, the new corporate entity that has replaced the Joffrey, is on money owed to the dancers by the Joffrey for back wages and union dues, medical reimbursements and other debts, Mr.
Dube said on Wednesday.


Dylex Ltd. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Art in Review
Javier Silva Meinel  Throckmorton Fine Art 153 East 61st Street Manhattan Through Thursday
Documentation and fantasy meet in Javier Silva Meinel's black-and-white photographs.
In his first solo exhibition in the United States, Mr.
Silva Meinel, a Peruvian artist, records the extravagant costumes worn by Indians and mestizos taking part in Qollor Riti, a religious festival blending pre-Columbian and Roman Catholic elements that is celebrated each year in mountain villages near Cuzco, Peru.


Restaurants
I finally solved my Shun Lee Palace problem.
After six meals, I resigned myself to the fact that it is impossible to serve great Chinese food in a room filled with people using forks, and decided to think of Shun Lee as simply a New York institution.
From that point of view, it is a wonderful restaurant.
Waiters bustle about with extraordinary obsequiousness; regular customers are greeted with glad cries each time they walk through the door.


Fay's Inc.(FAY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to July 29


International Briefs; ING Profit Rise Helped By Securities Trading
The Dutch financial services giant Internationale Nederlanden Groep said yesterday that securities trading in its banking division had returned to profitability, helping its first-half profit rise 18 percent.
ING's net rose to 1.184 billion guilders ($713.2 million) from 1.003 billion guilders in the corresponding period a year earlier, far better than analysts had expected.


International Briefs; Lufthansa Profit Rises Despite Exchange Losses
The German airline Lufthansa A.G. reported yesterday that it had a 40 percent increase in half-year profit, to 189 million marks ($127.8 million), and said it expected substantial demand and a strong profit for 1995.
First-half results, however, were "substantially depressed" by about 150 million marks because of foreign exchange losses and provisions for leasing liabilities, the company said.
But it added that the losses were almost completely offset by profit of 139 million marks from the sale of aircraft. (Reuters)


For Children
'Association of Tennis Professionals Tour Smash Tennis'  Wollman Rink 59th Street and Fifth Avenue entrance Central Park (914) 235-1169 Recommended ages: 6 to 16 Today and tomorrow
Andre Agassi plans to be there. (For about two hours, today.) Pete Sampras won't be coming, but Richard Krajicek, who recently lost to Mr.
Agassi in the Volvo International tournament, will be. (You may not know his face, but he's 6 foot 5 inches and Dutch.) These and other tennis players, members of the men-only Association of Tennis Professionals Tour, plan to show children what it takes to handle a racquet.
The program is part of the Smash Tennis tour of cities throughout the country, using miniature tennis courts.
The reason the tour exists is to encourage children to play tennis. (Move over, basketball.) And the reason the courts are only 30 feet deep is because the association found that children under 10 find regular court sizes intimidating.


METRO DIGEST
FIRES RAVAGE LONG ISLAND RESORT AREAS
As many as 10 homes, a lumberyard and other businesses and the Long Island Rail Road station in Westhampton, L.I., were destroyed by an explosive windblown fire that devoured thousands of acres of woods and scrub pine and threatened an airport and more populated summer resort areas of Suffolk County's South Shore.  [ A1. ]


COMPANY BRIEFS
CSK CORP., Tokyo, a computer services company, said it had acquired an 11 percent stake in Optibase Ltd., an Israeli company that makes hardware and software used in video data compression, for about $4 million.


HOCKEY &lt;HEADLINEDriver Heads Across the River and to the Rangers
It was not about money.
Or loyalty.
It was about job security.
The Rangers were offering it.
The Devils were not.
Bruce Driver, the 33-year-old unrestricted free-agent defenseman, yesterday decided to leave the Stanley Cup champion Devils and sign with the Rangers.


So Much Stock, but So Little Liquidity
Bill Gates as a broke technophobe? Only on Madison Avenue.
In a humorous sideshow to the hoopla surrounding Microsoft's introduction of Windows 95, Mr.
Gates, the company's chief executive, is featured in a television commercial for Coca-Cola Classic.


Corrections
An obituary on Wednesday about Dr.
Alan Yagoda, an oncologist and professor of clinical medicine at the College of Physicians and Surgeons at Columbia University, misstated his wife's first name.
She is Jane Smith Yagoda, not Judy.


Vatican Picks U.S. Woman As Delegate to U.N. Parley
Taking a shrewd new tack in its international diplomacy, the Vatican has chosen an American woman, Mary Ann Glendon, a Harvard law professor, to lead its delegation to the Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing next month.
The Vatican, which found itself nearly isolated on issues of abortion, contraception and the rights of women at the United Nations Population Conference in Cairo last September, has apparently decided to put a new face on its international team.


Wu Is Greeted By Supporters In California
The Chinese-American human-rights activist, Harry Wu, arrived here tonight after more than two months in a Chinese prison, fell to his knees on the airport tarmac and threw his arms around his relatives, a friend said.
"He looked very haggard and he was sort of limping. He could hardly speak," said the friend, one of a dozen people, including relatives, escorted by airport officials for a private meeting with Mr.
Wu on the tarmac beside the aircraft.


Poor, Innocent Rosemary And Her Nosy Neighbors
"Rosemary's Baby" begins and ends with Mia Farrow humming an eerie lullaby.
By now we all know why: Rosemary was sold out to a witches' coven, conveniently situated on Central Park West, by her overambitious cad of a husband (John Cassavetes), and became the mother of the devil's own son.
Familiar though it is, Roman Polanski's classic horror film can still send shivers through the most jaded viewer.
For all its 60's trappings -- most conspicuous in Ms.
Farrow's cropped hair and the way she does nothing all day but fix her husband's lunch -- "Rosemary's Baby" stands up amazingly well 27 years after it first appeared.
In fact, the film looks smarter when you know the ending.
Told entirely from Rosemary's point of view, the story is complete with vivid dream sequences that clue us into what's really happening.
That knowledge makes it creepy and often amusing to watch the signs of devil worship around the long-unsuspecting Rosemary.
Best of all are her hilariously nosy neighbors, Roman Castevet (Sidney Blackmer) and his wife, Minnie (Ruth Gordon), who slips Rosemary a sleeping potion in some chocolate mousse (or "mouse" as Minnie calls it).
Ms.
Farrow is a wonderfully believable innocent in her best pre-Woody role.
"Rosemary's Baby" is a reminder of how intelligent and slick Mr.
Polanski can be, turning the stuff of genre movies into a mainstream masterpiece.


C.I.A. STILL IN DARK ON SPY'S DAMAGE
Eighteen months after the arrest of Aldrich H. Ames, Moscow's mole inside the Central Intelligence Agency, the agency has still not sounded the depths of the damage he did -- and it may never get to the bottom of the case, intelligence officials say.
A report by the agency's damage-assessment team is long overdue.
It was supposed to be completed in March, but the new Director of Central Intelligence, John M. Deutch, rejected a draft two months ago because it left too many questions unanswered.
The agency now expects the report by November.


Ex-Cadet's Actions Didn't Match Her Words; 'The First Woman'
To the Editor:
Those of us who have been "the first woman" in a position can attest to the incredible pressures and loneliness that accompany the rewards of this experience.


Griffey's Two-Out Blast in 9th Sends the Yankees Reeling
It was quick. It was alarming. It was unbelievable. It was even unprecedented.
It ended with Ken Griffey Jr. crushing a two-run homer off John Wetteland to cap a three-run ninth inning and lift the Seattle Mariners to an amazing 9-7 victory over the Yankees tonight.
It was the first time in his glitzy career that Griffey hit a game-ending home run.
How the Mariners managed to advance to the juncture that allowed Griffey to finalize the game with a homer was even more astounding.


Shopping Amid TV Lounges, Fax Machines and Espresso Bars
THE sun worshippers are absorbing their last rays of the summer.
Soon, the beaches will close.
Then, inexorably, the chill will come and time for a sweater, preferably a cotton argyle with a touch of chocolate brown.
Major clothes-shopping season is here, the most wonderful time of the year for major clothes shoppers.
What's not to love?
The Sunday papers are fat with back-to-school circulars, white shoes will soon be gone from sight and all the other hardcore shopping buffs are out of their closets, running around the stores to bring home new stuff.


Egos and Loafers on the Rise
There's still a thoroughly British air around firms like Cazenove &amp; Company, a tradition-steeped brokerage house staffed by upper-class Oxford graduates, which named its first woman partner just last year.
Self-promotion and talking to the press are bad form and only shoes with laces are considered proper.
But these days, it is much harder to find anything traditional or even particularly British in the City, as London's financial district is known.
In the last several months, aggressive European and American rivals -- who unabashedly show off both egos and loafers -- have snapped up most of the remaining independently owned investment banks and brokerage firms here, greatly accelerating a trend that has proceeded in fits and starts for two decades.
Only a handful of relatively small firms like Cazenove remain under British control, and even their days may be numbered.


Ultimate Electronics Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to July 31


Kellwood Co.(KWD,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 31


Patients Abuse Other Patients At Nursing Home, Report Says
Several patients at a county-owned nursing home in Westchester have inflicted physical or sexual abuse on at least 10 other patients since December, the State Department of Health has charged.
In a report, health officials put the blame on administrators at the Ruth Taylor Geriatric and Rehabilitation Institute in Hawthorne, charging that they did not adequately supervise a locked 33-bed unit for patients suffering from Alzheimer's disease and other dementia.
The report paints a chaotic picture of conditions there, with apparent slapping matches breaking out among patients and with several patients wandering out of the unit.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-12  CHINA EXPELS RIGHTS CAMPAIGNER
China expelled the American human rights activist Harry Wu, a day after a Chinese court found him guilty of spying, and he flew to the United States.
A1  GOOD NEWS FOR U.S.-CHINA TIES
News analysis: China's expulsion of Harry Wu is the first good news in months for the deteriorating relationship between Washington and Beijing, and it opens the way for the First Lady to travel to Beijing.
A1  VATICAN PICKS DELEGATE TO CHINA
Marking a new diplomatic tack, the Vatican has chosen an American law professor, Mary Ann Glendon, to lead its delegation to a conference on women in Beijing.
A3  BITTERNESS TEMPERS GAZA BOOM
Fifteen months into self-rule, Gaza has two faces.
One shows in an explosion of new building, the other in the fences and heavily guarded border crossings that bar many Palestinians from Israel.
A1  ZAIRE HALTS OUSTER OF REFUGEES
Thousands of wary refugees returned to their camps after Zaire, following international appeals, ceased deporting refugees back to Rwanda and Burundi.
A3  GANDHIS MAY RE-ENTER POLITICS
A speech by the widow of Rajiv Gandhi, the former Prime Minister, set off new speculation about the re-entry of the Gandhi family into politics.
A4  U.N.
TROOPS LINGER IN CROATIA
Removing peacekeepers from Croatia has proved difficult for both political and economic reasons.
For some nations, peacekeeping is a source of income and honor.
A11  Iraqi TV broadcasts Jordanian's criticism of Saddam Hussein.
A9  Tokyo Journal: Breaking with tradition, Japanese sit on chairs.
A2  National A14-23  MYSTERY IN SPY CASE LINGERS
Eighteen months after the arrest of Aldrich Ames, the Central Intelligence Agency still has not determined the damage he did as a mole in Moscow -- and it may never get to the bottom of the case, intelligence officials say.
A1  MORE SWEATSHOPS RAIDED
For the second time this month, government raids have turned up evidence that organized rings may be bringing foreign workers into California illegally to work in sweatshops.
A1  OLD-LINE CUBAN MIAMI CHANGES
Cuban exiles who oppose Fidel Castro have long dominated political discourse in Miami.
But now many Cubans say that political and demographic changes have weakened the hard-liners' message and allowed other views.
A14  MORE VACCINATIONS
A survey found that more children are being properly vaccinated than previously thought but that a quarter of the nation's toddlers still do not have adequate protection.
A14  DEMOCRATS DENOUNCE REYNOLDS
Leading House Democrats repudiated Representative Mel Reynolds of Illinois after his conviction on sexual misconduct charges, and joined a list of legislators who have demanded that he resign.
A14  WILSON STARTS UP ADS
Gov.
Pete Wilson of California sought to burst into the consciousness of Republican primary voters by announcing his campaign's first television commercial.
A22  An increase in antibiotic-resistant bacteria was reported.
A18  Metro Digest B1  RAPE VICTIM SPEAKS OF ORDEAL
A man whose release from prison ignited a furor after he allegedly went on a killing spree was found guilty of rape, but the moment belonged to his victim, who went before television cameras and declared herself victim no longer.
A1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-27  Rolling through New York City in a wheelchair.
C1  The public library gives itself a birthday party.
C1  Dancers ratify an agreement on money owed to them.
C2  For Children C20  Theater: "The Food Chain." C1  Charles Busch as female lead in "Swingtime Canteen." C2  Film: "Beyond Rangoon." C3  "Nadja." C5  "The Show." C5  "Desperado." C6  "Lord of Illusions." C6  "Dead Funny." C14 "Dr. Jekyll and Ms. Hyde." C17  "Rosemary's Baby" returns.
C18  "Blackboard Jungle" again.
C12  Music: Catherine Wheel.
C3  Restaurants C26  Art: Relief sculpture at the Met.
C21  Dormant homoerotic imagery.
C27  Art in Review C15  Photography: Dieter Appelt.
C18  Books: "The First Man," by Albert Camus.
C25  Television: TV Weekend D18  Home Video D18  Sports B8-15  Baseball: Ken Griffey Jr.'s homer in ninth dooms the Yankees.
B9  The Mets rally for three runs in the ninth to beat San Diego.
B9  Basketball: Riley asked Heat for big bucks before quitting.
B9  Column: Vecsey on Pat Riley B9  Hockey: Defenseman Bruce Driver leaves Devils for the Rangers.
B9  Tennis: Graf gets tough draw in the United States Open.
B14  Wimbledon cost Jeff Tarango about $150,000.
B15  Obituaries B6-7  Alfred Eisenstadt, photographer.
B7  Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27  Editorials  The Harry Wu opening.
Fuhrman tapes and the L.A.P.D.
Philip Taubman: Russian fable.
Letters  Bob Herbert: Bradley takes stock.
Anthony Lewis: Stranger than fiction.
Patrick J. Buchanan: Mexico -- who was right?
Carolyn Chute: An invading army, in pink and khaki.
Chronicle B20  Crossword C22


Johnston Industries(JII,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Bangladesh Jails Writer Without Charges
To the Editor:
Farhad Mazhar, poet, intellectual, journalist, researcher and activist in agriculture and economic development, was incarcerated in Dhaka without trial or charge on July 30.
The Bangladesh Government called this act preventive detention, authorized by the Special Powers Act of 1974, whose constitutionality has long been questioned.


Short Sales of Two Stocks Precede Drops on Nasdaq
Sometimes the short-sellers get it right.
Among the largest increases in open positions of short sales on Nasdaq this month -- covering trades made by Aug. 10 and therefore settled by Aug. 15 -- were two stocks that have since shown weakness.


For Higher Standards Of Medical Competence
To the Editor:
"The Doctor Left Free to Murder" (editorial, Aug. 21) raises important issues regarding the assurance of physician competence and the protection of the public health.
Like your readers, the physicians of America are disgusted by the events surrounding the conduct of Dr.
David Benjamin.
It is time to review the medical disciplinary system and to make necessary changes in it.
The medical profession can be expected to lead in this effort.


Pete Wilson's 'Courage'
Gov.
Pete Wilson's first commercial of the 1996 primary campaign, which has had a limited run in small test markets, will make its debut on Monday in New Hampshire.
This is the 60-second version of what the producers have titled "Courage." PRODUCER Don Sipple, Strategic Communications.


Market Place; Turnaround hopes for Polaroid: Photography or illusion?
IS it wishful thinking, or a triumph of hope over experience?
Shares of the Polaroid Corporation, long a market laggard, have been hitting new highs lately.
But analysts who follow the company are more temperate in their opinions, and most are still cool toward the maker of instant photography products.
Polaroid's stock, which traded around $30 when the year began, started to climb in the second quarter and hit a new high of $44.75 last week.
It closed yesterday at $43.50.


Quanex Corp.(NX,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to July 31


New York State Opens 2 Doors On Insurance
The New York State Insurance Department announced two new rulings yesterday that allow more competition in investment contracts that insurance companies sell to retirement plans.
The market for such contracts is worth more than $100 billion.
One ruling, which was opposed by some large New York-based insurance companies, allows financial guarantee companies that are best known for insuring municipal bonds to expand into the business of insuring investment contracts issued by insurance companies.
Because the bond insurance companies have the highest triple-A ratings, the investment contracts they insured would also carry that rating, even if the insurance company that issued the contract had a lower rating.


For Bailey, Ex-Giant, Panthers' Door Is Open
Carlton Bailey is asked about his years with the Giants and there is no bitterness in his voice.
No harsh words.
"The Giants are a class organization," he said.
"I have nothing but respect for everyone there."


Block (H&amp;R) Inc.(HRB,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 31


CHRONICLE
Temper, temper.
The singer NINA SIMONE was convicted on Wednesday of shooting a pellet gun at two teenagers who were playing, noisily, in a pool next to her house in Bouc-Bel-Air, near Aix-en-Provence in the south of France.
According to reports in The Daily Telegraph and from Reuters, Ms.
Simone asserted that on July 25, she asked them twice to be quiet, and when they did not, she shot at them with a pellet gun and hit one of the boys in the legs.


Too Long a Delay at Hope Creek
The operators of the Hope Creek nuclear reactor mishandled a problem last month that could have led to overheating, and they took too long to recognize the significance of what was happening, Federal regulators said yesterday.
The preliminary findings of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission echoed conclusions reached by Public Service Electric and Gas Company, which operates the reactor, The Associated Press reported.
In the July 8 mishap, operators failed to realize for 19 hours that misaligned valves were diverting about one-fifth of the water normally used to cool the reactor core.


Smith Barney summons the ghost of a haughty John Houseman in a revival of its 'timeless' ads.
MCCANN-ERICKSON New York makes advertising for Smith Barney the old-fashioned way.
They revive it.
In a landscape increasingly populated with comeback campaigns from the likes of Timex and Culligan International, Smith Barney will once again promote itself in the third-person plural: "They make money the old-fashioned way. They earn it." The theme, which still resonates in the imperious tones of the actor John Houseman, will return in a campaign that begins Monday.


Young Lovers, Their Practical Jokes and a Real Death
John Feldman's film "Dead Funny" tries so hard to be ingeniously tricky and ambiguous that it ends up outsmarting itself.
This twistingly plotted story of young lovers whose elaborate practical jokes on each other finally backfire falls flat on the line between dark comedy and eerie whodunit.
The movie, which aspires to be a hipper, low-rent version of "Manhattan Murder Mystery," has neither the focused humor to score as a comedy nor the narrative tautness to succeed as a thriller.
Intricately edited so that it continually flashes back and forth in time, it feels like a bunch of loose ends tied into a deceptively tight knot that might unravel at the touch of a fingertip.


Behind-the-Scenes Visits With the Stars of Hip-Hop
"The Show" is a documentary that explores the fractious world of rap, finding angry bombast both on the concert stage and behind the scenes.
Though it's too loosely organized to offer more than a cursory view of its subject, "The Show" does suggest that hip-hop culture isn't too recent a phenomenon to have spawned its own generation gap.
This film, which leans more toward offstage observations than performance scenes, pointedly begins and ends at Rikers Island, where the rapper known as Slick Rick is serving a sentence for attempted second-degree murder.
Seen in both his pre-incarceration glory and in jail-house mufti, Slick Rick speaks out against the flame-fanning invective that has become the stock in trade for some of the newer hip-hop stars seen here.
After all, one member of Naughty by Nature is happy to tell the camera that his success has been a good thing not only for himself but for the world at large.
He'd be tying you up, raiding your safe and slapping around your children, he says, if he weren't a hip-hop star.


Inside-Trading Cases Settled With S.E.C.
A father and his son yesterday became the latest Rochester businessmen to settle Federal insider trading charges involving Rochester Community Savings Bank's abortive 1993 merger deal, which may have been one of the worst-kept secrets in the history of corporate takeovers.
Robert B. Frame, a manufacturing executive and former director of the savings bank, agreed to pay about $73,000 to settle charges by the Securities and Exchange Commission that, using inside information, he illegally bought shares in the savings bank, and that his son, Duncan M. Frame, traded on the same information.
Duncan Frame agreed to pay an $111,000 settlement.


A Quiet Show With a Loud Echo
It is not with a bang, but with a whisper, that the new season of exhibitions has started at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The exhibition is small (under 50 items in all).
It is an in-house affair, with no spectacular loans.
Not everyone is on fire for its subject matter, which is "American Relief Sculpture" from the 19th and early 20th centuries.


California Dam Won't Benefit Recreation; In Whose Interest?
To the Editor:
In "Concrete for America? Count Him In!" (Op-Ed, Aug. 20), on federally built dams in California, Marc Reisner seems bewildered why a self-proclaimed fiscal conservative like Representative John Doolittle would try to push through a $2.2 billion boondoggle.


Cubs' Sosa Continues Slugging Barrage
Cubs 6, Marlins 2
Sammy Sosa hit his seventh homer in seven games and Kevin Foster pitched eight strong innings yesterday, leading the Chicago Cubs to a 6-2 victory over the Florida Marlins at Wrigley Field.
Sosa hit his 27th homer of the season in the seventh inning, a two-run shot that put Chicago ahead, 6-2.


House's Top Democrats Say Reynolds Faces Expulsion if He Doesn't Resign
The ranking House Democrats publicly repudiated Representative Mel Reynolds today, after his conviction on sexual misconduct charges, and joined a growing band of legislators who have demanded that he resign his office or face expulsion.
The House minority leader, Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, and the Democratic whip, David E. Bonior of Michigan, disclosed that they had sent letters to Mr.
Reynolds urging that he quit his Illinois House seat before the House ethics committee completes an inquiry into his conduct.


Chargers' Coach Is Set to Have Surgery
Coach BOBBY ROSS, who took San Diego to the Super Bowl last season, will miss tonight's exhibition finale against the St.
Louis Rams.
The 58-year-old Chargers coach was scheduled to undergo surgery last night to relieve pressure from scar tissue that was pinching his small intestine and causing pain.
The team's spokesman, BILL JOHNSTON, said Ross could remain at Scripps Memorial Hospital in La Jolla, Calif., for four to five days and that the offensive coordinator, RALPH FRIEDGEN, would coach in Ross's absence.


MacFrugal's Bargains Close Outs Inc.(MFI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 30


At Plot Trial, Mix Is Called Inadequate For a Bomb
A Government explosives expert acknowledged in court yesterday that bombs could not have been made from the ingredients being used in what prosecutors say was a plot to blow up major buildings and transportation links in the New York area.
The expert, James Thurman of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, was called as a defense witness in the trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, a prominent Muslim cleric, and nine other men charged with conspiring to bomb the United Nations headquarters and the Lincoln and Holland tunnels in an effort to intimidate the United States into changing its Middle East policies.


A Raid Uncovers On-Line Bookies
Investigators had a surprise waiting for them when they raided the wire rooms of a major bookmaking operation in New York City.
Instead of smoke-filled dens with bookies' paraphernalia of betting slips and paper tally sheets, prosecutors said, the raiders found computers, fax machines and telephone-forwarding systems in air-conditioned apartments.
Article, page B3.


Rabbi Isaac Lewin, 89, Teacher Of Jewish History at Yeshiva U.
Rabbi Isaac Lewin, a scholar of Jewish history and the history of Jewish law who often spoke for Orthodox Jewry before international bodies, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 89 and lived on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
Rabbi Lewin was professor emeritus of Jewish history at the Bernard Revel Graduate School of Yeshiva University.
He taught at Yeshiva from 1944 until his retirement 10 years ago.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Monday listing technology books sponsored by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation misidentified the author of a planned book on immunotherapy.
The writer is Stephen S. Hall, not Susan S. Hall.


Snubbed at Windows Party? Log On the Internet
It was a beautiful day in Redmond, Wash., where Microsoft's Windows 95 was officially introduced.
In the main tent, Jay Leno's quips with William H. Gates were amusing.
Outside, waterfowl paddled on Lake Bill, a pond in the middle of the Microsoft office campus.
Commemorative T-shirt sales were brisk.
Mick Jagger sounded great on "Start Me Up," the Windows 95 theme song.
And best of all, one did not have to travel to Washington to take part in the festivities.
All the events, except the day's sunshine and cool breezes, were re-created on the global Internet almost as soon as they happened, letting thousands of people who wanted to attend the software party -- whether to cheer or jeer -- do so via PC.


Leslie Berger, 67; Psychologist Taught Course on Holocaust
Leslie Berger, a clinical psychologist and educator who developed a statewide remedial education program and taught a course on the effects of the Holocaust on the descendants of its survivors, died on Aug. 9 at White Plains Hospital.
He was 67 and lived in White Plains.
The cause was cancer, his family reported this week.


International Briefs; Muhlebach to Be Sold
The British-French paper manufacturer Arjo Wiggins Appleton P.L.C. said yesterday that it planned to buy the Muhlebach Group, a leading Swiss paper merchant owned by BBA Group P.L.C.
The purchase price would be 220 million Swiss francs, or $179 million, which would include the assumption of 74 million francs of Muhlebach's debt.
BBA Group of Britain had acquired Muhlebach in June as part of a takeover of the German company Holvis A.G. (Dow Jones)


Keep in Mind
"WHO LIVED HERE?," a new exhibition based on a list of questions, compiled by public-school children, about Brooklyn's history.
With information on the borough's Dutch, black and Lenape Indian settlers; a reproduction period kitchen to play in and a mural of Flatbush livestock, crops and landscape.
At the Leffert's Homestead Children's Museum, Prospect Park, near the carousel, Flatbush Avenue, near Empire Boulevard, Brooklyn.
Hours: Saturdays and Sundays, noon to 5:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 965-6505.
"JACK AND THE BEANSTALK," a puppet production with Tudor settings and costumes, an actor playing the giant and a black-light sequence.
At Puppetworks, 338 Sixth Avenue, at Fourth Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
For children 3 and up.
Tomorrow at 12:30 and 2:30 P.M.
Tickets: $5 for children, $7 for adults.
Reservations: (718) 965-6058.


Stiffer Labeling for Poultry
A year from now, sellers of frozen chickens will no longer be able to claim that their products are fresh, reversing a longstanding practice that has angered consumers.
The Department of Agriculture announced yesterday that the only birds that can be labeled fresh are those that have never been either completely or partly frozen.


A Student of Time Who Catches It on the Fly
In some respects, it is simply an accident of personal history that Dieter Appelt is classified by curators and critics as a photographer.
In his long career, Mr.
Appelt has produced paintings, sculptures, engravings and drawings as well as photographs, and many of his best-known works are based on his own ritualistic performances.
But Mr.
Appelt was trained as a photographer, and is now an influential teacher of photography in Berlin.
And as the current retrospective of his work at the Guggenheim Museum's SoHo branch makes clear, it is photography that links the many threads of his art.


Fluor Corp.(FLR,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


New Seat for an Old Elephant
Lucy the Elephant, the wooden tourist attraction that stands six stories tall, is sporting a new $60,000 seat, thanks to a grant from the state Historic Trust and private donations.
Workers rebuilt the howdah, as the elaborate roofed seat is called, after stripping the rotted wood off its metal frame.


Love as a Comical Fugue Of Thin, Lonely Voices
IN "The Food Chain," Nicky Silver's toxic, fractured tale of sex, loneliness and the importance of being thin, the pursuit of love is an even more convoluted process than usual.
It's hard, after all, to forge a relationship when all you can really hear is the sound of your own voice.
For the poisonously funny, image-obsessed Manhattanites in the play, all the world's a mirror.
It's no accident that much of this breathless comedy of neuroses at the Westside Theater is made up of monologues, even though there are nearly always at least two people onstage.
Or that the lust-provoking center in an erotic tug of war is a young man whose most pointed contribution to conversation is to stare blankly at his hands.


Eagle Hardware &amp; Garden Inc.(EAGL,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 28


Art in Review
'The Fire Next Time' Artists in Residence, 1994-1995  Studio Museum in Harlem 144 West 125th Street Through Oct. 1
The three artists in this year's annual showcase are geographically far flung and stylistically eclectic.
And as the spiritual's quotation they've chosen for the show's title implies, a sense of spiritual urgency links their work.


What's Left? How About a Transsexual Mr. Hyde?
When Dr.
Richard Jacks (Tim Daly) discovers that he is descended from Dr.
Jekyll and begins fiddling with his great-grandfather's scientific formulas, he messes up the hormone levels and turns himself into a woman named Helen Hyde (Sean Young).
That gives "Dr. Jekyll and Ms. Hyde" the pretext for dressing Mr.
Daly in drag, letting Ms.
Young scare children with even creepier gender-bending than she did in "Ace Ventura: Pet Detective," and using inexpert special effects to make breasts suddenly grow or disappear.
Four screenwriters, all specializing in rewrites, have been enlisted to cook up embarrassing settings -- in the bedroom, at a party, in the office -- where Helen or Richard is unexpectedly transformed.


Charles Busch Replaces Female Lead
The faux is loose in the hencoop at the Blue Angel, where Charles Busch, that past master of the Hollywood pastiche, has stepped into the role of Marian Ames, the mistress of ceremonies of the female troupe that is the oversized heart and songful soul of "Swingtime Canteen."
From snood to sandal straps, the role is tailor-made for Mr.
Busch.
Little wonder.
The drag diva, who replaced Alison Fraser, is, after all, one of the co-writers (with Linda Thorsen Bond and William Repicci) of this exuberant excursion back to the days of World War II.
As writer and star, Mr.
Busch has previously tapped Hollywood's B-movie lode for such kitsch-and-tell exercises as "The Lady in Question" and "Red Scare on Sunset."


Critic's Choice/Film; Hardened Youths in a Staider Era
Richard Brooks's earnest, clunking 1955 film "The Blackboard Jungle" may not look especially incendiary 40 years after it was made, but this portrait of juvenile delinquency in a New York City trade school was once considered as shocking as "Kids" is today.
The film, which begins a 10-day engagement today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, will forever be identified with "Rock Around the Clock," Bill Haley and the Comets's seminal rock-and-roll classic, which, heard over the credits, rings as a siren call of 1950's teen-age rebellion.
The hip soundtrack also includes music by Stan Kenton and Bix Beiderbecke.
Glenn Ford plays Richard Dadier, an idealistic World War II Navy veteran who takes a job teaching English at North Manual High School, an institution notorious for its "discipline problem." Gangs abound.
And switchblade-toting students, slinging the hip streetwise lingo of the day (Dadier is derisively nicknamed Daddy-O), take pleasure in terrorizing the faculty.
Dadier is beaten up in an alley and menaced in his own classroom by a knife-wielding hood.
One colleague, a nerdy math teacher (Richard Kiley), watches the students turn his precious collection of jazz records into Frisbees.
The only female teacher in sight, Lois Hammond (Margaret Hayes), is nearly raped at knifepoint.
The meanest student goes so far as to send anonymous letters to Dadier's pregnant wife claiming that her husband is having an affair with Lois.


Orders for Durable Goods Drop as Weakness Persists
The economy may be rebounding from a flat performance in spring, but factories, at least, are showing hardly any bounce at all.
The Commerce Department reported today that orders for long-lasting manufactured goods fell 1.7 percent in July, a markedly weaker result than was expected and another indication that economic growth should remain slow well into fall.


After U.N. Pleas, Zaire Halts Ouster of Rwandan Refugees
Thousands of wary refugees, hungry and thirsty, drifted back to their camps along the Zairian border today after Zaire, following appeals from the United Nations and other countries, abruptly ceased deporting the refugees back to Rwanda and Burundi.
United Nations and other aid officials said about 173,000 refugees had fled into the arid hills and countryside to avoid being sent home after Zairian soldiers began the forced repatriations five days ago.


Anthony (C.R.) Co. reports earnings for 2d qtr to July 30


Job Done, U.N. Troops Stay On In Croatia
Five months after the United Nations Security Council ordered the number of peacekeepers in Croatia reduced to 8,750, there are still 13,000 here
Today, the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, recommended a further reduction in the troop presence, to a maximum of 2,500.
But recent months have shown that removing peacekeepers from a place where they no longer have any purpose can be difficult, for both political and economic reasons: for some Governments, it turns out, peacekeeping postings are a welcome source of income and even an honor.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in Manhattan that are to close soon:  Closing This Weekend "ARCADIA," Vivian Beaumont Theater, Lincoln Center.
Tom Stoppard's play about two modern-day scholars competing to uncover a 19th-century scandal.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $55, $45 and $25.
Information: (212) 239-6200.


Art in Review
Jean Lowe and Kim MacConnel 'Bull Story'  Holly Solomon Gallery 172 Mercer Street SoHo Through Sept. 30
The title of this odd, charming show refers to Hindu mythology and the bull named Nandi, who carries the god Shiva on his back.
Although a gentle creature, he embodies the propulsive forces of nature, and his image guards the entrance to Shiva temples, alert to the presence of the deity within.


Sad Tourist Trapped In Burma
There are two heroines in "Beyond Rangoon," a film with a shrewd double vision.
One heroine, based on a real-life woman, becomes an ethereal, legendary presence hovering over the film.
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the Burmese democratic leader who was placed under house arrest for six years and won the Nobel Peace Prize, gives the film its purpose, though she appears in only one scene (played by Adelle Lutz).
The fictional heroine, appearing in almost every scene, is Laura Bowman (Patricia Arquette).
She is an American tourist caught in the chaos and violence of Burma in 1988, when the military cracked down on Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi and the democracy movement, and declared martial law.
When Laura wanders into the lush, overgrown countryside, she finds herself the target of soldiers ready to shoot her on sight.
John Boorman's film is determined to be both a thriller with commercial possibilities and, that least fashionable of genres, a serious political film.
Amazingly, this hybrid works.
"Beyond Rangoon" gets off to a slow, worrisome start, but it soon becomes an elegant, fierce, absorbing movie.


Ralph Pomerance, Architect, 87
Ralph Pomerance, whose architectural firm, Pomerance &amp; Breines, designed more than 400 buildings, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 87.
Born in Manhattan, Mr.
Pomerance was a graduate of the Carnegie Institute of Technology.
He opened his own office in 1933 and two years later became a partner with Simon Breines in an architectural practice that continued until both men retired in 1993.


Drop in Child Abuse Cases
The state's Division of Youth and Family Services reported yesterday that it has documented 9,519 cases of child abuse in 1994, a substantial drop from 1992, when the agency confirmed 17,499 cases.
Officials attributed much of the decrease to a change in reporting methods that shifted some cases from the category of child abuse to the category of family problems.
Cases listed as family problems increased from 23,030 in 1993 to 26,586 last year.


3d Suicide at Mental Hospital
A 47-year-old Waldwick man became the third psychiatric patient at Bergen Pines Hospital to commit suicide this year.
Dominic Trifilio was out on a pass when he lay down on Route 17 and was run over by a truck, a death that has been ruled a suicide, said Charles R. Buckley, Acting Prosecutor of Bergen County.


Tokyo Journal; In a Painful Situation, Japanese Choose Chairs
For many Japanese, the pain in attending a funeral comes only partly from the loss of a friend or relative.
It also comes from having to sit nearly motionless on the floor, legs tucked underneath one's body, during a Buddhist service lasting a half-hour or longer.
"Everybody's legs fall asleep," said Kohryu Endo, a priest at Tenryu Temple in Tokyo.
But like a growing number of temples, Tenryu offers a remedy in its main prayer hall.
"When I guide the people into the room," Mr.
Endo said, "they look relieved and say, 'Thank god -- chairs.' "


Riley Sought Heat Contract Before Quitting Knicks
The day he left the Knicks, Pat Riley said his decision had "absolutely nothing to do with money" and everything to do with philosophical differences over control and final decision-making in basketball matters.
Yet 10 days before he faxed his resignation on June 15, Riley was already laying the groundwork to become the next coach of the Miami Heat, according to a memorandum in which he outlined his contract demands, including 20 percent ownership of the club.


Toronto-Dominion Bank reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


Esiason Goes Back: To Jeers Or Cheers?
Will they boo or will they cheer when Boomer Esiason returns to Cincinnati tonight?
"It'll probably be mixed," he suggested yesterday.
"I was a part of the total operation, on and off the field, for nine years."


Kafelnikov Routs 'Over-the-Hill' Foe
Yevgeny Kafelnikov, at 21 the youngest player in the top 10, beat up Aleksandr Volkov, his Russian Davis Cup teammate, twice today.
In the second round of the $328,000 Genovese Hamlet Cup tournament, he decimated Volkov, 6-1, 6-2, in 46 minutes.
Then Kafelnikov dismissed his victim, saying Volkov was obviously over the hill at age 28.


Bookies Go Computer Age, But Wind Up Being Raided
There was a surprise waiting for investigators this month when they raided the wire rooms of a major bookmaking operation in New York City.
Instead of finding smoke-filled dens with the customary bookies' paraphernalia of betting slips and paper tally sheets, prosecutors said, the raiders uncovered a high-tech operation of computers, fax machines and telephone-forwarding systems in air-conditioned apartments.
"The day of the old-fashioned bookie is coming to an end," Charles J. Hynes, the Brooklyn District Attorney, said yesterday in announcing the uprooting of a ring that he estimated grossed $65 million a year in illegal bets.
"They have discovered computers."


Germany Cuts Key Interest Rates to 6-Year Lows
Germany's central bank, seeking to reduce the value of the mark and lift the country's economy, cut each of two key lending rates by half a percentage point today, setting their lowest levels in more than six years.
The impact of the cuts in the Bundesbank's discount and Lombard rates could be felt well beyond Germany.
Because the Bundesbank effectively sets monetary policy across the Continent, today's action resulted in rate cuts in other European countries.
And if the rate reductions do weaken the mark against the dollar in coming weeks, the Federal Reserve would have more leeway to lower interest rates in the United States.


In a Stamford Park, Skaters Have Taken Over
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 18 article on in-line skating refers to Cove Island Park in Stamford, Conn.


Jan Bell Marketing Inc.(JBM,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Israelis Want Peace
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 22 front-page report on the latest suicide bombing In Israel, which includes extensive quotes from Hamas's press release, states that "The opposition Likud bloc has vowed to halt the peace process, a goal Hamas shares."


Edwin H. Rian, 95, Minister Who Held Posts in Education
The Rev.
Dr.
Edwin H. Rian, whose ministry was mainly devoted to education, including 15 years as assistant to the president of Princeton Theological Seminary, died on Tuesday at the Pacific Region Health Care Center in San Diego.
He was 95 and lived in San Diego.
In a career that spanned more than half a century, he was president or vice president of six institutions.


Giuliani Should Allow Jerry Garcia Memorial
To the Editor:
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's decision to cancel the Jerry Garcia memorial in Central Park is unforgivable (news article, Aug. 18).
There is no excuse for New York to insist on such a large police presence and to demand that organizers pay for the police.
We already pay for the police with our taxes.
If the state feels that the most peaceful, loving group of people in the world needs to be policed, then the state should pay for it.


Diller Plan May Result in TV Network
Barry Diller is back, and he still wants a television network.
But it's not CBS or ABC. It's SKTV.


Rays of Hope in the Watershed
Under Federal pressure, New York City has drawn up ambitious plans and set aside millions of dollars to clean up pollution in the 2,000-square-mile watershed that supplies drinking water to seven million city dwellers and one million suburbanites.
Failure to carry out the task will force the city to build a $6 billion filtration plant to meet Federal environmental requirements.
But for five years, the city has essentially been running in place -- in part because of fierce resistance from upstate communities whose streets, outmoded sewage treatment plants and cow pastures send pollutants and parasites into the city's 19 reservoirs.


Diller Gets the Nod to Head Network-in-Waiting
Barry Diller took his first step yesterday toward the possible creation of a new television network, reaching an expected deal for control of Silver King Communications and its group of stations.
Mr.
Diller, who helped build the Fox television network, was named chairman and chief executive of Silver King, the company said yesterday.
He will control 70 percent of its voting stock and 20 percent of its equity.


Half-Safe Is Not Good Enough
Judge Richard B. Lowe 3d may have thought he was issuing a Solomonic compromise on Tuesday when he partially reinstated the license of a Manhattan doctor who had been suspended by the State Health Commissioner as an imminent danger to his patients.
But from the standpoint of protecting the public, the judge's decision makes little sense.
If a doctor is so incompetent or negligent that he poses a danger in one area of his practice -- in this case abortion -- then surely he is a menace in other areas as well.
The Health Commissioner, Dr.
Barbara A. DeBuono, made a reasonable call on Aug. 16 when she used her emergency powers to suspend the license of Dr.
Herbert Schwarz, an East Side gynecologist.
State health investigators had found him grossly negligent and incompetent in performing abortions on 11 patients between November 1994 and May 1995.


Clinton Defines Religion's Role In U.S. Schools
Trying to defuse the politically volatile issue of school prayer, the Clinton Administration has issued the first detailed guidelines on what kinds of religious activities public schools may permit under current law.
The four-page set of guidelines, prepared earlier this month by the Department of Education, stresses the extent to which student-initiated prayer or proselytizing can be accommodated as long as it is not disruptive, coercive or endorsed or organized by the school or teachers.


Crash Nuclear Program by Iraq Is Disclosed
As part of an arms buildup far larger and more dangerous than was known at the time, Iraq embarked on an eight-month crash program to make a nuclear weapon immediately after invading Kuwait in August 1990, the leader of a United Nations inspection team said today.
The Iraqis set themselves a goal of April 1991 to produce a nuclear device.
Experts said today that they had no way of knowing how advanced the Iraqi program was when it was interrupted by the Persian Gulf war, or whether the Iraqis could have met their ambitious timetable for constructing a bomb.
There is no evidence of foreign complicity in this program, officials said.


J. S. Badeau, Former Envoy To Middle East, Dies at 92
John S. Badeau, who served as United States Ambassador to Cairo from 1961 to 1964, died yesterday in Monroe Village, a retirement community in Jamesburg, N.J.
He was 92.
Mr.
Badeau, an engineer, educator and ordained minister, was widely known throughout the Arab world when President John F. Kennedy chose him as his envoy to the United Arab Republic, the three-year political union of Egypt and Syria that dissolved in 1961, when Syria withdrew after a military coup.


CHANGING STANCE, PACKWOOD BACKS PUBLIC HEARINGS
Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon reversed his stance today and called for public hearings into sexual and official misconduct charges against him.
For months, critics as diverse as the National Organization for Women and the Christian Coalition have clamored for public hearings before the Senate Ethics Committee, while Mr.
Packwood and his allies in the Senate insisted that the charges be heard behind closed doors.


Transactions
Baseball  American League BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Purchased the contract of James Hurst, pitcher, from Rochester of the International League.
Placed Arthur Rhodes, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Assigned Andre King, outfielder, to Prince William of the Carolina League.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Assigned Juan Guzman, pitcher, to Syracuse of the International League for medical rehabilitation.
Recalled Danny Cox and Woody Williams, pitchers, from Syracuse.
Assigned Dennis Gray, pitcher, outright to Knoxville of the Southern League.
National League NL -- Suspended Carlos Perez, Montreal pitcher, for four games for bumping umpire Bill Hohn during a game on Aug. 22.
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Acquired Mike Devereaux, outfielder, from the Chicago White Sox for Andre King, outfielder.
Sent Jose Oliva, third baseman, to the St.
Louis Cardinals for Anton French, outfielder, and assigned French to Durham of the Carolina League.
CINCINNATI REDS -- Placed John Smiley, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Purchased the contract of Frank Viola, pitcher, from Indiananapolis of the American Association.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Announced the resignation of Tim Bawmann, spring training coordinator and general manager of Kissimmee of the Florida State League.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Recalled Kirk Rueter, pitcher, from Ottawa of the Pacific Coast League.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  VANCOUVER GRIZZLIES -- Named LionelHollins assistant coach.
Football  National Football League N.F.L. -- Suspended Chuck Levy, wide receiver, for one year for violating the league's substance-abuse policy.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Waived Steve Israel, cornerback.
Agreed to terms with Joe Kelly, linebacker.
MINNESOTA VIKINGS -- Agreed to terms with Robert Smith, running back, on a one-year contract.


Lone Defendant in NASA Sting Won't Be Retried
Federal prosecutors said today that they would not retry the only man to go on trial in what the Government once heralded as a major sting investigation into bribery and kickbacks at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration here.
The first trial of the defendant, Dale Brown, once the financial officer for a small contracting company that routinely dealt with NASA, ended in a hung jury in June.


Trapped in a Wildfire's Unpredictable Path
One day ago, 53 Station Road was a small blue and white frame house where children kept bicycles and a little red wagon, family photographs were on display and the kitchen wall was hung with frying pans.
Today the house, where a family named Dyson had lived, seemed to have been turned inside out.
The heat of a wildfire had blown out windows and ripped walls apart, revealing beds and chairs and clothing blackened beyond recognition.


Washington Bounced From Hamlet by Italian
He is the highest-ranked black man on the professional tennis tour.
He is a role model who spends much of his time working with youngsters.
Last year, People magazine named him one of the 50 most beautiful people in the world.
If only MaliVai Washington could get his game back to where it was when he was ranked 11th in the world in 1992 and again in 1993.
He has made progress here in the $328,000 Genovese Hamlet Cup, a warm-up for next week's United States Open in Flushing Meadows, Queens.
But not enough.


Sports of The Times; One Man's Better Idea For Tennis
WHEN Murray Eisenstadt asked Althea Gibson to give a tennis clinic at Brooklyn's Midwood High School in January 1958, he felt her monumental visit would accomplish two goals.
Gibson, at the time the United States' top-ranked female player, was looking to build on the fame gained a year earlier by winning Wimbledon and becoming the first African-American to win a major tennis championship.


Heart Surgery Technique Puts Spotlight on Start-Up
Although it could be two years before its technology is generally available, a Silicon Valley start-up named Heartport has captured the attention of cardiac surgeons and investment bankers alike.
Heartport, based in Redwood City, Calif., has developed a technology that would allow coronary bypass surgery to be performed through a tiny incision between the ribs, promising far less pain and trauma than current methods, which require cutting open a patient's chest and splitting the breastbone.
Heartport's minimally invasive procedure is much like modern procedures for gall-bladder surgery and for repairing runners' knees.


A Neat, Brisk Beethoven Offered by Asian Youths
There seems to be a hot market for multinational youth orchestras these days.
Since the end of the cold war, the Russian-American Youth Orchestra has brought together young musicians from East and West and has undertaken an annual tour.
There have been several European efforts, one of which transformed itself into a professional ensemble, the Chamber Orchestra of Europe.
Now the Asian Youth Orchestra, which brings together players from China, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam is making its first American tour, as a celebration of the 50th anniversary of the United Nations.
The ensemble stopped at Avery Fisher Hall to play the Beethoven Ninth Symphony and other works on Wednesday evening.
The orchestra includes 96 players between the ages of 13 and 25, as well as a chorus.
Some 2,000 musicians auditioned for the program this summer, and those who were selected attend tuition-free, the costs underwritten by donations from several Asian businesses.
The faculty includes representatives of the Boston Symphony, the Cleveland Orchestra, the Kyoto Symphony, the New Zealand Symphony and several American universities and conservatories.
And Yehudi Menuhin is the music director, although he did not conduct the tour.
Sergiu Comissiona has led most of the concerts, and he conducted on Wednesday.


Robeson and Brown Inducted in Hall
Being inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame with Paul Robeson meant almost as much to JIM BROWN as the honor itself yesterday.
"The man was multi-talented, had tremendous courage," said Brown, who rushed for 2,091 yards and 25 touchdowns at Syracuse from 1954-56 before going on to a glorious pro career with the Cleveland Browns.
"It's very significant to me because he was the person I most admired."


Tennis Federation's Goal: Putting Third World First
The Egyptian beat the American yesterday, which is not the way the cookie normally crumbles on a tennis court.
But if the International Tennis Federation has its druthers, victories like Tamer el-Sawy's over Steve Bryan in the second round of United States Open qualifying will not raise quite so many eyebrows in the years to come.


Having a Ball


Clinton and Old Faithful Let Off Steam
With the steamy plume of Old Faithful rising behind him, President Clinton came to the oldest national park in the world today to revel in the wonders of nature and warn against proposed Republican budget cuts that he said could threaten the nation's natural treasures.
In the process, Mr.
Clinton experienced more wonders than he may have bargained for, including a flash hailstorm and a lecture on the aggressive courtship rituals of the park's bison, which are now in the midst of their snorting, pawing, stamping mating season.


Haitian Exile Is Fighting Deportation
Emmanuel Constant, once Haiti's most feared paramilitary commander, was brought in chains before an immigration judge today.
Seeking a legal loophole by which he might avoid deportation and a trial on charges of crimes against humanity, he swore he was a legitimate presidential contender in his homeland.
The founder of the Front for the Advancement and Progress of Haiti, known as Fraph, Mr.
Constant is a former informer for the C.I.A. who stands accused of overseeing hundreds of acts of brutality -- including murder, torture and rape -- under the military junta that ousted President Jean-Bertrand Aristide in 1991.


Yanks Go From Bad To Worst Moment
Buck Showalter was remarkably composed.
David Cone was refreshingly honest.
John Wetteland was routinely philosophical and Tony Fernandez was revealingly critical of himself.
Meanwhile, somewhere in Tampa, Fla., George Steinbrenner might have hollered that this is getting ridiculous.
He would have been right.
Maybe the devastating 9-7 loss to the Mariners Thursday night will be remembered as the harsh setback that finally turns the Yankees from possible contenders into another Peter McNeeley.
After a dreadful breakdown in a three-run ninth inning in which Wetteland, Fernandez and Ken Griffey Jr. were crucial to the Yankees skidding to their sixth straight setback, how do they recover?
If there was a three-knockdown rule for damaging defeats in their season, the Yankees would have been a technical knockout by now.


Casino Bandit Strikes Again
The casino bandit won again yesterday.
For the third time in eight days, a man robbed a change clerk at gunpoint on a casino floor, this time taking $100 at the Claridge.
The robber fit the description of the armed man who fled last Friday after stealing $250 from a change clerk at the Showboat and then on Sunday took $220 from a clerk at the Trump Plaza.
The only other armed robbery in a casino in Atlantic City was in February 1994, when gunmen shot a security guard at Merv Griffin's Resorts and made off with $1.1 million.


METRO DIGEST
FIRE RAGES FOR 2D DAY IN SUFFOLK COUNTY New York State's worst ground fire in decades raged for a second day in Suffolk County, but its threat to a South Shore resort community appeared to ease, and officials said it might be brought under control today.
The blaze posed Herculean hardships for weary firefighters and raised a testy political issue between state authorities who anticipated airborne tankers to fight the flames and Federal officials who failed to fulfill a promise to deliver them.
The police said an arsonist may have been behind the blaze.  [ Page 1. ] Station Road in Westhampton, L.I., one of the neighborhoods most damaged by the brush fires, has become a study of illogical contrasts.
Every so often, a call to prayer booms through the trees.
A prayer leader hikes along the gravel path skirting the campsites.
He's traded his traditional dress for jeans and a T-shirt.
It's Islamic summer camp in the Poconos.  [ 1. ] NEW YORK CITY  NO LAYOFFS PLEDGED AT SCHOOL OPENING Its budget still in upheaval, the New York City Board of Education tried to smooth the opening of school next month, telling superintendents that no teachers or other school staff would be laid off during the first eight days of school.
The directive did not resolve how the board plans to close the $230 million gap that remains in its budget.  [ 23. ] GUILTY VERDICT IN THEFT OF PAINTING A New York City financier who made millions off tax shelters in the 1980's was convicted in Federal District Court in Manhattan of buying a stolen Marc Chagall painting and trying to sell it a decade later on the black market.
They are offering to pay the state the equivalent of the top corporate income tax in exchange for Governor Pataki's approval.  [ 25. ] Traffic Alert 24


Mattingly Is Out of Lineup
The back spasms that have bothered Don Mattingly for the last week and caused him to be removed from Thursday's game persisted today, so Manager Buck Showalter scratched the Yankee first baseman from tonight's lineup against the Mariners and said he would not play again until at least Monday.
Showalter even characterized that return date as "grasping."
"It's been coming for about a week," said Mattingly.
"I kind of kept going and hoped I would wake up feeling better. This time it didn't go away."


State to Keep a Veterans Home
"We're very relieved we're overjoyed," Richard Valentine, a father of four who makes $25,000 a year as a maintenance worker at the New Jersey Veterans Memorial Home, said yesterday.
It was one day after Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman announced that she had dropped her bid to turn the running of the 334-bed home over to private interests.
Mr.
Valentine is president of Local 195 of the International Federation of Technical Engineers, which represents 40 of the home's 362 employees.
Besides employees, the fight to keep the institution under state management was led by the state's Department of Military and Veterans' Affairs and by Representative Robert G. Torricelli, Democrat of Englewood, who yesterday praised the Governor for recognizing what he called her mistake.


British Utility To Be Acquired By Southern Co.
South Western Electricity P.L.C. today accepted a sweetened $1.7 billion takeover bid from the Southern Company of Atlanta in what would be the first American acquisition of a British electric utility.
The accord is part of a wave of merger agreements and takeover offers that is reshaping Britain's power industry.
The nation's power distribution and generating business has changed sharply in recent years as a state-owned monopoly was broken up and privatized and the industry was partly deregulated.


4 Former Honda Employees Sentenced in Kickback Case
While sentencing Honda executives in a $15 million bribery and kickback scheme, a Federal judge said yesterday that the company "could well be accused of being negligent," but not criminally culpable, for ignoring the scandal's warning signs.
The comments by the judge, Joseph A. DiClerico Jr. of the Federal District Court in Concord, N.H., could bolster the more than two dozen lawsuits brought against Honda by dealers around the country.


Subway Jumper Unhurt
A 22-year-old man who leaped in front of a Times Square-bound No. 7 train on the IRT Flushing line as it entered the Grand Central station yesterday was removed uninjured from a drainage ditch between the rails after three cars of the 10-car train passed over him.
The man, who was not immediately identified, was taken to Bellevue Hospital for physical and psychiatric evaluation.
Service on the Flushing line was suspended for 39 minutes, the Transit Authority said.


Corrections
A chart on Thursday summarizing the efforts by Community School District 27 in Queens to cut its budget misstated the opening date of school this year.
Elementary and intermediate schools reopen on Sept. 7, not Sept. 11. (High schools reopen Sept. 6.)


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
5.71
4.71
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.33
5.33
4.54
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.34
5.33
4.85
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.34
6.45
7.22
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.70
6.81
7.48
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.60
7.70
8.33
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.21
6.25
6.38
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
A brief report in the Real Estate column on Wednesday about the sale of a Manhattan property by the Jonathan Woodner Company misspelled the name of the buyer.
It was the Manocherian family, not the Manachurian family.


Taxi Riders Also Need Safety Information
To the Editor:
The Taxi Rider's Bill of Rights (news article, Aug. 18) is well intentioned, but misses the mark.
The real concern surrounding taxi issues should be safety.


F.A.A., After a Crash, Orders Propeller Scrutiny
Following the crash of a twin-engine turboprop on Monday in Carrollton, Ga., the Federal Aviation Administration said yesterday that it would require airlines that fly the same model of plane, the Embraer 120 Brasilia, to take out of service any propeller blade that had undergone significant repairs.
It estimated that about 20 propeller blades fell into this category.
In addition, the agency ordered inspections for similar blades made by the same company for other types of aircraft.
It said that any such blades, manufactured by Hamilton Standard, that had a history of significant repairs should undergo a special ultrasound inspection within their next 10 flights.
The order affects about 370 blades on commonly used commuter planes like the Dash-8 and the ATR-42 and ATR-72 turboprop models, the F.A.A. said.


CHRONICLE
ISMAIL MERCHANT, the film maker whose informed eye for perfect locations and polished sets has made productions like "A Room With a View" and "Remains of the Day" as renowned for their visual splendor as for their dramatic content, found himself cast out onto the street this week.
In New York, of all places.
Mr.
Merchant, who has filmed in the palaces of India and the palazzi of Italy, was denied access to a co-op apartment at 131 East 66th Street while directing "The Proprietor." The movie stars Jeanne Moreau as an internationally celebrated French novelist.


Some Advice For Travelers
A spokesman for the New York State Department of Transportation had three words of advice yesterday for people planning to drive to the East End of Long Island this weekend: "Patience, patience, patience." And train riders, too, will have to adjust.
The spokesman, Chris Cotter, noted that the Sunrise Highway was closed yesterday from Exit 61 to Exit 65 because of the brushfires sweeping parts of Westhampton, and that the route was expected to remain closed at least through today.


Defending a Panda Cub, Everyone's Endangered
With its towering peaks and gossamer waterfalls, the mountainous terrain of the Sichuan province in China where "The Amazing Panda Adventure" was filmed is so breathtaking that it lends this otherwise conventional family adventure film an eyecatching visual splendor.
Here is where Ryan Tyler (Ryan Slater), a plucky American boy visiting his father, Michael (Stephen Lang), a naturalist, gets lost with Ling (Yi Ding), a slightly older Chinese girl who translates for his father.
Complicating their wilderness adventure is an ailing panda cub which they have rescued from a pair of gun-toting poachers and which they carry with them on their rugged journey, pursued by the poachers.
If they don't save the life of the cub, which Ryan christens Johnny (after his best friend in school), the reserve that his father operates to protect and renew the pandas, of which only about a thousand remain, will be closed by the Chinese Government.


Cleon Jones Gets College Coaching Job
CLEON JONES, the outfielder who batted .340 for the 1969 Mets and made the final catch in the World Series that year, has become the baseball coach at Bishop State Community College in Mobile, Ala.
Jones, who is from Mobile, was hired Thursday and replaces MIKE WATKINS.


Pamida Holdings Corp.(PAM,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 30


China Keeps Up Criticism As U.S. Welcomes Dissident
While Harry Wu was being celebrated as a hero in the United States, Chinese authorities continued their campaign against him today, portraying him as a thief, a fraud and a womanizer who wanted revenge against his native land.
Beijing's decision to release Mr.
Wu, the Chinese-American human rights advocate, is widely expected to ease tensions between China and the United States.
But the old Communist-style denunciations of him today are a reminder of how far apart the two countries remain on human rights.


Britain Offers to Cut Terms for 400 Irish Convicts
Seeking to give new momentum to peace talks in Northern Ireland, the British Government said today that it would grant early release over the next few years to 400 people convicted of terrorist offenses in the embattled province.
The decision would mean shortened prison terms for roughly equal numbers of Catholics and Protestants, officials said.
But it was clearly intended as a gesture to the Irish Republican Army, which a year ago unilaterally stopped using violence to bring about its goal of forcing a British withdrawal and reuniting the province with the predominantly Catholic Republic of Ireland.


TCG International reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


At a Muslim Camp, Studies Before Sports
A grandmother wearing the thick head scarf and ankle-length dress of an observant Muslim sits near the aluminum pier in the 85-degree heat, swathed in pungent tobacco smoke swirling up from her water pipe.
Every so often, a call to prayer booms through the trees.
A prayer leader hikes along the gravel path skirting the campsites.
He's traded his traditional red fez, white turban and flowing robes for jeans and a T-shirt.
It's Islamic summer camp in the Poconos.


The Road Not Taken
It is hard to believe that the Westway highway and development project, which died 10 years ago next month, was New York City's last grand dream for its future.
It was an urban renewal project the likes of which cities have rarely seen.
It is high time that we dare to dream again -- of development on Manhattan's West Side overlooking miles of parks lining the Hudson River.
Originally, the Federal Government was prepared to foot Westway's $2.3 billion bill.
New York planned to build a new highway, much of it underground, along the West Side and to revitalize the Hudson River waterfront with nearly 100 acres of parks and related development.


Bad Nauheim Journal; For the Love of Elvis, a Tug-of-War
Rita Issberner-Haldane climbs up two long flights of stairs at her Grunewald Hotel here, carefully unlocks room No. 10, and enters almost reverently.
She sits on the bed on which he slept.
She leans up against the bathtub where he bathed, and she steps out onto the balcony where he would look down on his adoring fans.
She says everything in the room today is just how it was when he lived there.


Controlled Burning Adopted, but Too Late
For decades, New Jersey has used small controlled fires to cut the amount of fuel available to wildfires in its pine barrens.
But Long Island adopted a similar plan for its explosively flammable Pine Barrens only this summer, and it will take years to implement.
Had the program been in place, it might have reduced the amount of fuel feeding the fire that has scorched thousands of acres in Suffolk County, said Raymond Corwin, executive director of the Central Pine Barrens Joint Planning and Policy Commission, which is coordinating a land-use plan for the area that was adopted in June.


Copters and Crop-Dusters Aid Old-Fashioned Methods
They had high-ranking Federal advisers, hundreds of emergency vehicles and an estimated 2,000 firefighters along the steep walls of flame.
But as New York State officials worked to develop a comprehensive strategy for containing the wildfire here, they were hampered by a crucial missing element: C-130 airplanes, which are capable of dumping enormous loads of water on the fire's fiercest, most remote reaches.


Bill Gates's Carnival
Hand it to Bill Gates.
The canny chairman of Microsoft orchestrated one of the noisiest product introductions in Madison Avenue history with the debut this week of Windows 95, the new operating-system software for personal computers.
With lavish spending, Mr.
Gates cranked up a mighty publicity Wurlitzer that featured everything from Microsoft-subsidized free copies of The Times of London to a blur of television appearances by the normally reclusive Microsoft chief.
It was not easy to tell whether the buyers who stormed into stores at midnight Wednesday, when Windows 95 first went on sale, were propelled simply by the international promotional blitz or genuinely thought the next phase of the computer age was dawning.


Wallace to Give Up University Salary


Summer Ensign Is First in Seneca
Julie Krone won the featured Seneca Handicap at Saratoga today aboard Summer Ensign, an 18-1 long shot who hadn't won a race in two years.
Summer Ensign suffered through four straight losses and one year on the sidelines before returning to the races last April.
Then he lost six more races.
But he dashed from sixth place into contention after one mile today, and won a duel down the homestretch by the length of his neck over Hasten to Add, who had four lengths on Proceeded.
The favorite, King's Theatre, finished fifth.


Postal Clerk Admits to Theft
A former postal clerk admitted yesterday to stealing up to $14,575 from the cash drawers of the Mount Emphraim Post Office.
Ronald Cilurso Jr. said in United States District Court that he used the money, taken from August 1993 to March 1994, for personal expenses.
The theft was discovered in an audit.


American Deported From China Kept Secret Diary of Life in Jail
"I lied to them," said the human rights campaigner Harry Wu, leaning forward in his study today as he recounted his two months of imprisonment in China, "and so what?"
"I said that if they released me I would stay away from politics and have a good life with my wife," he said in an interview just hours after his expulsion from China and return to his home here, 30 miles south of San Francisco.


Does the C.I.A. Have to Employ Torturers?
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 21 front page article on the Central Intelligence Agency's re-examination of rules for hiring unsavory characters as intelligence sources describes a dilemma that has a solution.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Advertising column on the Media Business page yesterday about a new campaign for the Smith Barney brokerage firm misstated the name of the firm's parent company.
It is the Travelers Group.


To Keep Fares Down, End Discounts on Tolls
To the Editor:
"Mitigate the Unfair Transit Subsidies" (editorial, Aug. 20) asserts that the transit fare hike would not have to be as large if the formula for distributing Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority tolls were shared more fairly.
New York City residents pay more than 75 percent of the tolls.


First Lady Will Attend Women's Conference
Hillary Rodham Clinton will spend two days at a United Nations-sponsored conference on women in Beijing early next month, the White House announced today, only 24 hours after China expelled a Chinese-born American who had been convicted on spying charges.
In a statement released in Wyoming, where President Clinton and his family are vacationing, the White House said "the conference presents a significant chance to chart further gains in the status of women." Mrs.
Clinton, the honorary chairwoman of the American delegation, will speak to the conference and talk with members of advocacy groups meeting separately in Huairou, near the Chinese capital.


Bridge
Making tricks without straw is a difficult art, and there is no greater master of it than Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla., a multiple world champion.
In the Cavendish Invitational Pairs played in Manhattan in May, he held the South cards on the diagramed deal.
His partner was Perry Johnson of Farmington Hills, Mich., and they finished third in a very strong field.
Meckstroth landed in four spades after his partner had made a somewhat frisky take-out double of the weak two-heart opening.
He then took full advantage of two subtle defensive errors.


30-Year Bond Price Surges In Light day
Prices of Treasury securities surged for a second consecutive session yesterday, pushing the yield on the 30-year bond to its lowest level in six weeks.
Traders said the gains were driven by follow-through buying from Thursday's rally.
The buying was bolstered as short-sellers scrambled to cover their positions.


Suspect Arrested in Fatal Shooting Spree at Basketball Game
A 24-year-old man was arrested late Thursday in the slaying of one of two men who were shot and killed during a crowded basketball tournament at Baisley Pond Park in Queens last month, the police said.
The suspect, Scott Fleming, 24, was charged after the police received tips about the shooting, said Lieut.
Jack Shatinsky of the 113th detective squad.
Mr.
Fleming was arrested outside 140-04 123d Avenue, in South Jamaica, at the home of relatives, he said.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Scott, 18, Chasing Woods's Record  The defending champion, Tiger Woods, won two matches yesterday to reach the quarterfinals of the United States Amateur in Newport, R.I.
His victories were overshadowed by those of another teen-ager who is trying to replace him as the youngest Amateur champion.
Steve Scott, 18, of Coral Springs, Fla., defeated 37-year-old Griff Moody of Hoover, Ala., 5 and 4, to reach the round of eight.
Scott, who won the last three Florida high school championships, was 5-under through 14 holes, including birdies on Nos. 10, 11, 12 and 13.
He will play Duke Delcher of Linwood, N.J., who defeated Chris Riley of San Diego, 2 up.
Woods, who had only one bogey over 33 holes, defeated Chad Campbell of Andrews, Tex., 4 and 2, in the morning, then beat Sean Knapp of Oakmont, Pa., 2 and 1, in the afternoon.
Woods is paired with Scott Kammann of White Pine, Tenn., in the quarterfinals. (AP)
NEUMANN IN FRONT AFTER 66: The winds calmed, the clouds disappeared and it was Liselotte Neumann's day to sparkle at the du Maurier Classic in Montreal.
While the first-round leader Patty Sheehan shot a 77, Neumann, the 1988 United States Open winner from Sweden, had a bogey-free 66 yesterday to take a three-shot lead after two rounds of the L.P.G.A.
Tour's last of four major championships.
Neumann, at seven-under-par 137 after 36 holes, is three strokes ahead of Jenny Lidback, a native of Peru who holds Swedish citizenship but lives in the United States.
Lidback, who is seeking her first victory in seven years on tour, shot 69.
Five strokes back heading into the third round at the 6,261-yard Beaconsfield Golf Club was Laurie Rinker-Graham. (AP)
ONE-STROKE LEAD FOR GALLAGHER: Jim Gallagher Jr. avoided the pitfalls that befell his playing partner, Payne Stewart, and retained a one-stroke lead yesterday through two rounds of the World Series of Golf.
While Stewart shot 74 after an opening-round 67, Gallagher's 71 left him at three-under 137.
He started the round with a one-stroke lead over Stewart at parched and hard Firestone Country Club in Akron, Ohio.
One shot back were the defending champion Jose Maria Olazabal, Billy Mayfair and Mike Sullivan.
Olazabal shot a 70.
Sullivan had a 67 and Mayfair a 68, accounting for two of only eight subpar scores in the second round. (AP)
ORR'S 63 BREAKS COURSE RECORD: Scotland's Gary Orr, the 1993 European P.G.A. rookie of the year, broke a course record with an eight-under-par 63 yesterday and created a three-way tie for the lead in the German Open in Nippenburg.
With Orr at 132 were Paul Afflek of Wales and Paul Moloney of Australia.
Ian Woosnam of Wales shot his second 69 and was in danger of failing to get a berth on the European Ryder Cup team.
Woosnam was among 13 players in contention for four spots on the 10-man team that plays the United States Sept. 22-24.
Woosnam needs to place at least fifth, and maybe higher. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  Kiptanui Breaks 8 Minutes in Steeplechase
Moses Kiptanui of Kenya ran the second sub-eight-minute 3,000-meter steeplechase in history yesterday, finishing only .35 seconds shy of his world record at the Van Damme Memorial in Brussels.
In cold and windy conditions, Kiptanui ran most of the race on his own and finished in 7 minutes 59.53 seconds, just short of the record he set in Zurich last week.
Maria Mutola of Mozambique set a world mark in the rarely run women's 1,000 meters.
Mutola became the first woman to run the distance under 2:30 by finishing in 2:29.34. (AP)


Suspected Cat Burglar Arrested
A man suspected of robbing as many as 100 apartments while people slept was arrested after the police formed a special unit to find him, authorities said yesterday.
Derek Williams, 27, of Hackensack, was arrested on Thursday morning when a man awoke, confronted the intruder, and called the police, who already had an undercover unit in the area looking for the burglar.
"We believe he has done well over 100 burglaries in Hackensack and Teaneck alone," Hackensack's Police Chief, Charles Zisa, told the A.P.
"He was a cat burglar who operated only on fire escapes, looking for unlocked windows or screens to cut through with scissors."


Executive Changes
BROTHERS GOURMET COFFEES INC., Boca Raton, Fla., named David B. Vermylen, its president and chief executive, to the additional position of chairman.
CIRCLE K CORP., Phoenix, appointed John Antioco, its president and chief executive, to the additional position of chairman, succeeding Bart A. Brown Jr., who resigned to become chairman and chief executive of Color Tile Inc. of Fort Worth.
FORD MOTOR CO., Dearborn, Mich., appointed Vaughn Koshkarian, its director of international automotive operations strategy and associations, to the position of president of Ford China Operations, succeeding Jim Paulsen, who retires in October.
POLO RALPH LAUREN, New York, promoted John Idol, previously president of the Ralph Lauren Home Collection, to the new position of group president and chief operating officer.
Ken Rood, previously vice president of sales, will assume Mr.
Idol's former post.
QUANTUM CORP., Milpitas, Calif., a maker of computer disk drives, said William Miller had resigned as chairman and chief executive for personal reasons but would remain at Quantum until a replacement was named.
WAL-MART STORES INC., Bentonville, Ark., appointed John Menzer, former president and chief operating office of Ben Franklin Retail Stores Inc., to executive vice president and chief financial officer, replacing Paul Carter, who will become president of Wal-Mart Realty Co.


Cordis Corp.(CORD,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Burglars Take Nothing of Value
Burglars went to a lot of trouble to break into the headquarters of the Newark Teachers Union but left apparently without stealing anything of value, the police said yesterday.
The union's president, Joseph Del Grosso, said the intruders forced bars on a second-floor window early Thursday to enter an office containing four new computers and a television set, but took nothing there.
The burglars then climbed to the third-floor office of Pietro Petino, the union's executive director, broke open a file cabinet and rifled his desk drawers.


INSIDE
Buffett in Geico Bid
Underscoring an early success, Warren E. Buffett, through Berkshire Hathaway, bid $2.3 billion for Geico's remaining 49 percent.
Page 33.
Threat to National Parks
In a visit to Yellowstone, Clinton warned that budget cuts sought by the Republicans were a threat to the nation's natural treasures.
Page 7.


Washington Wants Cortines Back
The United States Secretary of Education, Richard W. Riley, is very interested in having New York City's Schools Chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines, return to work for him in Washington, perhaps as assistant secretary of education for elementary and secondary education, a spokesman for the Secretary said yesterday.
Mr.
Cortines worked briefly for Mr.
Riley before coming to New York in 1993.
At the time, he was awaiting confirmation as an assistant secretary in charge of interagency affairs.


No Headline
"Why should I be honest with them? I deal with men as men deal with me, and they lied to me from the very beginning." -- HARRY WU, expelled from China for spying.  [ 1:2 ]


Court Bars Voucher Plan in Religious Schools
Plans to expand Milwaukee's school voucher program to include religious schools were stymied yesterday when the Wisconsin Supreme Court blocked the state from providing the money.
The state's high court granted a request for a preliminary injunction filed by the American Civil Liberties Union, which challenged the plan as a violation of state and Federal constitutional guarantees of separation of church and state.
The plan uses state money to pay private school tuition.


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page yesterday misstated some of the water-brand advertising assignments of the Perrier Group of America in some editions.
Publicis/Bloom handles the Perrier and Valvert brands; it does not have the Arrowhead and Deer Park brands, which are handled by Waring &amp; LaRosa, nor the Poland Spring brand, which is handled by Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners.


Cruel and Unneeded
To the Editor:
In "Spinal Cord Research" (letter, Aug. 19), Robert J. White upholds animal experimentation by virtue of his own experiments.
But his more than 100 unspeakably cruel monkey head transplants were worthless.
Dr.
White's colleague Dr.
Jerry Silver, an expert in regrowing severed nerves, said of Dr.
White's living monkey heads, "I think it is fairly barbaric."


Executive Charged With Raping Job Applicant
A top executive of a $1 billion private holding company was charged yesterday with luring a 19-year-old woman to the company's offices at 30 Rockefeller Center for a job interview after hours and then raping and sodomizing her in the company's conference room.
The police identified the suspect as Marvin Koenig, a 63-year-old Scarsdale resident who is executive vice president of Renco Group Inc., a company that buys and controls other concerns.
The police said the attack occurred on March 24.
After five months of investigation had failed to result in an arrest, the police said the suspect was finally tripped up by surveillance elevator cameras that had been installed at Rockefeller Center the day before the woman was attacked.


Florene May Schoenborn, 92, A Benefactor of the Modern
Florene May Schoenborn, a benefactor and life trustee of the Museum of Modern Art, to which she gave dozens of paintings collected over the years by her and her second husband, Samuel A. Marx, died yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 92.
The couple came to own what was among the most distinguished collections of modern art in private hands.
The collection included the most outstanding collection of early works by Matisse outside Russia, the museum said.


School Board Pledges No Layoffs at Beginning of Classes
Its budget still in upheaval, the New York City Board of Education attempted yesterday to smooth the opening of school next month, telling superintendents that no teachers or other school staff would be laid off during the first eight days of school.
The board's directive to the superintendents was intended to minimize disruptions during the always-hectic first week, but it did not resolve how the board plans to close the $230 million gap that remains in its budget.
While board officials said that layoffs of perhaps 1,000 unlicensed teachers -- who are hired on a temporary, year-to-year basis -- could begin as soon as Sept. 15, they said they were making every effort to minimize or eliminate that possibility.


A Late Finisher About Old Araby
In 1968, long before he animated "Who Framed Roger Rabbit," Richard Williams began an ambitious, elaborate feature called "The Thief and the Cobbler," about a brave cobbler, an Arabian princess and a bumbling thief.
His decades-long project, retitled "Arabian Knight," opened yesterday in an end-of-summer slot usually reserved for films being tossed away.
"Arabian Knight" deserved better.
It's no dog, though it is a fascinating problem.
Mr.
Williams's wide-screen animation is among the most glorious and lively ever created.
The backdrops feature beautiful, jewel-like mosaic walls in old Baghdad.
The thief leaps and scampers like a slapstick comedian.
When Princess Yum Yum and the cobbler, named Tack, try to save the city from an army of one-eyed villains, the colorful battle scenes whiz along using ingenious Rube Goldberg weapons.
"Arabian Knight" is amazing to watch.


Fed Committee Gave Greenspan Discretion to Cut Rates
In a strong sign that the Federal Reserve may lower interest rates in the coming months, the Fed disclosed today that its top policy committee had authorized its chairman to reduce short-term interest rates at his discretion this summer.
The authority granted by the committee on July 6, although not exercised, was the latest of several signs that interest rates could be reduced this fall, which would allow millions of Americans to save money on everything from car loans to adjustable-rate mortgages.
Lower rates this fall would also tend to fuel economic growth next year, probably helping President Clinton's bid for re-election and Democratic efforts to regain control of the House of Representatives and the Senate.


Buffett Moves To Acquire All of Geico
Warren E. Buffett is returning his focus to one of his earliest successes.
Berkshire Hathaway Inc., which he controls, announced a $2.3 billion cash offer yesterday to buy the 49 percent of the Geico Corporation it does not already own.
Geico, the country's sixth-largest car insurer, has been a solidly profitable company in recent years with a good record for low losses and low expenses in comparison with others in its business.
These results have been possible because the company bypasses agents, selling directly to the consumer, concentrating on low-risk drivers.


Fear of an Epidemic Rises in Central America


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMERITECH CORP., Chicago, said that because of a series of weather-related repair problems in Ohio earlier this year, it planned to add more than 500 service and repair employees there in the next three months.
CCP INSURANCE INC., Carmel, Ind., said its shareholders had approved Conseco Inc.'s plan to buy the remaining 11.8 million shares of CCP that it did not already own in a transaction valued about $274 million.
Conceso will purchase CCP shares for $23.25 each in cash.
DOMINION RESOURCES INC., Richmond, a utility holding copmpany, said its Virginia Electric Power Co. unit would reduce its work force by another 175 jobs, which should save it more than $8 million annually in the next four years.
WEST FRASIER TIMBER CO., a forest products concern, completed its acquisition of Alberta Energy Co.'s Calgary, forest products division for 394 million Canadian dollars, or about $290 million.


Esiason And Jets Survive Final Test
They wanted to come out of the game healthy, show some offense and look at their new middle linebacker.
The Jets did just that tonight and more -- getting continued support from their special teams, which could become their best unit this season.
In the end, they posted a 30-24 victory over the Cincinnati Bengals to wind up the preseason at 2-2.


U.S. Rowers Collect Gold
The United States won four of the 10 finals on this, the first of three days of finals at the 1995 world rowing championships.
"It was a fantastic day for the Americans," said the former Olympic coach Allen Rosenberg.
"Not since the '48 Olympics has America had such success."


Vatican Attacks U.S.-Backed Draft for Women's Conference
Saying it feared the Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing next month could result in a "step backward in the field of human rights for women," the Vatican today made a detailed attack on positions endorsed by the United States and other participants in preparatory meetings, saying that they promoted abortion and would undermine the central place of the family.
The statement by Joaquin Navarro-Valls, the spokesman for Pope John Paul II, came as the Vatican announced that its 22-member delegation will include 14 women and will be headed by Mary Ann Glendon, an American legal scholar whose appointment had been quietly urged by the Clinton Administration.


Religion Journal; Episcopal Bishop Who Became a Catholic Recants
Ten months ago, Bishop Clarence Pope, the spiritual leader of the Episcopal Church's Diocese of Fort Worth, announced that he would do something no other sitting bishop in his church had done this century: convert to Roman Catholicism.
Adding to the drama of that news, the Bishop, who is married, also said he would seek to be ordained as a Roman Catholic priest.


N.F.L. TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Suspended for One Year
The National Football League suspended Arizona wide receiver Chuck Levy for one year yesterday for violating the league's substance-abuse policy.
In a statement released before the start of last night's Cleveland Browns-Cardinals preseason game in Tempe, Ariz., the N.F.L. said the second-year player would have to apply to Commissioner Paul Tagliabue for reinstatement.
The ban will cost Levy, 23, the Cardinals' 1994 second-round draft choice from the University of Arizona, $300,000 in salary.
The two-paragraph statement did not give details of Levy's case, but the severity of the penalty indicated a Stage 3 violation, the most serious.
Stage 1 requires participation in a rehabilitation and education program.
Stage 2 involves a second violation and may involve a fine of four weeks' pay or suspension for four regular-season games without pay.


Weighing Electronic Voting, Mayor Faces the Fraud Factor
In the next two weeks, as Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani considers whether New York should go forward with its decadelong effort to computerize voting, he will have to grapple with questions about whether the proposed system is vulnerable to fraud.
Experts are divided over the security of computerized voting systems, and even the city's security consultants have hedged on the issue.


From Husker to a Giant And in a Hurry to Learn
The first time the rookie guard Rob Zatechka lined up with the first- team offense this week during pass-protection drills, he went against defensive tackle Stacey Dillard.
The chunky Dillard is an excellent player, but he isn't the swiftest.
Yet the 290-pound Dillard looked like that cartoon character the Flash when he blew by Zatechka not once but twice.
Zatechka has all the makings to be a solid player -- he is smart, big, aggressive.
Right now, though, he is extremely raw.
No matter.
Sometimes a near-catastrophe like losing three starting offensive linemen forces a rookie from the comfort of the sideline into the heat.


Taiwan Takes On Texans in Final
Few American 12-year-olds are as respectful as the youngsters from Taiwan playing in the Little League World Series.
They salute the umpires, take off their caps when their coach is speaking and bow to the crowd after victories.
Despite all the politeness, fans love to hate the Taiwanese at Williamsport, Pa., where they will play Spring, Tex., today for the championship.


Hillary Clinton's Trip Is On
With Harry Wu, the rights activist, freed, the White House said Mrs.
Clinton would attend the women's conference in China.
Page 5.


Seaman Furniture Co. reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 31


B. Dale Davis, 73, Newspaper Editor
B.
Dale Davis, a journalist who ended his 45-year newspaper career in 1989 as editor and publisher of The Santa Barbara News-Press in California, died on Thursday at his home in Cape May, N.J.
He was 73.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Looking to the Future


Legacy of Chicago's Cruel Summer


Beijing Government Never Ruled Taiwan
To the Editor:
"Bullying Taiwan" (editorial, Aug. 22) lays out the true origin of the crisis in relations between the United States and the People's Republic of China: the P.R.C.'s military posturing to block the Republic of China on Taiwan from achieving a proper place in the international community.


A School for Parker
Richie Parker, the New York City schoolboy basketball star who was recruited, then rejected by three major colleges after involvement in a sexual-abuse case while in high school, will attend Mesa Community College in Phoenix.
The 6-foot-5-inch standout from Manhattan Center for Science and Math had received scholarship offers from Seton Hall and George Washington and had been strongly recruited by Utah.
He pleaded guilty to a reduced charge of felony sexual abuse for an incident that occurred on a school stairway in 1994 and received five years' probation.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  HARRY WU TELLS OF HIS ORDEAL  Harry Wu, the human rights campaigner whose arrest became a major irritant to Chinese-American relations, said his release does not mean China has improved its human rights record. 1


August 'Classics' Kick Off College Season
Everything seems so different from last Labor Day weekend when Boston College opened the 1994 football season.
Dan Henning, the new head coach, had been away from the college game.
The Eagles, a team without an experienced quarterback, were opening on Saturday at Michigan, which considered itself a national championship contender.
A year later, Boston College will open its season on Sunday against Ohio State in the Kickoff Classic at Giants Stadium.
Michigan, its future still uncertain following the sudden off-season dismissal of Coach Gary Moeller, will be led by the new head coach, Lloyd Carr, on Saturday when the Wolverines begin the season against Virginia in the Pigskin Classic at Ann Arbor, Mich.


N.R.A. Takes Aim at Study Of Guns as Public Health Risk
Aided by a small group of conservative doctors, the National Rifle Association has embarked on a campaign to discredit and ultimately eliminate a research program at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention that studies firearms as an issue in public health.
The study program is part of a three-year-old effort by the centers, an Atlanta-based branch of the Department of Health and Human Services, to expand its mission beyond such traditional issues as preventing diseases to other causes of death, like accidents and crime.


U.N. Cites Iraq Plan For a Nuclear Device
Iraq began a crash program to make a nuclear weapon immediately after invading Kuwait in August 1990, the leader of a United Nations inspection team said yesterday.


Forest Fire Alert
With drought-parched forests at risk, the New Jersey Forest Fire Service has banned all open fires.
In addition, state forest fire workers have been called back from vacation to join the alert this weekend as conditions resemble the mid-spring height of the forest fire season rather than the usually slow pace of late August.
A 200-acre blaze in Ocean County was declared under control yesterday morning, 19 hours after it started.
More on brush fires in the state and in New York on pages 1, 24 and 25.


CHRONICLE
Some people seek immortality by donating money and having their names carved on the facades of hospitals or other institutions or on brass plaques on the backs of theater seats.
But park benches?


Grand Slam From Everett Launches Mets
Watching from his perch behind the cage while the Mets were taking batting practice yesterday at Shea Stadium, Joe McIlvaine was asked which of his young outfielders possesses the most pure talent.
Without hesitation, the Mets' general manager pointed at the lean, 24-year-old right fielder who happened to be taking some cuts.


Tower Failed to Alert Jet In Midair Near-Collision
A USAir jet flying over the Triborough Bridge and preparing to land at La Guardia Airport earlier this month came within 200 feet of a helicopter after the air traffic control tower failed to alert the jet's pilot of the other craft's location, aviation officials said yesterday.
The jet and the helicopter were flying 700 feet above ground, La Guardia air traffic controllers said.
At that altitude, they should have been separated by 500 feet, they said.


Good Vibrations? Church Is Getting Acoustical Help
WHAT architect doesn't dream of having his grand designs reverberate through the ages?
Well, Gerald Allen will settle for a four-second echo.


INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: The Gold in Latin Skies; South of the Border, U.S. Airlines Ride a Travel Boom
The last five years have been unkind to United States airlines.
But not in Latin America.
Air travel is booming south of the border, and heavy investments by American Airlines, United Airlines and Continental Airlines are paying off well.
The three carriers have grabbed $1 billion a year in annual business from weaker Latin American airlines, according to one estimate.


Cleveland Robinson, 80, Civil-Rights Advocate
Cleveland Robinson, a veteran labor official and civil-rights advocate, died on Wednesday at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine's hospital in the Bronx.
A resident of the Bronx, he was 80.
The cause was kidney failure, his family said.


Black Film Makers Seek Ways To Keep the Genre Generating
There were six panelists yesterday morning at a seminar on "Film Noir: Can the Black Film Renaissance Be Jump-Started? Does It Need to Be?," and none of the six were Keenen Ivory Wayans, who had been listed on the program.
But the audience got its slice of celebrity: John Singleton, the writer and director of "Boyz N the Hood," who had not been promised, was on the dais.
If anyone wondered why the topic of film was included in Vibe magazine's two-day music seminar, held Thursday and yesterday at the Marriott Marquis Hotel just off Times Square, Arthur Jafa's comments certainly tied the subjects together.
Mr.
Jafa, the cinematographer of Spike Lee's film "Crooklyn" and Julie Dash's "Daughters of the Dust," said that if black film makers did "to cinema what we've done to music," their work would become a dominant cultural force.


World News Briefs; No Accord in Talks On New World Court
A two-week session scheduled to clear away the remaining legal hurdles to the creation of a permanent international criminal court ended today short of agreement.
Further debate and action on the court, which would replace the ad hoc tribunals set up in recent years to deal with atrocities in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, will be put off until the fall session of the General Assembly.
The International Criminal Court would operate separately from the International Court of Justice in The Hague.


Lee Hadley, 60, Half of a Beloved Writing Team
Lee Hadley, an Iowa State English professor who helped turn a collaborative pedagogical sendup into an acclaimed literary career as half of a writing team known to young readers as Hadley Irwin, died on Tuesday at her home in Madrid, Iowa.
She was 60.
The cause was cancer, said her collaborator, Annabelle Irwin, a retired Iowa State professor.


Corrections
A sports article on Friday about Pat Riley's negotiations with the Miami Heat over a possible coaching job misstated the name of the law firm representing the former Knicks' coach in the negotiations.
The firm is Arkin, Schaffer &amp; Supino.


How Tobacco Lawsuit Stifled TV Reporting
To the Editor:
The tobacco industry's full-throttle assault against the news program "Day One" (front page, Aug. 22) has produced an unwarranted and disappointing apology from Capital Cities/ ABC.
Long before the network's humiliation, the industry's lawsuit had affected the way ABC News covered this deadly product.


'Wrist Wars' on the Waterfront
The finals of the Yukon Jack World Arm Wrestling heavyweight championship yesterday afternoon at the South Street Seaport figured to match Cleve Dean, the 6-foot-7-inch, 480-pound former hog farmer and defending world champion from Pavo, Ga., against the so-called Georgian Giant -- Georgia as in the former Soviet Union, that is -- Zaur Tskhadadze, the 1994 world champion, coming in at a more demure 6 feet 6, 303 pounds.
The stage was set, literally, at one end of the Pier 17 boardwalk at Fulton Street for the grimacing and groaning arm wrestlers.
Under a warm sun and a cloudless blue sky, flags flew, forearms rippled and fish smelled while an estimated 2,500 people came to watch -- or stumbled upon during a lunch break -- the total of 68 contestants in the four divisions of "wrist wars," as the cognoscenti call them: heavyweight, middleweight, lightweight and women.


Financier Found Guilty Of Buying Stolen Work
A New York City financier who made millions off tax shelters in the 1980's was found guilty yesterday of buying a stolen Marc Chagall painting and trying to sell it a decade later on the black market.
After deliberating just three hours, a jury in Federal District Court in Manhattan found Barry H. Trupin, the onetime head of Rothschild Reserve International, guilty on one count of possession and sale of stolen property that had crossed state lines.


Gehrig Was Durable and Then Some
To the Editor:
In "Baseball Immortality, Fair and Square" (Op-Ed, Aug. 21), Florence King belittles Lou Gehrig and his consecutive games played streak.


Governor Gets the Ocean View
Governor Whitman has traveled abroad and across the country.
But on many summer weekends, she is at the Jersey Shore -- in one of two beach houses the state keeps for top politicians at Island Beach State Park, the A.P. reported.
The state-owned buildings were built in the 1920's by Henry Phipps, a partner of Andrew Carnegie.
The Governor's Cabinet and staff members stay at one house, on the bay side.
The ocean house is exclusively maintained for the Governor, who uses the residence less often than some previous governors, her office reported.
JOE SHARKEY


Journalist Exchange Benefits Russia and U.S.
To the Editor:
Democratic development of society is unthinkable without a free press.
This thought is true for Russia now as never before.
Learning from positive experience of the world's democratic press is one of the more important prerequisites for successful development of a free press in Russia.


French Cold-Shoulder Riviera City
"Look around the harbor -- there's nobody here, even though it's the height of the vacation season," growled Andre Herrero, a burly former rugby star many people in this French Mediterranean port regard as their unelected mayor.
This summer, he said, his restaurant and the other tourist venues on the harbor promenade had the worst season he can remember, and he blames the Mayor the people of Toulon actually did elect last June.


Jet and Helicopter In Near-Collision
A USAir jet preparing to land at La Guardia Airport earlier this month came within 200 feet of a helicopter after the air traffic control tower failed to alert the jet's pilot of the other craft's location, officials said yesterday.


Oneida Indians Offer Albany an Inducement for Approval of a Casino in the Catskills
With efforts to legalize casino gambling outside Indian territory gaining momentum in New York and Connecticut, the Oneida Indians have upped the ante in their bid to open the first casino within 100 miles of New York City.
They are offering to pay the state the equivalent of the top corporate income tax in exchange for Gov.
George E. Pataki's approval.
But should the Governor balk, the tribe, which already runs a casino on its reservation near Syracuse, said it would take the matter to court.


U.S. Faces Resistance to Bosnian Peace Plan
As the Clinton Administration tried to restart its new Bosnian peace initiative, its top negotiator sought today to play down expectations of quick success and to put the burden for difficulties squarely on the Bosnian Serbs.
Other Western diplomats said the American initiative had also met some resistance from Croatia, Serbia and the Bosnian Government before talks were cut short by a road accident that killed three American envoys last Saturday outside Sarajevo.
But Assistant Secretary of State Richard Holbrooke, the Administration's lead negotiator on the Balkans, sought specifically to step up pressure on the Bosnian Serbs by threatening them with serious consequences if they continued to refuse to negotiate.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Boatmen's to Buy Fourth In a $1 Billion Bank Merger  Boatmen's Bancshares agreed to acquire the Fourth Financial Corporation for $1.2 billion in stock, creating a new banking giant in the Midwest.
Boatmen's, the largest banking company in Missouri and 30th in the nation, has about 500 offices in 9 states in the Midwest and Southwest.
Fourth Financial is the largest banking company in Kansas and one of the largest in Oklahoma.  [ Page 36. ] A Start-Up Hopes to Develop Breakthrough in Heart Surgery  A Silicon Valley start-up named Heartport said it had developed a technology to allow coronary bypass surgery to be performed through a tiny incision between the ribs, promising far less pain and trauma than current methods that split open the breastbone.
But the advance could be two years away from being generally available.
Analysts say Heartport's technology could cut the cost of a coronary bypass -- which can be as high as $50,000 -- by $10,000 or more.
The development needs F.D.A. approval, but investment bankers are already scrambling to underwrite an initial public offering.  [ 34. ] Bond Yield Falls to 6.70%  Treasury securities surged in price, cutting the yield on the 30-year bond to its lowest level in six weeks.
Traders said the gains were driven by follow-through buying from Thursday and were bolstered as short sellers scrambled to cover their positions.  [ 36. ] Fed May Lower Rates Soon  Federal Reserve policy makers gave Alan Greenspan the power to cut short-term interest rates this summer.
He didn't take up the offer, but the discretion given him strongly suggests that the Fed may lower interest rates in the coming months.  [ 35. ] Home Sales Sprinted in July  Home resales surged 5 percent in July to an annual rate of 3.99 million units, their highest annual rate in more than a year, as mortgage rates fell, an industry group said.
But the market may have peaked.  [ 35. ] Harsh Words for Honda  A Federal judge criticized Honda's role in a scandal in which company executives solicited bribes from dealers.
The judge, who sentenced former executives, said the company "could well be accused of being negligent," but not criminally culpable, for ignoring the scandal's warning signs.
The comments seemed likely to bolster the more than two dozen lawsuits brought by dealers against Honda.  [ 35. ] Dollar Skids in Turbulent Day  The dollar fell against the German mark after Finance Minister Alain Madelin of France resigned, suggesting that there was dissension in the conservative Chirac Government.
The political uncertainty caused dealers to unload dollars as well as French francs, as they rushed to buy marks.  [ 32. ] In futures trading, prices of coffee, gasoline and corn all rose.  [ 32. ] Geico Takeover Lifts Stocks  Stocks rose, led by banking and insurance companies, but technology shares fell.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 20.78 points, to 4,601.4, its biggest gain in almost two weeks.
For the week, the average slipped 16.2 points.
Stocks took strength from the plans for Warren Buffett's investment company to buy the rest of the insurer Geico for $2.3 billion.
Microsoft slipped for a third consecutive day, losing 1 3/4 to 94 3/8 , and I.B.M. fell 1 to 103 7/8. [ 37. ] Crisis Claims 9 Russian Banks  Russian banks have begun to default on credit obligations, but the crisis may ultimately prove to be healthy if it weeds out weak institutions.
Overnight lending rates have soared.
The crisis began unfolding in July, when the Government limited ruble speculation by banks, cutting off a lucrative source of profits.
And in the last week or so, nine banks failed to meet some of their credit obligations.  [ 34. ] F.A.A.
Orders Blades Grounded  The F.A.A. ordered airlines to take out of service any propeller blades for Embraer 120 Brasilia aircraft that had undergone significant repairs.
The action follows the crash of one of the twin-engine turboprop planes in Georgia on Monday.
The agency estimated 20 blades would be affected.  [ 6. ]


Jet-Giant Brawl Brings 3 Fines
The National Football League has fined two Giants and one Jet for their actions in last Saturday's fight-filled game at Giants Stadium.
Linebacker Mike Croel and defensive end Chris Maumalanga of the Giants were fined $4,000 each for their involvement and subsequent ejections, and offensive lineman James Brown of the Jets was fined $4,000 for entering a fight area.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday of Dr.
Leslie Berger, an educator and clinical psychologist, misstated the cause of his death.
He died of complications from a heart attack, not cancer.


Long Island Fire Rages a 2d Day, but Threat Eases
The state's worst ground fire in decades -- a vast arc of windblown flames that boiled in 40-foot walls, scorched miles of pine woods and burned a dozen homes and other property -- raged for a second day in Suffolk County yesterday.
But last night its threat to a South Shore resort community appeared to ease, and officials said it might be brought under control today.
The fire, which posed Herculean hardships for weary firefighters, also raised a testy political issue between state authorities who anticipated airborne tankers to fight the flames and Federal officials who failed to fulfill a promise to deliver them yesterday.
And police investigators raised another specter, saying that an arsonist may have been behind the blaze.


The Importance of Being Anyone at All
The next time you write a check for state or local taxes, you might ponder how much of your money will be spent to support the gambling and drinking activities of the people you elect to serve you.
At a time of tightening state and local budgets across the country, the taxpayer-financed junket remains one of the few expenses no one touches.
My experience as a neophyte elected official illustrates the phenomenon.
As a new town committeeman, I was informed that my first official appearance would be at the annual New Jersey State League of Municipalities convention for elected officials in Atlantic City.
Convening in Atlantic City to study municipal governance is like assembling a religious retreat in Times Square on the problem of virtue.
So what if four out of the last seven mayors of Atlantic City were convicted of crimes?
The crucial point is that there are scads of casinos, and virtually every local elected official in New Jersey can be entertained in chandeliered ballrooms by corporate representatives.
The townships pick up the tab for the hotel rooms and most of the meals (I reimbursed the citizens of Princeton, the township that elected me).
The Princeton delegation was booked at the Trump Plaza.
With no clocks, few phones and no place to sit, a casino is not exactly a conducive setting for sober discussion of public policy issues.
The atmosphere was favorable, however, for one of the convention's main purposes: enabling corporations to pitch products and services to local officials who need to purchase, with tax dollars, everything from software to insurance to pavement markings.
The assembled delegates, overwhelmingly male, were plied with liquor, food and gifts by -- in what must have been a coincidence -- attractive women representing hundreds of companies, including Fortune 500 enterprises like Bell Atlantic, General Motors and Chemical Bank.
My complimentary Midlantic Bank Post-It notes and Charmin samples deepened my understanding of the political process.
Lobbyists competed ferociously to stage the most sumptuous reception for junketeers.
The clear winner was K. Hovnanian Enterprises, one of the largest real-estate developers in New Jersey.
Hundreds of politicos thronged around their regal display of oysters, shrimp, prime rib and ice sculptures. (Hovnanian is scheduled to build a housing development in Princeton, joining recently opened Wal-Mart and Home Depot outlets. Thus our downtown shopping district can take its place on the endangered species list along with so many others.)
Corporate leaders understand that cultivating local politicians can boost the bottom line, and that the laws controlling contracts are often looser at the local and state level -- even though hundreds of millions of taxpayer dollars are at stake.
A casino is an apt metaphor for the spending of municipal money: decisions about local purchasing can be influenced at gaudy promotional booths rather than through a sober competitive bidding process.
The largess doesn't end at the state line, either.
And sometimes the junkets are corporate-sponsored.
The New Jersey Chamber of Commerce has for years chartered an Amtrak train to transport more than 1,000 politicians, businesspeople and lobbyists from New Jersey to Washington for its annual Congressional reception, a junket known in the local press as the "pub crawl on wheels" and the "pork-barrel express." The ride, whose expense is partly reimbursed by the lobbyists, gives the select crowd a few hours of extra special access.
This event became so popular that three years ago the Chamber of Commerce inaugurated a second train to transport state legislative leaders to, of course, Atlantic City.
No thought is ever given to bringing convention dollars to impoverished New Jersey cities like Trenton, Newark or Camden.
The amount spent on local and state junkets nationwide is impossible to estimate, because reporting requirements are much less stringent than at the Federal level.
Some states are more vigilant than others.
Wisconsin has a law dating back to 1957 banning any gifts -- even a cup of coffee -- to state legislators.
Iowa, Minnesota, South Carolina and Kentucky also have tough laws.
Even Wisconsin, though, allows taxpayers to pick up the tab for lawmakers who attend events partially sponsored by corporations.
And most states, including New Jersey, lack all but the most minimal restrictions on corporate-sponsored and taxpayer-financed junkets.
As the momentum grows for "real reform" in government, banning this kind of influence-peddling at the local and state level would be a good start.
By the way, I just received my invitation for this year's Atlantic City convention in November.


Clan of Many Knees (and Some Bad Actors)
WHEN learning new things about plants, "many knees" is easier to remember than polygonum.
But for those who know their Greek, the name is easy.
Polygonum is the generic name for a large clan or genus of plants.
The name comes from the Greek: "poly," meaning many; "gony," meaning knee.
All polygonums have many knees, the swollen stem joints that are important clues for the genus identity.


When the Artist's Canvas Is the Body
THROUGHOUT HISTORY, Tattooing has been taboo in most parts of the world, but it has never gone away; it retreats for a while but always comes back.
In 1981, the Rolling Stones album "Tattoo You" helped propel tattooing into the mainstream, and in the 90's it has become a fashion and a folk art.
Now, to celebrate the craft, comes the first comprehensive exhibition devoted to it, "Pierced Hearts and True Love: A Century of Drawings for Tattoos," which will open at the Drawing Center in SoHo in Manhattan on Sept. 16 and remain through Nov. 11.
The show surveys the work of 60 American and European artists as well as Japanese influences on the craft.


DISASTERS: Nature's Logrolling
It is called a derecho by the weather connoisseurs and its fury is unrelenting.
In the early-morning hours of Saturday, July 15, one of these fierce windstorms blew through Adirondack Park in upstate New York, where 5,000 people were camping.
By dawn, four campers and a motorist were dead and more than 50 million trees were down. (Nary a metallic white pine among them.) A derecho (de-ray-cho) is a straight-line storm (unlike its similarly Spanish-named cousin, the tornado, which swirls), accompanied by rain, thunder and virtually nonstop lightning.
Not since Hurricane Hazel of 1954 has the state park endured such devastation: nearly two million acres of damaged wilderness, some of it now extremely combustible.
"Imagine a group of thunderstorms going out for a family picnic," says Dick Westergard of the National Weather Service.
With winds as high as 100 miles an hour and lightning flashing up to 50 times a minute, the park's Five Ponds Wilderness Area was the hardest hit.
Ninety-two campers and canoeists had to be evacuated by helicopter or assisted out on foot.
But no one was hurt there.
"It's a miracle," says Bernard Siskavich, a forest ranger.
"I guess it was just the way the trees fell." Amen.


Tea and Scones And What Went With the Lace
Outside the headquarters of the Queens Historical Society last weekend, Flushing was in full cacophonous effect.
Sidewalks teemed with shoppers, ambulances wailed, and children shrieked in delight at a nearby playground.
But in the society's backyard, the scene harked back to the gentility and manners of English manors.
For two hours on the afternoon of Aug. 19, the society's headquarters were transformed for the group's first annual Victorian Tea Party.
Adorned with cameos and bonnets and dressed in lace and pressed suits, 50 people gathered beneath an ancient weeping beech tree at the Kingsland Homestead, which houses the historical society, to munch on scones with marmalade and clotted cream, cucumber sandwiches, seed cakes and lemon tarts the size of quarters.
Cutwork lace tablecloths and napkins and gilt-edged tea sets graced the tables.


With All Its Spikes, of Course It's Aggressive
WHEN you are learning new things about plants, "many knees" is easier to remember than polygonum.
But for those who know their Greek, the name is easy.
Polygonum (pronounced po-LIG-uh-num) is the generic name for a large clan or genus of plants.
The name comes from the Greek: "poly," meaning many; "gony," meaning knee.
All polygonums have many knees, the swollen stem joints that are important clues for the genus identity.


MANHATTAN MINUTE
EAST MEETS WEST: A four-block section of walkway -- the final link in a promenade that joins the South Street Seaport to Battery Park City -- has been completed, allowing pedestrians an unimpeded walk from the East to the Hudson Rivers.
And it only cost $45,000.
Paid for by the Alliance for Downtown New York, a business improvement district. . . .
NO RELIEF IN SIGHT: Upper West Side residents who followed last year's painstaking negotiations over the siting of a public pay toilet shouldn't look to see one anytime soon.
The company picked to supply the toilets for the Parks Department, Wall City Design, backed out for financial reasons, a parks spokesman says . . .
THE NEW NEIGHBORS: More than 80 new tenants have moved into Euclid Hall, the residence on 86th Street and Broadway for homeless people over 50.
While opponents of the program are still at work on a legal challenge, Euclid Hall's director, Laura Jervis, says that building's construction should be complete by the end of September and that 70 more residents will move in by the end of the year, for a total population of 292 . . .
SHELTER OR NO: Foes of the New Providence, a planned 130-bed city shelter for women at 215-225 East 45th Street, have suffered a reversal.
They won an initial State Supreme Court ruling against the city for failing to consult with the community over changes in the project.
But now the Appellate Division has overturned the lower court.
Jack Lester, a lawyer for the 45th Street Association and others, says he will seek permission to appeal to the state's highest court . . .
SIC TRANSIT GLORIA MUNDI: Richard Morris Hunt was one of the city's most prodigious architects of the 19th century, responsible for many a grand mansion along Fifth Avenue, most now demolished.
And even the statue of the former darling of the Astors and the Vanderbilts, at 70th Street and Fifth Avenue, is rotting.
"And now one of the allegorical figures on the monument representing architecture is in disrepair," complains Michael Tramis, who, along with the Central Parks Conservancy, the Municipal Art Commission, and private citizens, is launching a restoration  campaign . . .


Old 125th St. Warriors Find Peace at 116th St. Market
Ten months ago, street vendors in Harlem picketed, shouted at the police and tried to organize store boycotts to fight Mayor Giuliani's order sweeping them from 125th Street.
Today, they accept credit cards.
And the scorn they once expressed for the market the city set up for them a few blocks away on Lenox Avenue at 116th Street has turned to praise.
"We have a certain air of respectability here," said Carlos Pesante, who sells clothes and toys from a corner booth.
"It's like a store."


Clinic Offers Refuge for the Working Poor
Almost everybody who comes to the nearly free Shepherd's Clinic here has a job.
None of them has health insurance, either because the employer does not offer it, or because the premiums are unaffordable.
Pamela McDowell, a 39-year-old secretary at a local college, sat near the base of the stairs leading into the row-house basement clinic and wept softly as she described her experiences with doctors elsewhere.
"I work every day, and I feel like I'm begging," she said, dabbing at her eyes with a white tissue, her throat swollen with an infection.
"I'm willing to pay something for it, but I can't afford what they're asking, so I keep working until I get so sick that I miss time."


Secret's Out for 2 Million Fans
The West Indian-American Day Carnival has grown from meager beginnings in Harlem social halls in the 1940's to become one of the city's largest parades: This year city officials expect more than two million revelers to throng Eastern Parkway on Labor Day.
And, for the first time, the carnival will be broadcast live.
It is a watershed for the Caribbean community, giving the carnival the visibility of ethnic gatherings like the St.
Patrick's Day Parade.
Although the carnival has long drawn West Indians from around the city and as far away as Toronto and Trinidad as well as vote-seeking politicians, organizers hope that television will attract more New Yorkers from other ethnic backgrounds.


Secret's Out for 2 Million Fans and TV Network
The West Indian-American Day Carnival has grown from meager beginnings in Harlem social halls in the 1940's to become one of the city's largest parades: This year city officials expect more than two million revelers to throng Eastern Parkway on Labor Day.
And, for the first time, the carnival will be broadcast live.
It is a watershed for the Caribbean community, giving the carnival the visibility of ethnic gatherings like the St.
Patrick's Day Parade.
Although the carnival has long drawn West Indians from around the city and as far away as Toronto and Trinidad as well as vote-seeking politicians, organizers hope that television will attract more New Yorkers from other ethnic backgrounds.


Woodhull Plumped For Negro Rights
I was delighted to read of renewed interest in Victoria Clafin Woodhull, a woman who has always fascinated me  [ July 30 ] .
However, I feel that some important facts were omitted in the article.
First, the reporter failed to mention Mrs.
Woodhull's strong advocacy of Negro sufferage and rights, including the fact that Frederick Douglass was the vice presidential candidate on her ticket during her campaign for President in 1872.
She also neglected to mention her sister, Tennessee Celeste (also known as Tennie C.) Clafin, who played an almost inseparable part in every aspect of Mrs.
Woodhull's life and career.


Tiny Clue Leads to Murder Charge in Woman's Fatal Plunge
It was a gruesome discovery on a February morning: a nightgown-clad woman, 38 years old, impaled on three spikes of a metal fence five floors below her Washington Heights apartment.
For four months the only things that kept detectives from calling the death of Ramona Enrique Hernandez a suicide were a half-inch screw found on her bedsheet and the fact that her body landed in a manner different from other such deaths, said Lieut.
Eugene Shields, head of the 33d Precinct detectives.


BEACH DREAMS
The paraphernalia of summer is different from the trappings of fall.
In summer the dowry of the world turns Day-Glo; what in autumn will be somber, hemstitched, restrained, in summer is silly, outre, a mess.
The shy student who in October will wear a black beret enlivened by one small diamante pin in summer slouches slack-jawed by the water, wearing a hat the color of a tiger lily.
To Henry Adams, writing about his boyhood in New England a century and a half ago, summer was drunken and winter was school.
When I was a child my parents owned a bungalow in the woods with a view of a cove; when we arrived I would go around the back of the house and look for my reflection, 11 months older, in the kitchen window.
The bayberry and scrub pine shone greenly through me so that I became, in the wavy kitchen glass, not a product of the heavy, ponderous year but a mirage, a figment of summer.
For the last 15 or 20 years, through the Indian summer of adolescence, through marriage and motherhood, I have worn exactly the same clothes in August; paradoxically, it is the month in which I have thought most elaborately about clothes.
In other months I have dressed like a mountaineer, like Hippolyta, like a French chambermaid, like a schoolboy, like Janis Joplin.
Some years it is a wearing business, and sometimes it is less so.
Through it I observe with passion and awe my friends whose dress stays constant: for a time I worked alongside a woman who had made whatever economies were necessary to wear only clothes by Sonia Rykiel.
One morning she appeared in a Missoni jacket; it was as if she had joined a vaudeville troupe and changed her name.
I am deeply envious of what others might see as obsession but I see as organization of a high order; this envy accompanies my desire for the contemplative life, for convents and the hush of long corridors, for vespers and ecclesiastical dress.
In this guise I imagine myself aging in a small but not provincial town -- Vezelay or Bevagna -- wearing a wool skirt by Valentino, a blouse and very good shoes, worn but cared for.
But in August the costume designer in me is visiting her aged mother in Cap d'Antibes.
There is also a cotton jacket in an unpleasant shade of blue.
None of these garments is remotely becoming.
They smell of salt, and I cling to them because they are my summer skin.
Years ago my mother had a pink hooded sweatshirt that she wore at the beach.
During the winter months of exile from the ocean I would go to the cupboard and bury my face in it.
If we are lucky, as children in summer we are covered in salt and sand and scratched by brambles; we don't think for a minute about what we wear because we live in our skins.
Ten years later on the same spit of sand we think without ceasing about what we wear because we have become naked in the garden; we fear not the sun but the harsh, curious gazes of our friends.
When we grow up, we live again in our skins; we care, but not as desperately, about our bodies, which have after all been put to use and which in any case are buried in the sand every day by our children.
Like workers on a vast plain we wear large hats to shield our faces from the sun; our bathing suits are like armor for beetles.
A moment later it is September.
Like children we pull up our socks, buckle our shoes, button our overcoats, but the questions for those of us still deep in the dress-up box are: What socks?
Which shoes?
Whose overcoat?
I cling to my summer clothes as a charm both for and against change.
To wear them is to become again the mirage in the window who, for that moment, could be anyone, but who still needs, come the fall, to get dressed; to wear them is evidence that, indeed, as anyone can see, I have nothing to wear.
"Beware of all enterprises that require new clothes," wrote Thoreau.
Beware, comes a voice, of those that don't.
"Three prs. black tights," "School shoes (green suede??)," "Brown velvet dress p. 83," read the lists that surface now and then, written decades ago, as I sat with my mother on the beach studying the premature fall fashion magazines, from which sheathed, impossibly elegant versions of ourselves beckoned like silent screen stars.
"WHITE dress. Buckles?" reads a later, cryptic list.
It is an easy thing to do at the edge of the water: to rummage among the bright pages for a scarf, a hat, an evening gown, here at the tail end of summer, where the earliest creatures first crawled out on land and tried on their new shadows.


Jennifer Werby And Arnon Levy
Jennifer Werby and Dr.
Arnon Levy are to be married today in Jerusalem.
Rabbi Joseph Green is to perform the ceremony at Beit Shmuel, a community center.
The bride, 27, was the cantor at Congregation Beit Yisrael in Armonk, N.Y., until recently.
She graduated from Indiana University and received a master's degree in sacred music from Hebrew Union College, from which she also received her cantorial investment.
She is the daughter of Marcia and Stephen Werby of Spring Valley, N.Y.
Her father is a marketing consultant there.
Her mother is an administrator at the Rockland Children's Psychiatric Center in Orangeburg, N.Y.


SHH!
Thanks to the healthy alternatives in John Tierney's "Shh!" (The Big City, July 30), I won't be tempted to act on my rage fantasies brought about by car alarms.
From now on, I'll keep eggs and Vaseline in the house.
NORA O'CONNOR New York


Government To Take Over Hotel Union
The Justice Department will ask the Federal courts to supervise the international union representing hotel and restaurant workers because of its alleged longtime connections with organized crime, a department official said today.
The union has agreed to accept the arrangement, its lawyer said.
In an action expected to be filed the week after Labor Day in Federal District Court in Newark, Justice Department lawyers will seek to place the 300,000-member Hotel Employees and Restaurant Employees International Union under a court-appointed monitor, said a department official who spoke on condition of anonymity.


Tiny Retail Arcade, Hidden Off 34th, Sees Dim Future
Gallery 34 is a narrow, curved pedestrian arcade lined with little shops that resembles the old-quarter bazaar of an ancient Middle Eastern city.
But it lingers as an obscure oddity amid the modern squared-off blocks of midtown Manhattan, running between 33d and 34th Streets east of Seventh Avenue.
The alley was built in 1919 as the Pennsylvania Arcade.
But now, its survival is in doubt, with the property's ownership fragmented, most of the operation in bankruptcy and many of its merchants facing eviction.


RESULTS PLUS
BASEBALL  Taiwan Routs Texas in Little League Series
Taiwan won its first Little League World Series title since 1991 yesterday, beating Spring, Tex., by 17-3 in Williamsport, Pa.
Taiwan might have even gone on to break the record of 21 runs scored by another team from Taiwan in 1987, but the game was called after four innings because the Little League introduced a 10-run mercy rule this season.
Chih Hsiang Lin threw a four-hitter and had two homers, including his sixth of the series to break the career record.
Spring had just one hit until the fourth and final inning, when Christopher Conway and Michael Cepeda singled.
Conway stole home and Wardell Starling, the losing pitcher, then hit a home run to center to make it 17-3.


Land of Thrills and Bounces for Helen Keller Campers
AN amusement park is a land of sights and heights.
When there is no sight, there is little perception of height.
So the park becomes a land of vibrations.
"I want to go on rides," Sarah Badillo, 9, said, before entering the Adventureland amusement park in Farmingdale for the first time earlier this month.
"But I don't like bumpy things."


Oh, Yes . . . The Drawings Are Nice, Too
THE facts of the case are these: before the famous black bag with its syringe, needles and insulin, before the endless headlines and the two trials and the Jeremy Irons-Glenn Close film about it all, there was the Sunny Crawford von Bulow Fund at the Pierpont Morgan Library.
Mrs. von Bulow has been in a coma since 1980, but the library -- in consultation with her husband, Claus von Bulow -- has continued to use money from the fund to buy drawings.
Next month, 46 will go on display in an exhibition titled, without a trace of irony, "Fantasy and Reality: Drawings From the Sunny Crawford von Bulow Collection."
Mrs. von Bulow saw 6 of the 46; the library said they were purchased before she went into the coma.
One of the six is Watteau's "The Temple of Diana," a phantasmagoria with a leafy arch topped by a stag's head.
Two bought later are Fragonard's "Seated Young Woman," a red-chalk rendering of his daughter, Rosalie, and Nicolas Huet's "Study of the Giraffe Given to Charles X by the Viceroy of Egypt." Never mind who the Viceroy was; this portrait of a long-necked creature from Africa appeared in 1827, just when the craze sweeping Paris was for exotic imports -- like long-necked creatures from Africa.


Woods, 19, to Meet Car Dealer, 43, in Final
George (Buddy) Marucci, a 43-year-old Mercedes-Benz dealer from Berwyn, Pa., knows how daunting his task is in Sunday's final of the centennial United States Amateur championships at Newport Country Club.
His best chance, he figured, was to focus on a different opponent.
"Tiger Woods is definitely the best amateur golfer in the country," said Marucci, "so I'm just going to try and play the golf course."


Hampton Classic Leaps Into Prime Time
THE 1993 Hampton Classic horse show had ended and Bryant Carpenter, who had just wound up his third year of covering the show for the Southampton Press, was relaxing out on his porch in Hampton Bays with a friend in the publishing business.
Mr.
Carpenter remembers clearly how the friend, Carl Miller, turned to him on that late summer day and casually suggested that they collaborate on an illustrated narrative, a book that would combine text and photographs to capture the romance and excitement of the Bridgehampton show that has become the largest outdoor event of its kind in the country.


BARN RAISING
PERHAPS ONLY A PARENT CAN BE A TRUE PATRON OF ARCHITECTURE.
WHO ELSE would give an architect (see Robert Venturi, Charles Gwathmey) carte blanche to transform the family homestead into a showcase?
In this tradition, Robert Luchetti, a Cambridge architect, set out to build a weekend place for his parents in Northern California.
Along the way, he managed to reconcile the unlikely image of a 19th-century barn with high-tech structuralism.
Luchetti began with the simplest of architectural notions -- a long, tall shed, more like a chicken coop than a barn.
The interior is a web of wooden beams -- balloon-framed, in the design parlance of the Old West -- that buttress not only the walls and roof but a series of platforms used for sleeping, lounging and, at the highest level, office work.
So industriously layered is Luchetti's truss work that it begins to look more like steel than wood -- a kind of down-home Pompidou Center.


The Companies He Keeps
BUFFETT  The Making of an American Capitalist.
By Roger Lowenstein.
Illustrated. 473 pp.
New York: Random House.


THE WILD BUNCH
I was appalled and saddened by the photograph "Play Per View" in your children's fashion feature "The Wild Bunch" (Aug. 6).
There is nothing cute or hip about the violent, racist and ghoulish overtones in this image.
Fashion photography has truly got out of hand when it is acceptable to provoke a child to tears for art's sake.
HEATHER LEMONEDES Brooklyn


Club in Morris May Restore Turn-of-the-Century Theater
The Baker Theater in Dover, Morris County, where George Burns, W. C. Fields and Will Rogers once drew laughs from more than 1,500 people in plush orchestra and balcony seats, has been silent and crumbling for 13 years.
But the Lions Club of nearby Chester is thinking of buying and restoring it, and recently invested $10,000 to appraise its structure and value.
The theater was built about 1906 for vaudeville and was later turned into a movie house.
Before it closed in 1982, it was used for rock concerts.
Its high arched ceilings, marble staircases and ornate design attracted Woody Allen, who filmed scenes for his 1985 movie "The Purple Rose of Cairo" there.


Real Men Don't Melt
The tourists come and go, posing for pictures with Arnold Schwarzenegger.
Not the real Arnold, of course: he can hardly be expected to stand around indefinitely while small children stick their fingers up his nose and pretend they are extras in "Kindergarten Cop." But in wax, Mr.
Schwarzenegger currently reigns as one of the most popular figures in Madame Tussaud's museum, where he has all the time in the world (until they take him down).
What's so great about Arnold, in his khaki pants and red Madame Tussaud's T-shirt?
"Well, people from all cultures recognize him," said a harried guard who was beating back the throng on a late-summer afternoon and who would not give her name.
"He's not the one they necessarily like the best, but they all know him."


Spine Tinglers
THE MEMBERS OF the Cactus and Succulent Society of America are an easygoing bunch.
They clasp to their bosoms (figuratively, of course) strange botanical specimens that only a mother could love.
It takes a lot to get them upset -- say, someone overwatering a Pachypodium brevicaule. (A pachypodium, from the Greek for "thick foot," resembles an elephant's foot, though the elephant's foot is daintier.)
But these amiable folk have been bristling lately.
An eminent German botanist at the University of Heidelberg, Werner Rauh, had set out to demonstrate in an American lecture that cactuses (the preferred plural in Webster's New World) have thorns, not spines.
Cactophiles here were aghast.
Thorns?
But cactuses have spines, not thorns!


A Young City Troupe Commands The Stage
A FRONT PORCH and a garden can be as much a stage as the fanciest platform and curtain.
This summer, members of the 52d Street Project, a theater program for city children from the Clinton area of Manhattan, spent a week in the country creating and rehearsing 10 new plays before taking them to New York.
The project brings the children, ages 6 through 17, together with actors, writers, directors, designers and stage crew.
At an 18th-century farmhouse in Tyler Hill, in northeastern Pennsylvania, donated for the week, the young actors perform in plays that have been written for them as part of a one-on-one program of actor/playwright and child.
In another part of the project, begun in 1981 by Willie Reale, an actor and writer who won a Macarthur fellowship last year, the young players create their own scripts.


Glory of Elkdom Fading for Lodge 878
IN its heyday, the neoclassical palazzo of Elks Lodge No. 878 on Queens Boulevard in Elmhurst was a kind of social nexus, a place so vibrant that if you didn't get tickets two months in advance, you were locked out of the annual six-day Elks bazaar, the borough's premier social extravaganza.
Three decades ago, the lodge's 6,600 members included some of the borough's most prominent residents.
The Elks raised funds for charity, held grand balls and otherwise reveled in their own brotherhood.
"This was the place to be," recalled Paul Reilly, 61, a retired police detective.
"You'd have to fight to get near the bar."


A Gardener Who Plays Favorites. Lots of Them.
"This is absolutely my favorite plant," said Joy Martin, the matriarch of Logee's Greenhouses, a family operation in Danielson, Conn., which started in 1892.
She held out the white flowers of a Murraya exotica, otherwise called mock orange.
It smelled like the old-time flowers that bloom outside my mother's kitchen window.


Grim Reality for Some Is a Snapshot for Others
The vacationers pulled up in their BMW convertible just as 65-year-old Sarah Valenti was having a reunion with her cat, next to what was left of her house.
Two-thirds of the modest cottage by the railroad tracks was a shapeless black mass.
The cat had crept up silently through the charred wreckage, back after two days' absence.
He was just about all the elderly housekeeper had left, and she hugged him hard.


Day at an Oahu Beach Now Costs Visitors $5
Visitors can still swim with the fishes in Honolulu's Hanauma Bay, a circular cove formed when a volcanic cone collapsed long ago at the edge of the Pacific.
But now that day at the beach -- once free -- will cost $5.
The first-ever entrance fee went into effect last month, and is charged to nonresidents age 13 and older.


Vintage Communications
To the Editor:
We agree that the grapevine has become an increasingly important employee communications vehicle in these uncertain times


Calm and Collected While the A.C. Screams
ONE more week before the movers and shakers chopper back to town, but fall is already beginning to take shape.
The bagel man's attitude is driving people back to Westchester, and I'm hoping the National Association for Female Executives does the right thing.
You may call these quality-of-life issues, but I say if it can make you crazy, it is a quality-of-health issue.
Near my bedroom window, the giant twin air-conditioning units at the rear of the Comstock Building seem to have found a new voice.
Usually, they sound like nuts and bolts rattling over a waterfall, but now they sound like a lonesome freight train on rickety tracks.
At night, there is also an intermittent ringing noise; I hope something is breaking.


In Japan, Still Getting Tea and No Sympathy
WHEN Kazuko Yanagihara was pregnant with her first child a decade ago, her bosses asked her to quit her office job.
She refused, so they transferred her to a branch office that opened early, making it difficult for her to put her child in day care.
She persisted and even had a second child, so they banished her to a factory site two hours away and told her that if it was too far, she could move -- or commute by helicopter.
She refused; they fired her.


Life After The Westchester: All Business
HITE PLAINS
FIVE months after an upscale regional shopping center opened for business here, other retail activity in the city appears to be thriving -- deflecting for now predictions from some quarters that an older shopping area, a discount center and other smaller stores would languish in the shadows of The Westchester's 2.5 million square feet.
Retail business is up citywide, which in the last two years has become the major shopping destination between New York City and Stamford.
And each shopping area seems to have targeted a different type of customer -- what analysts refer to as niche marketing.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
A STRANGER IN THIS WORLD
By Kevin Canty.
Vintage Contemporaries, $10.
Many of the characters in these 10 stories act impulsively, letting their futures melt away in the heat of a moment.
In 1994 our reviewer, Catherine Bush, called this collection a "superb debut," offering "sharp, distilled intelligence, mingling recognition with surprise."


Corrections
A chart in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday listing votes by City Council members on a zoning change that would allow a Pathmark store to be built in Springfield Gardens, Queens, included two incorrect votes supplied by the Council press office.
Councilwoman Ronnie M. Eldridge of Manhattan voted in favor of the change; she did not abstain.
Councilman Sal F. Albanese of Brooklyn abstained; he did not vote in favor of the change.


Flying Through Windows
Airlines keep telling passengers not to play with their personal computers, at least during takeoff and landing, but that hasn't stopped American Airlines from offering coupons worth from $45 to $95 off a round-trip flight to anyone who buys the Windows 95 software at a CompUSA store.
It must be purchased by Sept. 30, and other restrictions apply.
Information: (800) 266-7872.


The Shifting Sands of New York Restaurants
NO "Do Not Resuscitate" sign was posted on the bronze-trimmed doors at 5 East 55th Street when Jean-Jacques Rachou, the owner of La Cote Basque, had to close the restaurant last spring after losing his lease to make way for a Walt Disney store.
Mr.
Rachou found another space, about a block west, at 60 West 55th Street.
"I can't fight Disney," Mr.
Rachou, 59, said last week, "but there is too much history here and I'm not ready to retire."


Wine and Women in Tuscany: Bertolucci Lightens Up
AFTER A SUDDEN SUMMER rainstorm, the garden at the Villa di Geggiano takes on a soft, damp glow, just right for the outdoor party scene in Bernardo Bertolucci's new movie, "Stealing Beauty." Wasps buzz around soggy slices of watermelon, elegant extras drift about with wine glasses and Liv Tyler, the film's 18-year-old star, resumes her search for love and identity, against the bewitching backdrop of a Tuscan landscape.
After an absence of more than a decade during which he traveled through China, North Africa and India to film "The Last Emperor," "Sheltering Sky" and "Little Buddha," which was a spectacular flop, Mr.
Bertolucci, at 55, has come home to Italy to make what he himself calls a "light" movie.


August 20-26: Neuromancing; Could This Be The First Step To A Plug-In Brain?
The central premise of William Gibson's seminal science fiction trilogy "Neuromancer" is the existence of a mind-computer interface that permits 21st-century data-cowboys to plug their brains into a global computer network, or, as Mr.
Gibson put its, to "jack into the Net." Last week a research team at the Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry at Martinsried, near Munich, Germany, took a tiny step in that direction.
The scientists announced they had developed technology that permits leech neurons to exchange information with silicon chips.
They created a signaling channel between the nerve cell, which has a diameter half the width of a human hair, and a single device on the silicon chip, which is about six times narrower.


New Crew
To the Editor:
I was disheartened to read in Jennifer Dunning's article that I am disbanding my dance company.
Actually, I have made a strong commitment to maintaining a company.


Sports Heroes Even A Wart Can Savor
This sports hero biz is out of whack.
My letter box is jammed, my voice mail overloaded.
You would think these ath-a-letes were running for President, or at least Surgeon General.
I've got Rush Limbaugh on my case and most every sports talk show on hold.
Who am I?
As one first-time caller, an admitted Mickey Mantle religionist, said, "Face it, Bobby, you are a wart."
But I have my heroes, too, people with whom even a wart can relate.
There's Vinny Vecchione, who took care of his boy.
Phil Rizzuto faced conflict in the modern manner, with graceful indecision.
And Deloris Jordan obviously taught her son the key lesson: Michael, you are as good as anyone else.


Now Is the Time to Think Geraniums
Make cuttings of your favorite fragrant geraniums.
If you don't have any, get some.
When you bring your geraniums inside for the winter, remember that they need plenty of sun and then cool temperatures at night (60 degrees is ideal), and they should dry out between waterings.
If you're having a drought and you're still allowed to water, do so deeply, about an inch a week, and use plenty of mulch to cut down on water loss.
Improve the soil with compost, manure and other organic material, which will also help retain moisture and promote sturdy plants.


A WAR IN THE FAMILY
I am reading the news of Bosnia with a fresh sense of personal urgency, as if I had relatives there.
The reason: Roger Cohen's article "A War in the Family" (Aug. 6).
Journalism at its best, opening the heart.
ANNE HERMAN New York


Maria E. Favorito, James C. Raffel
Maria Elizabeth Favorito, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
O.
Mario Favorito of Concord, Mass., was married yesterday evening to James Charles Raffel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen H. Raffel of Westport, Conn.
Rabbi Albert Ginsburgh officiated at the Middlesex School Memorial Chapel in Concord.
The Rev.
Austin H. Fleming, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 28, graduated from Connecticut College and received a master's degree in international affairs from George Washington University.
Her father, who works in Cambridge, Mass., is a chief counsel to W. R. Grace &amp; Company, the chemical manufacturers.


Overseas Ensembles in Recital, 'Charlotte's Web'
THE Prague Chamber Orchestra and the Bolshoi Symphony of Russia are among the international ensembles participating in the 40th anniversary concert series at Jorgensen Auditorium at the University of Connecticut in Storrs.
Other visitors will include the Haydn Trio of Vienna, the Veryovka Ukrainian Dance Company and the Central Ballet of China.
All six UConn subscription cycles begin in October.
An adaptation of E. B. White's "Charlotte's Web" will start a children's series on Oct. 1.
The ensemble Uakti, blending Brazilian music and jazz, gives the first Earth Rhythm concert on Oct. 5.
Dance Spectrum begins on Oct. 7 with the Mark Morris Group.
L'Orchestre de la Suisse Romande opens the masters series on Oct. 18.
And the chamber series gets under way on Oct. 24 with the Korean Chamber Ensemble.


Quietly Upscale In the East Village
DANAL ++ (212) 982-6930; 90 East 10th Street, near Third Avenue; $; all major credit cards
A charming mismatch of pretty chairs, tables, couches, old lamps and lanterns contributes to a relaxed country atmosphere at this popular little restaurant.
Befitting the setting, the kitchen serves an engaging roster of homey American fare that changes daily.
Appetizers might include chilled creamy tomato and basil soup; a salad of beets and endives seasoned with an herb dressing; a little tart of tomato, mozzarella and goat cheese, and even individual pizzas of smoked chicken, grilled onions and melted mozzarella.
For entrees, there might be herb-crusted salmon on a bed of couscous with a citrus sauce and a fennel salad on the side; grilled breast of chicken topped with a gazpacho sauce and served with steamed rice; roast tenderloin of beef with horseradish cream and fluffy mashed potatoes, and farfalle tossed with shrimp, scallops, olives, garlic and roasted peppers. ($25 and Under: 11/20/92)  HABIB'S PLACE ++  (212) 979-2243; 438 East Ninth Street, near First Avenue; $; no credit cards
For many neighborhood residents, this little North African and Middle Eastern restaurant feels like home, from the informal setting and communal tables to the warm greeting and delightful cooking of Habib Belkadi, the chef, owner and caretaker.
At Habib's Place the food is cheap, plentiful and delicious, and although Mr.
Belkadi generally cooks by whim, one can almost always count on the availability of the terrific falafel sandwich.
Other good starters include the familiar platters of hummus, baba gannouj, grape leaves and tabbouleh.
Recommended main courses include couscous with chicken, lamb, merguez sausages or vegetables, and juicy lamb kebabs served with grilled pita and a small salad. ($25 and Under: 6/16/95)  DOK SUNI'S ++  (212) 477-9506; 119 First Avenue, at Seventh Street; $; no credit cards
Perhaps the first Korean restaurant to go trendy in Manhattan, Dok Suni's offers Korean food with American flair, in a fashionable East Village decor and ambiance.
The cooking, if not quite true to Korean tradition, is light and tasty.
Appetizers include potato pancakes with a soy-and-vinegar dipping sauce, spring rolls, fried dumplings filled with a ground vegetable mixture, and kimchi pancakes, also served with a soy-and-vinegar sauce.
Among the main courses are bulgogi, or grilled slices of marinated beef in a spicy sauce served with lettuce leaves; mildly flavored seafood pancake, made with oysters, squid and shrimp; fried chicken with a jalapeno and garlic sauce with a hint of soy sauce, and broiled pork ribs in a hot sauce of chili pepper and garlic. ($25 and Under: 5/12/95)  LANZA ++  (212) 674-7014; 168 First Avenue, near 10th Street; $; all major credit cards
There are no pretenses at this cheerful and comfortable neighborhood favorite.
The old-fashioned cooking is the real thing too: solid, robust and well priced.
Sweet melon and prosciutto, sauteed mushrooms in garlic and olive oil, roasted peppers and mozzarella, and plump little clams oreganato all can be had as appetizers.
For pastas, there is fusilli in a tomato sauce with onions and prosciutto, and linguine with white clam sauce.
Main courses include grilled shell steak with mushrooms; sauteed chicken breast in a creamy fennel sauce; a fisherman's stew of calamari, clams and shrimp in marinara sauce; baked veal scaloppine with tomato and fresh mozzarella cheese, and a whole trout, pan-roasted with rosemary and brushed with olive oil and garlic. ($25 and Under: 1/22/93)  L'UDO


August 20-26: Rail Wreck; A Signalman (and a Cow) Blamed in Indian Crash
A speeding passenger train called the Pureshotham Express smashed into the back of another train that had stalled after hitting a cow in Northern India last week.
It was the country's worst railroad accident in more than 40 years, killing more than 300 people.
Officials blamed a veteran signalman, Ghore Lal Sharma, who had cleared the Purshotham Express to run on the same track as the stranded train, the Kalinidi Express, near Firozpur, 185 miles south of New Delhi.
Mr.
Sharma, who is 54 and has been a railroad employee for 30 years, fled with his family, railroad officials said.


Speed Limits and Air Bags: A Plea for More Information
To the Editor:
Your article on the push for a 65-m.p.h. speed limit on some state highways (Road and Rail, Aug. 20) quotes Katherine Hutt of Advocates for Highway and Auto Safety as saying, "Your chances of being killed are doubled every 10 miles per hour faster than 50 because the physical forces double." As an engineer, I would like to know why we have been spending so much money on air bags and other improvements to automobiles if they are having no effect on the death rate in accidents.


Warm Massachusetts Seas Yield Dolphin to Yellowfin
Shortly after 5:30 A.M., David Tilton eased his 33-foot Fortier, the See Saw II, out of the harbor and into fog-shrouded Vineyard Sound.
We were the first sport fishing vessel to depart Menemsha that morning.
Some two hours of steaming lay ahead of us -- we were bound for an area nearly 40 miles south-southwest of Martha's Vineyard -- before our trolling rigs went into the water.


Block Party's a Celebration and a Farewell
IT'S touted as "the world's largest block party," and it was created to celebrate the city's volunteerism.
But today's event will also mark the curtain call of We Care About New York, a nonprofit environmental group that works with individuals, community groups, schools and businesses to clean up the city.
"The board decided we had pretty much accomplished what we set out to accomplish 13 years ago," says Emory Jackson, the organization's president, "so we wanted to throw the largest party New York has seen."


Pony Tale
It's never easy concentrating on the movie in an airplane high over the Atlantic, what with the whoosh of the engines and the distortion of a cheap headset.
But there came a moment as I was watching "Legends of the Fall" when I realized I didn't even need the sound.
In fact, I grasped everything -- plot points, character development, narrative crisis -- through a whole new medium: hair.
The good guy, Brad Pitt, had long hair and a beard and was therefore uninhibited and virtuous.
The bad guy was close-cropped, clean-shaven, therefore rigid and had to be watched.
I followed the story strand by strand through the hair, even when the sound faded; when my son -- who dozed off because he couldn't hear -- asked for a quick summary, I was prepared:


Taking a Meeting in Your Jammies
When The New York Times asked readers who work at home about their secret vices, the breadth of confessions was formidably wide.
Indeed, if time is money, the ship of state is leaking gross national product in the form of timeouts for baking cookies, playing Microsoft Solitaire on the computer, tuning in to the perversion du jour on the television talk shows and getting the laundry lemony fresh.
Here, a selection:
It's dial V for Vengeance for Renee Marks Cohen, a freelance medical writer and editor from White Plains.
Oh, sure, sometimes she works while lying in bed, surrounded by reference materials.
And sometimes she works while not fully clothed.
She even treats herself to lunch at uncommon hours, like 10:30 A.M. or 4 P.M.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


THE GUIDE
SPECTATOR'S VIEW
Suzanne Challinor's paintings remind one of Sara Lee's cakes -- almost nobody doesn't like them.
Figurative, representational, full of the juices of everyday life, they follow in the path of genre painting that has been popular with the public since the days of the Brueghels.


Corrections
An excerpt on page 28 of Fashions of The Times, from the book "Love, Loss and What I Wore," by Ilene Beckerman, renders two passages incorrectly.
In the first paragraph of the excerpt, the date should read "on the eve of 1957," not "in 1956-57." In the last paragraph, the time should read "at midnight," not "at 12 o'clock."


Jet Ski Injury
To the Editor:
Readers of your article on Atlantis ("Waterscape In the Bahamas," May 28) might be interested to learn that this "aquatic resort" refuses to accept responsibility for the operators of its aquatic activities.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
WINGATE  A Evening of Calypso, And a Health Clinic, Too
Those calypso purveyors of enlightened social commentary, the Mighty Sparrow (below) and the Black Stalin, will entertain at the Caribbean Music Festival tomorrow night in Wingate Field.
That should make the needle a little easier to take at the festival's free health clinic, which will offer pediatric immunizations and H.I.V. testing.
The Mighty Sparrow, born Slinger Francisco and also known as "The Calypso King of the World," has captured the title of Trinidadian Calypsonian Monarch at the Trinidad and Tobago Carnival 11 times in his 40 years of performing -- more often than anyone else.
He met his match in this year's winner, the Black Stalin (born Leroy Calliste).
The free concert, the finale in the Martin Luther King Jr. concert series, begins at 7:30 P.M.
Bring chairs and blankets.
Wingate Field, Winthrop Street between Brooklyn and Kingston Avenues, opposite Kings County Hospital.
Health clinic opens at 6 P.M.; concert begins at 7:30 P.M.; free; (718) 469-1912.
HARLEM  A Contemporary Look At the 'Other Half'
The photojournalist Jacob Riis jolted the nation over a century ago with his searing images of the city's poor in his book "How the Other Half Lives." Now, the Museum of the City of New York is examining urban poverty in the 1990's in "The Other Half . . . Revisited," a one-hour film by the contemporary photographers Margaret Morton, Eli Reed and Jacob Holdt.
The film, which will be shown on Saturday at 2 P.M., coincides with the museum's current exhibition, "A Century Apart: Images of Struggle and Spirit, Jacob Riis and Five Contemporary Photographers." The Riis works on view are from the museum's collection of prints made from original negatives and lantern slides (e.g., left, "Italian Mother and Her Baby in Jersey Street").
1220 Fifth Avenue, at 103d Street.
Wednesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.; closed Monday.
Suggested admission of $5; $3 for children, students and the elderly, and $8 for families; (212) 534-1672.
EAST HOUSTON  An All-Night Party To Benefit Hale House
In 1993, Lisa Ludwig founded Music + Love in memory of her brother, Richard A. Kesten, who died of AIDS.
The group, which aims to raise social consciousness as well as funds to help people with AIDS through music, is holding a benefit for Hale House on Tuesday night at the Mercury Lounge.
Hale House is the Harlem charity that cares for babies born drug addicted or with H.I.V. and their families.
It was founded in 1969 by Clara McBride Hale, who died in 1992, and her daughter, Dr.
Lorraine Hale.
The K-Rock deejay Maria Milito will host the all-night jam with New York bands including the Rake's Progress, the Interesting Guys, Black Flamingo, N.Y.
Loose, Handel, Invaders and Divers.
Mercury Lounge, 217 East Houston Street.
At 8:30 P.M.
Admission: $10; (212) 260-1484.
ALSO AROUND TOWN SOFTBALL The championship of the women's division of the Therapeutic Community of America Softball League is today from 9 A.M. to 1 P.M. in Van Cortlandt Park, West 243d Street and Broadway, Field 5, the Bronx; (212) 979-8800.
WILDLIFE THEATER Until Labor Day, children can learn about the wilderness through interactive skits at the Central Park Wildlife Theater, Fifth Avenue and 64th Street.
Performers from All-Star Improv Jam at the West End Gate use special puppets and props to educate kids about wildlife and conservation; free with regular zoo admission.
Daily, 11 A.M., 1 P.M., 1:30 P.M. and 3 P.M., with a 4:30 P.M. show on weekends.
Admission: $2.50; $1.25 for the elderly; 50 cents for those 3 to 12; under three, free; (212) 861-6030.
KATHRYN SHATTUCK


Benjamin W. Watkins, 73, Dies; Podiatrist and Harlem Leader
Dr.
Benjamin W. Watkins, a podiatrist and chiropractor who played a prominent role in politics and community affairs in New York City and who served for years as the honorary mayor of Harlem, died on Friday at his home in St.
Albans, Queens.
He was 73.
The cause was congestive heart failure, his wife, Elizabeth, said yesterday.


Brooke E. Sterne, E. B. Whittemore
Brooke Ellen Sterne, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Hale Sterne Jr. of Harrisburg, Pa., was married yesterday to Edward Brewster Whittemore, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick B. Whittemore of New York.
The Very Rev.
Malcolm H. MacDowell Jr., the Dean of the Cathedral Church of St.
Stephen, performed the Episcopal ceremony at the church in Harrisburg.
The Rev.
Herbert B. Anderson, a Presbyterian minister, assisted in the service.
Mrs.
Whittemore, 26, graduated from Cornell University.
Until recently she was a food service director at Aramark Services in Washington.
Her father is a manufacturers' representative in the metals industry, in Harrisburg.
Her mother, Barbara Caulton Sterne, is a public health nutritionist for the Pennsylvania Department of Health in Harrisburg.


In the Region: Connecticut; Cleaning Up Contaminated Sites
A LOGJAM of contaminated industrial properties is expected to break up and flow into tax-paying, job-producing redevelopment as a result of new state and Federal environmental actions.
Buildings and land that real estate brokers despaired of ever selling because of the exorbitant costs and confusion surrounding mandated cleanups are being targeted for Federal aid to provide linchpins in the revitalization of depressed cities.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Guidebook for the Disabled Visiting Cultural Institutions Hospital Audiences Inc., a nonprofit organization that provides cultural opportunities for people with physical and mental disabilities, has recently issued a new guide: "Access for All: A Guide for People With Disabilities to New York City Cultural Institutions."
This guide to more than 300 museums, theaters, concert halls and other cultural institutions in the city covers entrances, parking, alternative entrances for people in wheelchairs, the availability of auxiliary aids and services (like touch tours and infrared hearing devices), restrooms, telephones and water fountains.


Mary L. Maguire And Mike Grubert
Mary Louise Maguire, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Maguire of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to Arthur Michael Grubert, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur C. Grubert of Larchmont, N.Y.
Msgr.
William P. Devine performed the ceremony at St.
Rose of Lima Church in Short Hills.
Mr. and Mrs.
Grubert, both 25, graduated from Georgetown University.
Next month the bride is to begin studying for a master's degree in social work at Fordham University.
The bridegroom, who is known as Mike, received a law degree in May from St.
John's University in Queens.


A Pacific Cruise Ship Is Switching to Cuba
The 480-passenger Pearl, owned by Costa Crociere of Genoa and currently cruising in the Far East, will change her name to the Costa Playa and begin sailing to Cuba from the Dominican Republic starting Nov. 28.
Costa Crociere will advertise the seven-night cruises only in Europe.
Treasury Department regulations forbid Americans to spend money in Cuba and therefore to travel there.
The ship will depart Puerto Plata in the Dominican Republic and is expected to call at Havana, Santiago di Cuba and Baja Nipe, both in Cuba, and Montego Bay.


Pamela Daley, Randall Phelps
Pamela Daley, a corporate lawyer, was married yesterday to Randall Lee Phelps, an energy industry executive.
The Rev.
Holly Antolini, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony in Camden, Me., at the home of Terry and Evelyn O'Toole, friends of the bridegroom.
Miss Daley, 42, is keeping her name.
She is a vice president and the head of corporate law for the General Electric Company in Fairfield, Conn.
She graduated from Princeton University and received her law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
The bride is a daughter of the late Elizabeth Bloom Daley and the late Edward M. Daley.


Insecurity Council; Isolationism Makes China the World's Problem
SUDDENLY, it seems, China is the world's troublemaker.
For two months it played with the life of Harry Wu, before setting the human rights advocate free last week so that Washington would not embarrass China by keeping Hillary Rodham Clinton from a conference on women in Beijing next week.


Woodland Fire Finally Tamed On Long Island
The Long Island fires that charred 12 square miles of pine barrens and imperiled a South Shore community in Suffolk County fell to an encircling army of firefighters and aerial attacks yesterday, ending three days of heroics and high drama with no loss of life, no major injuries and minimal property damage.
The headwalls of windblown orange flame that had scorched the earth and the pall of dense smoke that had hung over Westhampton, Westhampton Beach and Speonk on Thursday and Friday gave way to blue skies, wisps of white smoke adrift on gentle shore breezes and signs everywhere that the danger was over.


A Bridge to Ellis Island? What About One That's There?
More than a million visitors go to Ellis Island each year, and they all arrive by ferry.
Richard DuHaime wants to improve their experience.
"We have to let the people of the United States easily access their roots by being able to walk to the island," said Mr.
DuHaime, the chairman of the North Jersey Transportation Planning Authority.
"And it's important that they get to the island without paying a $7 boat fare."


Eating, Drinking, Shopping ... Tennis Anyone?
The U.S.
Open, which opens tomorrow at the National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows Corona Park, is more than just your average tennis tournament.
It's a two-week spectacle that brings together entertainers, politicians, millionaires and fans of all skills, sizes and stature.
Here is a statistical breakdown of the action on and off the courts:  13: Years since U.S.-born woman won the U.S.


Sex and the Teen-Age Girl
GOING ALL THE WAY  Teenage Girls' Tales of Sex, Romance, and Pregnancy.
By Sharon Thompson. 340 pp.
New York: Hill &amp; Wang. $24.
FOR REAL  The Uncensored Truth About America's Teenagers.
By Jane Pratt and Kelli Pryor. 317 pp.
New York: Hyperion.
Paper, $9.95.


Urban Children Who Have Now Seen Some Country
As she waited impatiently at the George Washington Bridge bus terminal in upper Manhattan, Brenda Oliver felt afraid for the first time this summer.
Her fear was for 10-year-old Caleb Natal, who was returning from Fresh Air Fund camp.
"When he was away, I didn't worry one minute," said Ms.
Oliver, who is Caleb's legal guardian.
"Now he's back in the city and anything could happen. He never believed the country was so beautiful. There should be more programs like this for kids. My son has got the country inside of him, and he's seen a different way of life."


With All Its Spikes, of Course It's Aggressive
WHEN you are learning new things about plants, "many knees" is easier to remember than polygonum.
But for those who know their Greek, the name is easy.
Polygonum (pronounced po-LIG-uh-num) is the generic name for a large clan or genus of plants.
The name comes from the Greek: "poly," meaning many; "gony," meaning knee.
All polygonums have many knees, the swollen stem joints that are important clues for the genus identity.


Judge Who Is Also a General Repairs Haiti's Judicial System
Donald F. Campbell has two jobs.
When he is not presiding over divorcing couples and deadbeat dads, he is fixing broken countries.
Since American troops entered Haiti last September to reinstate the exiled President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, among the biggest challenges has been resurrecting Haiti's tattered judicial system, which suffered from decades of neglect under a host of dictators and military juntas.


Windows 95: Hoopla To Hooopla to Hoooopla
AT 12:01 a.m. on Friday, Aug. 25, the entire planet breathed a collective sigh of relief as Bill Gates Day officially came to an end.
A seemingly interminable orgy of self-congratulation, masquerading as the introduction of Microsoft's new Windows 95 software, finally, mercifully reached its conclusion.
Jay Leno could now go back to being an affable talk-show host instead of a shill.
The Empire State Building could return to its normal coloration.
The guy who clambered down the face of a Toronto office tower clutching a Windows 95-equipped laptop could go back to his day job.
Ditto the Aussie drag queen who got gussied up in a gown made entirely of CD-ROM's to help draw attention to Microsoft's sexy new product.
After months and months of shameless hype, the world could now return to normal.


Tea, Top Hats and Tranquillity
Outside the headquarters of the Queens Historical Society last weekend, Flushing was in full cacophonous effect.
Sidewalks teemed with shoppers, ambulances wailed, and children shrieked in delight at a nearby playground.
But in the society's backyard, the scene harked back to the gentility and manners of English manors.
For two hours on the afternoon of Aug. 19, the society's headquarters were transformed for the group'sfirst annual Victorian Tea Party.
Adorned with cameos and bonnets and dressed in lace and pressed suits, 50 people gathered beneath an ancient weeping beech tree at the Kingsland Homestead, which houses the historical society, to munch on scones with marmalade and clotted cream, cucumber sandwiches, seed cakes and lemon tarts the size of quarters.
Cutwork lace tablecloths and napkins and gilt-edged tea sets graced the tables.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Habitats: 135 Lafayette Avenue; Architect Renovates a Home for Himself in Brooklyn
YVES FRANCOIS, all 6 feet, 4 inches of him, hoisted himself up on the foot-high brownstone base of the iron railing, and, clinging to the railing's wicked-looking spikes, edged himself across the precipice: a wet cement walkway.
Mr.
Francois is not an easy person to keep up with.
At 30, he has already spent four years working as an architectural consultant to the Pepsi Cola Company in Somers, N.Y., working his way up to project manager.
And he has just bought his first house: a massive three-window-wide Second Empire brick rowhouse in the Fort Greene section of Brooklyn.


Soaring Stocks Call for a Tax Review
SO.
You stuck it out in the discouraging stock market last year, when even many professionals failed to make money.
Now you are reaping the rewards of your persistence.
The Dow Jones industrial average has gained about 20 percent this year.
In the technology-laden over-the-counter market, the gains are about 35 percent.
And, if you hold shares in CBS, Capital Cities/ABC or some other takeover targets, you may have seen those prices go into orbit.


Delays Keep the Mayfair's Doors From Being Nailed Shut
When the Mayfair Theater on Fresh Meadow Lane was temporarily shut by the city in May as part of a municipal campaign to reduce the spread of the AIDS virus, neighbors thought it was the end of what they saw as a community nuisance.
But efforts to permanently close the Mayfair, which was shut after health inspectors reported more than 80 instances of high-risk sex among the men who patronized it, have been met with continued resistance from the theater's owner, Mousa Soudour.
Mr.
Soudour and his lawyers have not shown up over the last three months for scheduled court hearings on an eviction proceeding by the building's landlord and a lawsuit by the city Corporation Counsel seeking to close the theater permanently for violating the public health law of the sanitation code.


Yes, a Small Town Is Different
THE nation's center of population is a device that only a statistician could contrive -- the pivot at which a perfectly level map of the United States would balance if everyone weighed the same.
It's fitting that the pivot turns out to be Steelville, Mo., a town of fewer than 2,000 people that grew up around a gristmill in the 19th century, thrived until the railroad and the Interstate passed it by and then reinvented itself by remodeling downtown storefronts to evoke a bygone era when the small town was synonymous with American values.


When Neighbors Quarrel
FOR Philip M. Jones, one of the attractions of his quiet Dobbs Ferry neighborhood was its hilly, wooded landscapes, which offered an appealing sense of privacy.
But when a next-door neighbor decided to cut down most of the trees on his property, Mr.
Jones was unable to do more than fume.
"When the chain saws were going on, we were horrified," said Mr.
Jones, an architect and former member of the Dobbs Ferry architectural review board who serves on the Village Planning Board.
"Their goal was to create a Long Island-type backyard. It left us looking at a clear-cut backyard. There's a possibility it affects the value of our property."


Oldtown Journal; 2 Towns Torn Asunder as Private Bridge Is Closed
For 11 years, Minnie Piper and members of her family sat behind the curtained windows of a red-brick toll booth here, holding out a tin cup to travelers who crossed the Potomac River on Frances Walters's aging Oldtown Toll Bridge.
Travelers tossed in their coins starting at 6 A.M. -- 10 cents for pedestrians to $1.50 for tractor-trailers -- until 10 P.M. when the Pipers went home.
Afterward the crossing was free.


The Nation; Call 'Em 'Prez.' It's Fine by Them.
AS President Clinton practiced his putts at the Jackson Hole Golf and Tennis Club the other day, a middle-aged man a few yards behind him suddenly shouted, "Hey, Bill, over here!"
Mr.
Clinton nodded silently, but the mildly annoyed look that crossed his relaxed vacation face seemed to say, "That's Mr. President to you, pal."


Winifred Lloyds, Daniel Lender
Dr.
Winifred Margaret Lloyds, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard E. Lloyds of Montecito, Calif., was married yesterday evening to Daniel Lender, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Boris Lender of Lima, Peru.
Rabbi Steven E. Kaye officiated at the Vail Interfaith Chapel in Vail, Colo.
The couple graduated from Cornell University.


Women Mark 75 Years of Voting Rights
Wearing the white of the suffragist movement, a small group today celebrated the 75 years women have had the right to vote by honoring the earliest leaders of the battle for women's equality and protesting the absence of their statues in the halls of government.
The group gathered in the Capitol basement around a marble statue commemorating three of the nation's leading suffragists that has languished for years a few feet from the rest rooms and a gift shop despite repeated attempts to move it to a more prominent place.


Glory of Elkdom Fading for Lodge 878
IN its heyday, the neoclassical palazzo of Elks Lodge No. 878 on Queens Boulevard in Elmhurst was a kind of social nexus, a place so vibrant that if you didn't get tickets two months in advance, you were locked out of the annual six-day Elks bazaar, the borough's premier social extravaganza.
Three decades ago, the lodge's 6,600 members included some of the borough's most prominent residents.
The Elks raised funds for charity, held grand balls and otherwise reveled in their own brotherhood.
"This was the place to be," recalled Paul Reilly, 61, a retired police detective.
"You'd have to fight to get near the bar."


Foreign Affairs; The Bomb and the Boomerang
On the surface, Australia's bitter opposition to France's plans to conduct nuclear weapons tests in the South Pacific next month needs no explanation.
I mean, how would you feel if someone came from the other side of town to test his toxic fertilizer on your backyard?
"But it's totally safe," say the French.
Safe? ask the Aussies.
Safe you say?
If it's so bloody safe, then why don't the French test their bombs under Euro Disney and not half a world away beneath the coral of the Mururoa Atoll?
A good question, and just one of the reasons why it's impossible to exaggerate the depth of popular indignation here at President Jacques Chirac's decision to resume nuclear testing in Polynesia, thereby violating the de facto ban on such explosions that every nuclear power except China has been observing.
No wonder French bakeries in Sydney have had their windows smashed, French cars their tires sliced, French products boycotted and a French Consulate firebombed.
"We are not at war," the French Ambassador to Australia complained -- just before he boarded a plane to Paris after being summoned home by his Government.


DISNEY'S TOKYO KINGDOM
ASK a Tokyo resident what you absolutely must see during a visit to Japan, and you'll probably be told of some idyllic temple with a 500-year-old rock garden.
The problem, if you're traveling with a family, is that children are not very good at contemplating rock gardens.
Japan's charms -- serene country inns, placid rice paddies, beautifully made sushi -- are not the kind that impress the real heads of households.


Keeping Your Eye on the Private Eyes: The Life Under Investigation May Be Your Own
IF you apply for a job or a loan or even, in some cases, a college scholarship, you are more likely than ever before to be checked out by a private investigator.
"Without question, the likelihood is greater than it was in the past," said Robert McCrie, a professor of security at John Jay College of Criminal Justice in Manhattan.
"And the trend will continue in the future."


Claudia M. Meer, Robert J. Linehan
Claudia Michel Meer, a senior director of corporate finance at Marriott International in Washington, is to be married today to Robert John Linehan, a technical director at Magnet Interactive Studios, a producer of CD-ROM products in Washington.
Herbert Blinder, a leader of the Ethical Culture Society, is to officiate at the Four Seasons Hotel in Washington.
The bride, 34, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a master's degree in public policy from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of Gladys and George Meer of New York.


The Old Tax Debate Is New Once More
With Assembly Republicans preparing to defend their majority rule on the basis of Governor Whitman's income-tax rate cuts, Democrats are taking every opportunity to try to link the cuts to higher property taxes.
The debate isn't new, but it has begun to heat up, with the release of a report by the Governor's office claiming that the rate of increase in property taxes for both school and municipal purposes this year was lower than last year's, and that the local tax increase for schools was the second lowest in 17 years.


Patricia Kelley, Richard Mariani
Patricia Ellen Kelley, a retailing executive in New York, was married yesterday to Richard Charles Mariani, a lawyer in Liberty Corner, N.J.
Judge David S. Cramp of the New Jersey Superior Court in Morristown officiated at the Park Avenue Club in Florham Park, N.J.
Mrs.
Mariani is the senior vice president of the Door Store furniture chain.
She graduated from Fairfield University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph C. Kelley of Gig Harbor, Wash.


Chippewas Push Claims For Land In Canada
To Rose Manning, it is a return to the "promised land," where she was born and where her navel cord lies in sacred Chippewa ground.
"I don't remember, of course, but there was a little ceremony to show my roots are here because a part of my body is already here," she said outside one of the barracks at the Ipperwash Military Reserve, on the shores of Lake Huron, 25 miles northeast of Sarnia.


Mill Sought by Bronx Is Blocked; Railroad Bluff Delays A Project in Train Yard
For the South Bronx, the proposal to build a paper recycling mill in the old Harlem Rail Yard appeared to be a rare sure thing.
Announced in May 1994, the plan called for a $280 million plant that would recycle a daily torrent of office paper from New York City's trash.
At the same time, it would provide 1,000 permanent jobs and other economic benefits for the South Bronx, including housing, day care and health care services for the workers.


Insurance Rules On Illness Eased
THE "pre-existing conditions" clause, a bane to consumers who buy trip-cancellation insurance only to find that they cannot collect benefits when they are unable to travel because of illness, appears to be on the way out.
Most insurance companies are following the example of Mutual of Omaha, which announced in May that it would waive this restriction for clients who buy their policies immediately on making deposits for tours or cruises.
Trip-cancellation and trip-interruption insurance is important to people who buy expensive cruises or tours, because emergencies, particularly health emergencies, may make it impossible to take a trip that has already been paid for.
The old pre-existing conditions clauses generally held that claims to recover payments on the basis of illness of a traveler, a family member or a traveling companion were invalid if the illness "manifested itself" -- or some similar phrase -- in the 60 days before the insurance was bought.
Often enough, this meant denial of a claim made, for example, because someone's heart condition flared up.
One big company estimated that 6 percent of claims were denied on the ground that the conditions were pre-existing.


Denielle Pemberton, Gregory Heard
Denielle Marie Pemberton, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dennis E. Pemberton of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Gregory McQuade Heard, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Winlow M. Heard of Natick, Mass.
The Rev.
Dr.
Adolph Roberts performed the ceremony at the Red Oak Mansion in White Plains.
Mrs.
Pemberton-Heard is a senior counsel and a director of legal and business affairs for Discovery Networks in Bethesda, Md., the parent company of the Discovery and Learning cable television channels.
She graduated from Tufts University and received her law degree from Case Western Reserve University.
Her father is a principal in Wood Flooring Design Centers of New York and the founder of Century Flooring in New York.
Her mother, Andrea O. Pemberton, is a special education teacher at the Lincoln School in Mount Vernon, N.Y.


Dancer Shot to Death In a Queens Brothel
A 25-year-old Dominican immigrant who worked as a dancer and a cocktail waitress was shot to death early yesterday in a brothel in a Queens neighborhood known for a proliferation of low-rent houses of prostitution, the police said.
The dancer, Rosie Gonzalez, 25, of 104-17 Martense Avenue in Corona, Queens, was shot once in the chest at about 3:30 A.M.
The police said they were searching for five men who had been at the building, at 59-08 108th Street, in Elmhurst, at the time of the killing.


A Fee Grows In Queens: Fury at the Big 6
Margaret Mack, 68, a retired secretary, thought she had heard the worst when she and other shareholders of the Big Six Towers learned in March that their cooperative housing complex was $20 million in debt after a decade of mismanagement, bad investments and possible fraud.
But earlier this month, she found a note under her door saying that the co-op board planned to ask the city for a 25 percent increase in the maintenance.
If the proposal is approved by the city, Ms.
Mack, whose current maintenance fee is $327.17 a month for a one-bedroom apartment and a terrace, would be paying more than $400.


Kafelnikov Belts His Way To the Hamlet Cup Final
Yevgeny Kafelnikov of Russia, a good big man, outbelted and outsteadied Marc Rosset of Switzerland, a good bigger man, by 7-6 (8-6), 6-4, today and gained the final of the $328,000 Genovese Hamlet Cup.
Left-hander Jan Siemerink of the Netherlands beat Renzo Furlan of Italy, 6-4, 6-3, in the second semifinal.
Siemerink will meet the top-seeded Kafelnikov at noon Sunday, with the winner earning $43,000 and the runner-up $25,000.
Kafelnikov won last year.


Radical Bookstore Digs In
As Barnes &amp; Noble superstores continue to open throughout the city and smaller, local bookstores continue to close, one offbeat neighborhood bookshop is digging in its heels.
Revolution Books, a not-for-profit venture that specializes in Communist and leftist literature, has moved to a new space at 9 West 19th Street, just a block from Barnes &amp; Noble's main store.


Sarah Labaree and Craig Churchill
Sarah Calkins Labaree, the daughter of Prof. and Mrs.
Benjamin W. Labaree of Amesbury, Mass., was married yesterday to Craig Farren Churchill, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John S. Churchill of Atlanta.
The Rev.
John D. Eusden, an emeritus professor of religion at Williams College, performed the waterside ceremony at the bride's parents' summer home in Vinalhaven, Me.
Ms.
Labaree, 30, is keeping her name.
Until recently she was the manager of the basic education project for the United States Agency for International Development in Pretoria, South Africa.
Next month she is to become a senior analyst at Abt Associates, a consulting company, in Washington.
She graduated from Williams and received a master's degree in international development from Tufts University.
Her father is an emeritus professor of history and environmental studies at Williams.


Life and Works of Cram
To the Editor:
While I cannot comment on the accuracy of Walter Kendrick's assessment of Douglas Shand-Tucci's "Boston Bohemia, 1881-1900" (July 30), I do hope that his analysis of this work is more accurate than his statement that "until now, there has been no full-scale biography" of Ralph Adams Cram.
Mr.
Kendrick is apparently unaware of Robert Muccigrosso's "American Gothic: The Mind and Art of Ralph Adams Cram," a cogent and lucid analysis of both Cram's architectural and polemical works.
It is a paradigm for all scholars: to attempt to understand the thinker as he understood himself.
JOSHUA N. FELDSTEIN  Parlin, N.J.


Old 125th St. Warriors Find Peace at 116th St. Market
Ten months ago, street vendors in Harlem picketed, shouted at the police and tried to organize store boycotts to fight Mayor Giuliani's order sweeping them from 125th Street.
Today, they accept credit cards.
And the scorn they once expressed for the market the city set up for them a few blocks away on Lenox Avenue at 116th Street has turned to praise.
"We have a certain air of respectability here," said Carlos Pesante, who sells clothes and toys from a corner booth.
"It's like a store."


Laurie E. Cohen, Ronald C. Samuels
Dr.
Laurie Ellen Cohen and Dr.
Ronald Charles Samuels, instructors in pediatrics at Harvard Medical School and assistants in medicine at Children's Hospital, both in Boston, are to be married today.
Rabbi Joel E. Soffin is to perform the ceremony at Bretton Woods in Morris Plains, N.J.
The bride, 33, is a pediatric endocrinologist, and the bridegroom, 32, is a pediatrician.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received her medical degree from Cornell University.
He graduated from Harvard and received his medical degree from the Health Science Center of State University of New York at Syracuse.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL '95: Sports of The Times; The Big East Must Build Its Own Tradition
MIKE JACOBS had found a home in Morgantown, W. Va. Or so it seemed.
Beginning in 1980, Jacobs became a member of Don Nehlen's coaching staff at West Virginia.
His relationship with Nehlen went back to 1974, when he served as line coach at Bowling Green under him.


Empty Spaces, Room to Dance
To the Editor:
As Jennifer Dunning's article "When Disbanding Is the Only Logical Step"  [ Aug. 6 ]  indicates, the decline of the traditional company model in modern dance is not all bad.
Cannot all that energy invested in finding and maintaining boards of directors, attending monthly meetings and tending to the day-to-day administrative responsibilities be invested in the formation of new alliances and the securing of new support?


In the Hamptons, It's Paparazzi, Click! Click!
ON a sweeping lawn behind a Tara-like mansion in Southampton, the sounds of a party permeate the air.
Marty Richards, the Broadway and film producer, is greeting his guests.
His words rise and fall amid the tinkling of wine glasses and the mingling of a hundred conversations.
But what is that staccato clicking sound?
Click.
Click-click.
Click.
The sound becomes louder than Tony Bennett, who is singing, prerecorded, in the background.


Cynthia Decker, Geoffrey Bennett
Cynthia Janet Decker, a daughter of Mrs.
Richard Standish Francis 3d of Westport, Conn., and Peter Folger Decker of Dunwoody, Ga., was married yesterday to Geoffrey Scott Bennett, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Geoffrey White Bennett of New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Barbara Purinton, an Episcopal priest, performed the outdoor ceremony at the Inn at Shelburne Farms in Shelburne, Vt.
The couple graduated from Kenyon College.
Ms.
Bennett, 30, received a master's degree in organizational psychology from Columbia University and is an organizational development consultant in San Francisco.
Her father is a salesman at the Union Carbide Corporation in Atlanta.
Her mother, Janet Boeing Francis, is a psychotherapist in Westport.
The bride's stepfather is the president and chief executive of Cygnet Investment, an investment management company in Westport.


[ APPEARANCES ] ; THE COLOR WHEEL OF FORTUNE
DID YOU NOTICE MY LIPSTICK IS DIFFERENT TODAY?" ASKED MARIANNE DIORIO. (SHE'S VICE president of marketing at Prescriptives.) Last week she had shiny fire-engine red lips -- a gloss Prescriptives was bringing out for summer. Now her mouth was tinted shimmery apricot, one of the new colors for fall. Last week summer, this week fall. In real time it was spring.
We were in the van Prescriptives parked outside the fall fashion shows in Bryant Park, a spot where beauty editors could chill (by appointment) and incidentally discuss the new fall shades.
Anne Carullo, vice president of product development, talked about going to the fabric shows in France and Italy last year.
She saw iridescence, so she developed eye shadows with micronized titanium for a metallic sheen.
You get a feel, she said.
But makeup styles are volatile.
A lot can happen between concept and product.
"Color is quick," Diorio said.
Carullo added: "Don't go with what you're seeing a lot of. Go with what you're seeing a little of." But how do you know which of those little trends are going to hit big?
Carullo gave a rueful smile.
"I've been part of some huge mistakes."


Alison A. Hess, John G. Nevius
Alison Anne Hess, a daughter of Anne W. Hess of Port Jefferson, L.I., was married yesterday to John Garrett Nevius, the son of Mary and Garrett W. Nevius of Farmington, Conn.
The Rev.
Stephen H. Hackett performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in Arlington, Vt.
The couple work for the New York office of the Environmental Protection Agency, she as a geologist and he as a hydrogeologist and an environmental engineer.


Fast-Food Rebel Is Standing Fast On Hostile Turf
Jesus Mendez still flips burgers in the rear kitchen, as he has for the last five years, though now his wrists are more often at rest than in motion.
His wife, Minerva, still works the cash register, but now less money changes hands.
They are the lonely workers of Burger Boys of Brooklyn -- the last tenant on the second floor of the Fulton Market Building, a dogged underdog in a fast-food fight being played out in Federal District Court.
Jay Reidel and Arthur Dash, the scrappy Brooklyn natives who own Burger Boys, say they have no plans to leave the now funereal food court, which once bustled with 22 purveyors of everything from ice cream to egg rolls.
But the Seaport Marketplace Inc., which manages the building, has successfully rid the building of every other small retail shop and fast-food kiosk in a bid to transform the 56,000-square-foot building into the home of a superstore.
Or two.


Sex and Frank Kermode
To the Editor:
Frank Kermode's elegant and basically favorable review of Marjorie Garber's most recent book, "Vice Versa," had virtually convinced me that it contained an argument worth taking seriously.
After reading what can only be described as petulant, privileged and defensive responses to that review by Ms.
Garber and James R. Kincaid (July 30), I am beginning to doubt that possibility.


In Morris, Police Sharpshooters Add a Twist to the Debate Over Deer Hunting
When Morris County opens Lewis Morris Park in December for the park's first deer hunt, the hunters will have unusual company: police sharpshooters.
Seven county park officers armed with shotguns will complement the 60 or so hunters who will be given permits to take part in the hunt, Dec. 4 through 8.
The officers will be there to shoot deer that try to bound out of the park onto neighboring properties.


A QUESTION FOR: Judy Collins
Q: There are a lot of female singers you have influenced.
Which ones do you like?
A: I particularly like Trisha Yearwood.
I've always liked the Indigo Girls.
There are many strong women artists, and I would say I am among them, who have an entrepreneurial streak -- Cher, Bette Midler and Joni Mitchell.
Reba McEntire has made some interesting things with her career and her life.
And I am delighted to see Bonnie Raitt get the attention she's getting after all this time.
But it's not fair to say there is anyone out there who does what I do.
No one is really singing in my style, which is nice to know.
I like to know I can chart new territory that people can then take inspiration from.
I like Natalie Merchant a lot.
There are women in music today who have their feet on the ground.


August 20-26; How a Mafioso Takes the Heat: He Boards a Cuise Ship
Everyone in Italy goes away for August, so the Godfather-turned-Government informer, Tommaso Buscetta, 67, known as Don Masino, decided that there was no reason he should sweat out the August heat at home.
Instead, Mr.
Buscetta, whose testimony has sent mafiosi to jail here and in the United States, and who is the prosecution's star witness next month in the trial for Mafia connections of former Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti, mamboed in the ballroom of a cruise ship and sunbathed at poolside, much to the delight of the paparazzi.


Kristen Edmunds, D. B. Settelmeyer
Kristen Ann Edmunds, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Edmunds Jr. of West Hartford, Conn., was married there yesterday to Douglas Bradford Settelmeyer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fredrick H. Settelmeyer of Marblehead, Mass.
The Rev.
James Moran officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Peter Claver.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
WHITE BARN TRIBUTE
An exhibition honoring two former members of the White Barn Theater's board of directors will open today at 6 P.M.


Correction
An article on Jan. 8 about right-wing survivalists -- "Off the Grid," by Philip Weiss -- referred incorrectly to Kenneth Fadeley, an informant investigating white separatists for the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
Mr.
Fadeley merely posed as a dealer in illegal weapons, under the name Gus Magisono; he was never arrested on gun charges.
A lawyer for Mr.
Fadeley wrote to The Times in May about the error, and further investigation delayed this correction.


Willa Padgett, Michael Morris
Willa Howard Padgett, a daughter of William and Florence Padgett of New York, and Dr.
Michael Jonah Morris, a son of Dr.
Elaine I. Morris and Ronald A. Morris, also of New York, are to be married today.
Rabbi Stanley Urbas is to perform the ceremony at the Burden Mansion in New York.
Ms.
Padgett, 33, will keep her name.
She is a senior analyst for the City of New York Office of Management and Budget.
She graduated from Oberlin College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in city planning from the University of California at Berkeley.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Quietly Upscale In the East Village
DANAL ++ (212) 982-6930; 90 East 10th Street, near Third Avenue; $; all major credit cards
A charming mismatch of pretty chairs, tables, couches, old lamps and lanterns contributes to a relaxed country atmosphere at this popular little restaurant.
Befitting the setting, the kitchen serves an engaging roster of homey American fare that changes daily.
Appetizers might include chilled creamy tomato and basil soup; a salad of beets and endives seasoned with an herb dressing; a little tart of tomato, mozzarella and goat cheese, and even individual pizzas of smoked chicken, grilled onions and melted mozzarella.
For entrees, there might be herb-crusted salmon on a bed of couscous with a citrus sauce and a fennel salad on the side; grilled breast of chicken topped with a gazpacho sauce and served with steamed rice; roast tenderloin of beef with horseradish cream and fluffy mashed potatoes, and farfalle tossed with shrimp, scallops, olives, garlic and roasted peppers. ($25 and Under: 11/20/92)  HABIB'S PLACE ++  (212) 979-2243; 438 East Ninth Street, near First Avenue; $; no credit cards
For many neighborhood residents, this little North African and Middle Eastern restaurant feels like home, from the informal setting and communal tables to the warm greeting and delightful cooking of Habib Belkadi, the chef, owner and caretaker.
At Habib's Place the food is cheap, plentiful and delicious, and although Mr.
Belkadi generally cooks by whim, one can almost always count on the availability of the terrific falafel sandwich.
Other good starters include the familiar platters of hummus, baba gannouj, grape leaves and tabbouleh.
Recommended main courses include couscous with chicken, lamb, merguez sausages or vegetables, and juicy lamb kebabs served with grilled pita and a small salad. ($25 and Under: 6/16/95)  DOK SUNI'S ++  (212) 477-9506; 119 First Avenue, at Seventh Street; $; no credit cards
Perhaps the first Korean restaurant to go trendy in Manhattan, Dok Suni's offers Korean food with American flair, in a fashionable East Village decor and ambiance.
The cooking, if not quite true to Korean tradition, is light and tasty.
Appetizers include potato pancakes with a soy-and-vinegar dipping sauce, spring rolls, fried dumplings filled with a ground vegetable mixture, and kimchi pancakes, also served with a soy-and-vinegar sauce.
Among the main courses are bulgogi, or grilled slices of marinated beef in a spicy sauce served with lettuce leaves; mildly flavored seafood pancake, made with oysters, squid and shrimp; fried chicken with a jalapeno and garlic sauce with a hint of soy sauce, and broiled pork ribs in a hot sauce of chili pepper and garlic. ($25 and Under: 5/12/95)  LANZA ++  (212) 674-7014; 168 First Avenue, near 10th Street; $; all major credit cards
There are no pretenses at this cheerful and comfortable neighborhood favorite.
The old-fashioned cooking is the real thing too: solid, robust and well priced.
Sweet melon and prosciutto, sauteed mushrooms in garlic and olive oil, roasted peppers and mozzarella, and plump little clams oreganato all can be had as appetizers.
For pastas, there is fusilli in a tomato sauce with onions and prosciutto, and linguine with white clam sauce.
Main courses include grilled shell steak with mushrooms; sauteed chicken breast in a creamy fennel sauce; a fisherman's stew of calamari, clams and shrimp in marinara sauce; baked veal scaloppine with tomato and fresh mozzarella cheese, and a whole trout, pan-roasted with rosemary and brushed with olive oil and garlic. ($25 and Under: 1/22/93)  L'UDO


August 20-26: Straw Men; Squeezing Everything Out Of Nothing in Iowa
What was most absurd about the Republican straw poll in Ames, Iowa, last weekend was that most people voted long before they had heard the speeches from the 10 Presidential candidates.
And so the outcome of the poll seemed, as much as anything, a statement about which candidates were most adept at transporting supporters -- often across state lines -- to the event.
Yet in politics, even non-events can be significant.
With little else happening in the dead of August, this is a time when the political community is searching for any sign of political life (or vulnerability) among White House wannabes.
So it was big news that Senator Bob Dole did not do as well as anticipated, tying for first place with Senator Phil Gramm.
Speaker Newt Gingrich called the Republican race "remarkably open."
Mr.
Dole's rivalssqueezed everything they could from the results to showg that the Senator was slipping.
He is slipping.
But he is still 25 points ahead of his closest rivals.
Meanwhile Mr.
Dole's campaign manager, Scott Reed, made the best of Dole's showing.
"The perception was that he was going to pop off and yell and scream. And he didn't." RICHARD L. BERKE


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 A changing world catches up with Elks Lodge No. 878 in Queens.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 Facelifts and ownership changes await some of the city's highest profile restaurants.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 12 A 20-block block party in Murray Hill; A Caribbean music festival in Brooklyn.
MOVIE CLOCK 13  What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 14 A tour of the East Village; the engaging American fare at Danal; the informality of Habib's Place.
SOAPBOX 15  Speaking up for Pier 84.
And a plea against the subway free-for-all.
And letters.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL '95: The Bowl Alliance; One More Time at Trying To Insure No. 1 vs. No. 2
The bowl alliance, successor to the bowl coalition, takes over this season and promises a more likely matching of the nation's top two teams in Division I-A to determine a national champion.
Such a possibility could come to fruition in the Fiesta Bowl, to be played at Tempe, Ariz., the night of Jan. 2.


Robert Friedsam, Holly Borenstein
Holly Beth Borenstein and Robert Todd Friedsam, associates in the investment banking division of Morgan Stanley &amp; Company in New York, were married last evening in New York.
Cantor David Benedict performed the ceremony in the Pegasus Suite of the Rainbow Room.
The couple received M.B.A.'s from Harvard University.
Mrs.
Friedsam, 26, graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Mr.
Friedsam, 27, is a graduate of the University of Michigan.


Vintage Communications
To the Editor:
Robert L. Dilenschneider identifies an important and disturbing fact of life in "Cultivating the Corporate Grapevine" (Viewpoint, July 2).
The best way, however, to curtail the grapevine's negative impact is through a corporate culture in which candor and integrity are encouraged and rewarded.
Clearly rumor and discontent are inevitable byproducts of institutional life and must be combated.
But in the final analysis, business leaders best serve their reputations and that of their companies by setting an example of plain dealing -- not by engaging and attempting to manipulate a source of misinformation and negativity.
KENNETH D. MAKOVSKY  Manhattan, July 19  The writer is president of Makovsky &amp; Company, a public relations firm based in New York.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today:  Fashions of the Times Magazine Part 2


The Shifting Sands of New York Restaurants
NO "Do Not Resuscitate" sign was posted on the bronze-trimmed doors at 5 East 55th Street when Jean-Jacques Rachou, the owner of La Cote Basque, had to close the restaurant last spring after losing his lease to make way for a Walt Disney store.
Mr.
Rachou found another space, about a block west, at 60 West 55th Street.
"I can't fight Disney," Mr.
Rachou, 59, said last week, "but there is too much history here and I'm not ready to retire."


Lonely, and Rich, at the Top
ANYONE who can hit a curve ball in the Major Leagues is an instant millionaire.
The president of every self-respecting Fortune 500 company makes more in a week than the division manager down the hall earns in a year.
That's life.
Or, rather, that's the way of competitive markets -- the price of encouraging innovation and growth.
Then, again, maybe not.
Two very reputable economists, Robert Frank of Cornell and Philip Cook of Duke, have taken a fresh look at the gospel according to Adam Smith and found it wanting in an era of ballooning gaps in pay between the best and the merely excellent.


August 20-26: Religious Rights; Bavarians Balk at the Banning of the Cross
A decision by Germany's highest court that banned the display of crosses or crucifixes in classrooms has sparked widespread outrage and protest.
The decision was aimed at Bavaria, the most heavily Catholic state in Germany and the only one where the display of crucifixes in classrooms is mandatory.


Fight for Sanders Revs Up a Notch
Things are heating up in the Deion Sanders sweepstakes.
San Francisco is getting ready to play host to Sanders' agent, Eugene Parker, on Wednesday, and he has received commitments from quarterback Steve Young and tight end Brent Jones that they will restructure their contracts to fit Sanders under the 49ers' salary cap.
Dallas, meanwhile, has been shuffling contracts right and left with an eye toward putting together an attractive package for the coveted cornerback.
Last Wednesday, Jerry Jones, the Cowboys' owner and president, restructured the deal of their star receiver Michael Irvin, who signed a five-year, $15 million deal back in February, shifting a total of $85,000.
Quarterback Troy Aikman, who is into the fourth year of an 11-year, $50 million deal, has said he is willing to have his deal restructured in order to sign Sanders.
Jones has not moved on Aikman's deal.


Amy Tricarico, A. J. Conley Jr.
Amy Marie Tricarico, the daughter of Joy Przybyla of Grymes Hill, S.I., and Dr.
Joel F. Tricarico of Dungan Hills, S.I., was married yesterday to Arthur Jerome Conley Jr., a son of Mr.
Conley of Princeton, N.J., and the late Gerarda Conley.
The Rev.
David Simpson performed the ceremony at the New Preston (Conn.) Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Conley, 29, is an administrator in the finance department at the Museum of the City of New York.
She graduated from New York University, from which she also received a master's degree in public administration.
Her father is the director of clinical services at the South Beach Psychiatric Center in South Beach, S.I.
Her stepfather, Dr.
Andrew C. Przybyla, is a cardiologist in Willowbrook, S.I.


Mariner's Ways Are No Longer Just for Men
TODAY, those "who go down to the sea in ships," may well be women.
According to figures from the National Marine Manufacturers Association, one million of the country's boats, about 6 percent of the total, are now owned by women.
And among owners of popular entry-level items like Sea Mobile and Jet Ski, snowmobile-like craft capable of reaching 60 miles per hour that represent the fastest-growing segment of the industry, women make up 10 percent of the buyers, said Henry Brehm, spokesman for the Manhattan-based trade association.


August 20-26; Look Into Those Big Bug Eyes, and Shoot
"Watching him, it seemed as if a fibre, very thin but pure, of the enormous energy of the world had been thrust into his frail and diminutive body. . . . It flashed upon me that he was in difficulties; he could no longer raise himself; his legs struggled vainly. . . . the failure and awkwardness were the approach of death. . . . One's sympathies, of course, were all on the side of life."
-- Virginia Woolf "The Death of a Moth" THERE isn't a bug on earth that has died such a tender death as the moth that "decently and uncomplainingly" expired in front of Virginia Woolf, inspiring the essay "The Death of a Moth." But it's not for want of dead bugs, and it's not because no one dares indulge in anthropomorphism anymore.
While Woolf did not so much plumb the moth's dying thoughts as pile her own existential musings onto the poor moth's dying back, at least her sympathies were "all on the side of life." Now, when it comes to insects, we anthropomorphize to kill.


Seles Turns a Dark Corner And Heads for Center Court
She has survived a vicious stabbing meant to punish her for being a better tennis player than the rest of the pack.
She has been to a place she calls the black hole, and because she failed to figure out what would possess a man she didn't know to plunge a knife in her back and what would possess her peers on the circuit to immediately start jockeying for her No. 1 ranking, for two years Monica Seles wallowed there in the hole.
In uncontrollable tears.
It was foreign and frightening behavior for a champion, and it sent her to the psychiatrist's couch where, for the first few months of therapy, all she did was blubber, too.


Colleen Bashaw, Bruce D. Bohuny
Colleen Noel McIntire Bashaw, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Keith J. Bashaw of Pennington, N.J., was married yesterday to Bruce Douglas Bohuny, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce G. Bohuny of Franklin Lakes, N.J.
The Rev.
Willis Jones officiated at the Miller Presbyterian Chapel in Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Carl McIntire, who is the bride's maternal grandfather and a Presbyterian minister, took part in the ceremony.
The couple, both 26, graduated from St. Lawrence University.


Our Aging Air Traffic System
The Federal Aviation Administration is struggling to overcome equipment breakdowns that threaten to undermine the safety of air travel.
Some of the nation's busiest air centers rely on creaking computers and other ancient technologies that are prone to malfunction, forcing controllers to use less efficient backup systems.
Just last year the agency's associate administrator for air traffic warned that equipment failures were increasing and that "the chances of a catastrophic failure" in one or more traffic control centers "should be considered likely."
The dimensions of the problem were described in an article last Sunday by The Times's Matthew Wald.
He reported that some air traffic control equipment, notably the I.B.M. 9020e computers that deliver data and images to air controllers' screens at five key centers, date back a quarter century or more to the dark ages of the electronic revolution.
They are clunky vacuum-tube machines with tangled webs of wires that are extremely fragile.
Even the main data processing computers at major centers have only a fraction of the memory power of modern desktop computers.


R. G. Abramowitz, Joshua P. Goldin
Rachel Glass Abramowitz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton I. Abramowitz of Washington, was married last evening to Joshua P. Goldin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leon Goldin of New York and Deer Isle, Me.
Judge David Tatel of the District of Columbia Circuit Court of Appeals, who is a cousin of the bride, officiated at the home of the bridegroom's parents in Deer Isle.
The bride is a senior writer at Premiere magazine in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father, a former Foreign Service officer who attained the rank of career ambassador, is the president of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in Washington.
Her mother, Sheppie Abramowitz, is a vice president in Washington of the International Rescue Committee.


Jerusalem Will Mark 3,000th Anniversary
Celebrations marking the 3,000th anniversary of Jerusalem's designation as capital of King David's kingdom will begin Sept. 4 with performances, exhibitions, conferences and galas scheduled through January 1997.
Following an official opening ceremony at the Knesset, Israel's Parliament, Franco Zeffirelli will direct a spectacle of sight and sound -- music, fireworks and laser lighting.
The Valley of the King, on the site of the City of David outside the Old City's walls, will be officially opened as Jerusalem's major archeological garden.
Over the coming months, a variety of musical and theatrical presentations will be performed, including choirs of gospel singers, several new plays, a production of highlights from popular classical ballets and modern dance, and "David's Violin," a homage to King David from Itzhak Perlman, Pinchas Zukerman and other violinists set for December 1996.


Q and A
Changing Money in France
Q.
When traveling in France I find it difficult to convert dollars to francs in large amounts, for example, $5,000.
Do you have any suggestions? -- T. Eaton, Mission Viejo, Calif.


Calm and Collected While the A.C. Screams
ONE more week before the movers and shakers chopper back to town, but fall is already beginning to take shape.
The bagel man's attitude is driving people back to Westchester, and I'm hoping the National Association for Female Executives does the right thing.
You may call these quality-of-life issues, but I say if it can make you crazy, it is a quality-of-health issue.
Near my bedroom window, the giant twin air-conditioning units at the rear of the Comstock Building seem to have found a new voice.
Usually, they sound like nuts and bolts rattling over a waterfall, but now they sound like a lonesome freight train on rickety tracks.
At night, there is also an intermittent ringing noise; I hope something is breaking.


Pathmark Ruckus Puts Muralists On the Move
When 60 homeless children living in city shelters and welfare hotels created Dream Street Park out of a rat-infested lot on 124th Street and Lexington Avenue in 1989, they painted a large mural depicting their view of a perfect city.
The mural included fantasy images of children riding in limousines, Nike world headquarters and characters from "The Wizard of Oz."
It did not include a 53,000-square-foot Pathmark superstore.


A Seafood Stop on the Way to the Cape
NOAH'S Restaurant in Stonington is no secret to those who make a regular summer run along Interstate 95 to Cape Cod, as Stonington is a sensible place to make a mid-trip meal stop.
Noah's has been a local hangout for many years.
In recent times, though, it has acquired a fresher edge, making it an even better choice than in years past and better value than some of its fancier neighbors.
Seafood, usually premium-priced elsewhere, is a fairly priced staple.


N.F.L. TRAINING CAMP REPORT
49ers Top Seahawks
Steve Young made only a cameo appearance, leading two scoring drives in less than a quarter of work, as the San Francisco 49ers beat the Seattle Seahawks, 17-7, last night at Candlestick Park in the exhibition finale for both teams.


A Surviving Star Essays a Character in Crisis
LOOK at her, Phyllis Newman, hitting the switchboard again.
Only 39 years ago, she worked for Susanswerphone and her main worry -- the benevolent Ella's main worry, that is -- was waking up a hung-over client (Plaza-O-double 4-double 3) who had writer's block.
He didn't talk much.
Disguised as an old lady, Ella sneaked into his apartment with coffee and choice of danish: cheese or prune.
Now, Ms.
Newman is with Contact, a crisis hot line, working the graveyard shift, with another writer on the other end.
Only this time it's Amanda, a poet who is raving on about loneliness, abandonment, suicide and multiple orgasms -- and who has no block whatever in the writing or talking department, gushing forth with her poetry while Bea tells Amanda a thing or two about loneliness. ("Loneliness is my oxygen. I breathe loneliness.") All the while, Bea is chewing gum and doing needlepoint.


T-Shirt, Anyone?
WHAT: The official United States Open T-shirt, $19.99 in adult sizes; $18.99 in children's sizes.
IT'S NEW.
IT'S NOW: The design -- a multicolor logo with a hint of the Manhattan skyline on a white cotton background -- is new this year and will not be back next year.
Deciding to have a different logo every year was no small thing for a tournament where V.I.P.'s still wear straw boaters.
"What we used to do is have basically the same logo every year, just change the year number on it," said Bruce Levy, an official of the United States Tennis Association, the sponsor of the Open, which starts tomorrow in Flushing Meadows, Queens.


August 20-26; E-Mail
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review@nytimes.com


THIS DIVA IS DIFFIDENT
I could accuse Wayne Koestenbaum of being star struck ("This Diva Is Diffident," July 23).
I could accuse him of being a sycophant.
I could accuse him of being a musical romantic . . . were it not for the fact that I couldn't agree more with him: Dawn Upshaw is a gift.
L.
GALE JOHNSON Philadelphia


SHOPPING: Clued-In
Faced with the excruciating task of matching tiny T-shirt with micro-mini, the homeroom goddesses in the movie "Clueless" rely on Polaroids, computer simulations and open-ended allowances.
Average high-school girls, if there is such an animal, are also taking back-to-school shopping seriously this year.
So says John Konarshi, vice president of the International Council of Shopping Centers.
"All we used to hear was denim, denim, denim. But this year, it's sweater sets, satin blouses and clothes made out of men's suit fabric." Nonmovie teen-agers may have trouble actually leaving the house dressed like alien cocktail waitresses, but demand is soaring for urban-assault shoes and anything plastic.
And the No. 1 essential-essential is the backpack.
Parents better hope it's filled with cash.


CONFERENCE ROUNDUP
Atlantic Coast
CONTENDERS Florida State will win its fourth straight A.C.C. championship.
Virginia is the best bet to hand the Seminoles their first conference loss -- but don't bet on it.
LONG SHOT Duke went from 3-8 to 8-4 in Coach Fred Goldsmith's first season, and 14 starters return.
KEY OFFENSIVE PLAYERS Florida State's yards will come from QB Danny Kanell and RB Warrick Dunn.
Other ace passers are Duke's Spence Fischer, Virginia's Mike Groh and N.C.
State's Terry Harvey.
KEY DEFENSIVE PLAYERS Clemson DE Marvin Cross, Virginia LB Jamie Sharper and Duke S Ray Farmer.
PIVOTAL GAMES Florida State at Virginia, Nov. 2, and at North Carolina, Nov. 11.
KEY QUESTION How will Maryland QB Scott Milanovich fare after missing first four games because of his suspension for gambling?
Big East
CONTENDERS Miami one more time, with Boston College, Virginia Tech and West Virginia gaining.
LONG SHOT Rutgers, if an immature defense can match a flashy offense.
KEY OFFENSIVE PLAYERS Boston College's QB Mark Hartsell and T Pete Kendall; Rutgers's QB Ray Lucas, TE Marco Battaglia and RB Terrell Willis; Pitt RB Billy West, Syracuse WR Marvin Harrison and Miami C K. C. Jones.
KEY DEFENSIVE PLAYERS Miami's Kenard Lang, DE; Ray Lewis, LB; Carlos Jones, DB, plus Tom Tumulty, Pitt LB; Tim Morabito, Boston College DT; Torrian Gray, Virginia Tech S.
PIVOTAL GAMES Miami at Virginia Tech, Sept. 23.
Also Miami at Florida State, Oct. 7.
Winner might go to No. 1 in polls.
KEY QUESTION Will expected N.C.A.A. sanctions bar Miami from a bowl game? Big Eight
CONTENDER Nebraska, which finally won its national championship, has no apparent conference challenger as Colorado pauses to reload.
LONG SHOT Oklahoma. The new coach, Howard Schnellenberger, needs a quarterback.
KEY OFFENSIVE PLAYERS Tommie Frazier, Nebraska QB, is Heisman candidate.
Other aces are Koy Detmer, Colorao QB; Lawrence Phillips, Nebraska RB; Steve Alexander, Oklahoma TE; Kevin Lockett, Kansas State WR.
KEY DEFENSIVE PLAYERS Greg Jones and Matt Russell, Colorado LB's; Oklahoma's Cedric Jones, E, and Darrius Johnson, CB.
PIVOTAL GAMES Colorado at Oklahoma Sept. 30, and Nebraska at Colorado Oct. 28.
Second game has decided Big Eight title since 1989.
KEY QUESTION Will four new coaches shake up the status quo before Big Eight becomes Big 12 in 1996?
Big Ten
CONTENDERS Penn State, with Michigan and Ohio State closest pursuers.
LONG SHOT Illinois, especially if Michigan can be beaten in opener.
Illinois doesn't play Penn State.
KEY OFFENSIVE PLAYERS Penn State's Bobby Engram, WR, and Wally Richardson, QB; Michigan's Amani Toomer, WR, and Tim Biakabutuka, RB; Mike Alstott, Purdue FB.
KEY DEFENSIVE PLAYERS Simeon Rice and Kevin Hardy, Illinois LB's; Mike Vrabel, Ohio State E; Brian Miller, Penn State CB.
PIVOTAL GAME Michigan at Penn State, Nov. 18.
This match has replaced Michigan-Ohio State as key to Rose Bowl.
KEY QUESTION Will Mike Archie, Nittany Lions' tailback, be as good as Ki-Jana Carter?
Many say yes.
Pacific 10 CONTENDERS Southern California.
Trojans are loaded.
U.C.L.A. has 17 returning starters and Arizona has the top QB, Dan White.
LONG SHOT Oregon.
From last season's Rose Bowl team, the Ducks lost Coach Rich Brooks and QB Danny O'Neil but have many others returning.
KEY OFFENSIVE PLAYERS Southern Cal's Keyshawn Johnson, WR, and Shawn Walters, RB; Josh Wilcox, Oregon TE; Johnathan Ogden, U.C.L.A.
T.
KEY DEFENSIVE PLAYERS Tedy Bruschi, Arizona DE; Regan Upshaw, California T; Donnie Edwards, U.C.L.A.
LB; Lawyer Milloy, Washington S.
PIVOTAL GAMES USC at Arizona, Sept. 23, and U.C.L.A. at U.S.C., Nov. 18.
KEY QUESTION Will Stanford rebound after departure of Bill Walsh, who left a dispirited program?
Southeastern
CONTENDERS Florida and Tennessee in East Division, Auburn and Alabama in West.
LONG SHOT L.S.U. has a new coach, Gerry DiNardo, who inherits 17 starters including a good QB, Jamie Howard.
KEY OFFENSIVE PLAYERS Danny Wuerffel, Florida QB; Stephen Davis, Auburn RB; Peyton Manning, Tennessee QB; Eric Moulds, Mississippi State WR; Michale Proctor, Alabama K.
KEY DEFENSIVE PLAYERS Shannon Brown, Alabama T; Ben Hanks, Florida LB; Dwayne Curry, Mississppi State LB.
PIVOTAL GAMES Tennessee at Florida, Sept. 16; Florida at Auburn, Oct.  14, and Alabama at Auburn, Nov. 18.
KEY QUESTION What effect, if any, will N.C.A.A. penalties -- no bowl game and a three-year probation -- have on Alabama's performances?
Southwest
CONTENDERS Texas A&amp;M and Texas. Aggies have a shot at national championship.
LONG SHOT Texas Christian has aces for the skill positions.
KEY OFFENSIVE PLAYERS Texas A&amp;M RB Leeland McElroy may gain 2,000 yards.
In addition, there's Texas Christian's Max Knake, QB, Andre Davis, RB, Brian Collins, TE; Mike Adams, Texas WR, and Ramon Flanigan, Southern Methodist QB.
KEY DEFENSIVE PLAYERS Brandon Mitchell, E, and Ray Mickens, CB, from Texas A&amp;M; Zach Thomas, Texas Tech LB.
PIVOTAL GAME Texas at Texas A&amp;M, Dec. 2.
It is fitting this is the key game that dissolves the 81-year-old conference.
KEY QUESTION Does it really matter? Independents
CONTENDERS The goals are bowl games.
Candidates include Notre Dame as ever, Louisville and East Carolina.
LONG SHOT Southern Mississippi, with an upset of Alabama or Tennesee on the road.
KEY OFFENSIVE PLAYERS Notre Dame's WR Derek Mayes and QB Ron Powlus; East Carolina QB Marcus Crandell; Tulsa's C David Millwee and RB Solomon White; NE Louisiana WR Stepfret Williams.
KEY DEFENSIVE PLAYERS For Notre Dame, NG Paul Grasmanis, LB Bert Berry, LB and S Brian Magee.
East Carolina LB Mark Libiano, Louisville LB Tyrus McCloud
PIVOTAL GAMES Notre Dame at Ohio State, Sept. 30, their first match since 1936.
Army-Navy at Philadelphia, Dec. 2.
KEY QUESTION When, if ever, will Notre Dame join the Big East in football? Ivy League
CONTENDERS Penn stands alone.
Quakers aiming for third straight undefeated season, which would be an Ivy record.
LONG SHOTS Brown and Columbia.
KEY OFFENSIVE PLAYERS Penn's Miles Macik, WR, and Mark DeRosa, QB; Mike Cavanaugh, Columbia QB; Brown's Paul Fichiera and Marquis James, RB's; Chad Levitt, Cornell RB; Chris Hetherington, Yale QB.
KEY DEFENSIVE PLAYERS Columbia's Rory Wilfork, LB, and Eric Keck, T; Princeton's Darrell Oliveira, E, and David Patterson, LB; Nick Morris, Penn CB.
PIVOTAL GAMES Penn at Columbia, Oct. 7; Brown at Penn, Oct. 21.
KEY QUESTION Does Penn have better players than the others, better coaching or what?
Metro Atlantic
CONTENDERS St. John's and Marist. Both were 6-1 in the conference last season.
LONG SHOT Iona.
Gaels slipped to a 3-6 record last year but still have Tom Proudian, a terrific passer.
KEY OFFENSIVE PLAYERS St.
John's Jermaine Creighton, RB, and Andy Levine, QB; Eric Spezio, Iona WR; Jovan Rhodes, Marist RB; John Prizner, Canisius TE.
KEY DEFENSIVE PLAYERS Jeff Saccomanno, T, Marist; Markeem Watson, LB, St.
Peter's; Tom Wonica, LB, Georgetown.
PIVOTAL GAME Marist at St.
John's, Sept. 29.
Red Foxes gave Red Storm only loss in 1994.
KEY QUESTION Will St.
John's Creighton, now a sophomore, turn out to be better than alumnus Anthony Russo, the N.C.A.A.'s No. 3 career ground gainer?
Patriot League
CONTENDERS Lafayette, the defending champion, and Lehigh.
LONG SHOT Bucknell with a new coach, Tom Gadd, and an old star, Rich Lemon.
KEY OFFENSIVE PLAYERS Lehigh's Bob Aylsworth, QB, and Brian Klingerman, WR; Lafayette's Shawn McHale, QB, and Tramont Evans, WR; J. R. Walz, Holy Cross RB.
KEY DEFENSIVE PLAYERS Ed Burman, Bucknell, E; Carl Barbera, Fordham, T; Matt Cope, Lafayette S; Marcus Cameron, Colgate CB.
PIVOTAL GAME Lafayette at Lehigh, Nov. 18.
KEY QUESTION The league champion is now allowed to participate in the Division I-AA playoffs.
But will it ever be selected?
Yankee
CONTENDERS James Madison has a new coach, Alex Wood, but familiar players.
New Hampshire, the defending champion, must replace its offense.
Delaware, in Coach Tubby Raymond's 30th season, will contend as usual.
LONG SHOT UMass, if runner Rene Ingoglia gets enough support.
KEY OFFENSIVE PLAYERS Boston U.'s Keith Foley, QB, and Julien Dale, RB; James Madison QB Mike Cawley.
KEY DEFENSIVE PLAYERS Tyrone Frazier, Villanova LB; Darren Sharper, William &amp; Mary S; Mike Foley, New Hampshire E; Paul Williams, Delaware CB.
PIVOTAL GAME James Madison at New Hampshire, Oct. 14.
KEY QUESTION How about a contest to pick a new name for this unwieldy 12-team, two-division, no-playoff conference?


The Green Republican
THE MAKING OF A CONSERVATIVE ENVIRONMENTALIST  With Reflections on Government, Industry, Scientists, the Media, Education, Economic Growth, the Public, the Great Lakes, Activists, and the Sunsetting  of Toxic Chemicals.
By Gordon K. Durnil. 200 pp.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press. $19.95.


'MOHANDAS'
According to Eric Metaxas's so-called satire " 'Mohandas' " (Endpaper, July 30), Gandhi, in the Disney version, was to have the looks of Sly Stallone and the voice of either Michael Jackson or Mike Tyson.
I guess that's what a life of sacrifice, commitment, suffering, then assassination and global recognition as the Mahatma (Great Soul) gets you in today's society.
SHILPA MOHAN Harrington Park, N.J.


POSTINGS: A Face-Lift, Too, for the Roger Williams; Hotel Gets A New Operator
The Roger Williams Hotel on the southeast corner of Madison Avenue and 31st Street in Manhattan is about to get a face-lift from a new operator, Bernard Goldberg, principal in the Gotham Hospitality Group, which has taken a long-term lease on the building.
The 211-room hotel is owned by the Madison Avenue Baptist Church, whose trustees entertained bids on a 49-year lease from 8 operators or investment groups.
The Rev.
Michael B. Easterling, pastor of the church, said that the Gotham Group had proposed the strongest renovation program.
He declined to disclose the financial terms of the lease, but said that Gotham's bid was "highly competitive."


A Day Trip To a Japanese Spa
WHEN Japanese find social or business pressures too much to bear, they gather a few friends or colleagues and head for an onsen, a hot spring resort.
Sometimes they take their children with them, either as a reward for passing a particularly difficult exam or just for fun.
After a leisurely bath and a midday feast at the onsen, they are usually back in town by early evening.
Two spots, both about an hour and a half from downtown Tokyo, are popular resort areas: Kinugawa Onsen to the north, near Nikko, and Hakone Yumoto to the south, near Mount Fuji.
Each has a spa that specializes in guests visiting for the day, though overnight lodgings are also available.
Japan is a cash economy, and these spas, like most others, require payment in cash.
Hana Saryo
The annex of Hana Saryo, built several years ago to lure the day-trip trade from Tokyo, is a gorgeous place.
A black rickshaw and a red umbrella (the kind used in outdoor tea ceremonies) decorate the entrance to a traditional Japanese building.
The interior is finished in lots of sleek, pale wood and tatami mats.
Minimalist flower arrangements nestled into nooks and alcoves help create a striking backdrop for a lavish and leisurely lunch.


Day at the Races, Night at the Altar
Saratoga Race Course prepared to wind down its 127th season this cool weekend with a flurry of racing and social activity: Fourstardave retired after 100 races, Jerry Bailey won four races and broke the track record for jockeys, Unaccounted For stumbled but L'Carriere streaked in the search for honors, and Julie Krone rode in six races before getting to the church on time on her wedding day.
It was a weekend that also will star juvenile horses before it ends.
But before the young ones take their shot at fame, older horses took the stage for today's $200,000 Saratoga Cup at the classic distance of a mile and a quarter en route to challenging Cigar and Thunder Gulch in the Breeders' Cup Classic.
And the stately old race track proved unforgiving once more.


Larger Role of the Duck In Architectural History
Barbara Bixby, the Long Island "duck lady," seems to think it is the innate charm of the Big Duck that causes visitors to seek it out from as far away as Idaho and Germany  [ "About Long Island: A Cherished Roadside Symbol of the Region," July 30 ] .
The Big Duck, however, is an emblem of the most significant architectural debate of the last 30 years.
It first appeared in "God's Own Junkyard," a book-length denunciation of chaotic highway-strip development by the architectural critic and editor Peter Blake.


Small-Cap Success, Against the Grain
AN independent streak can produce superior returns.
Just look at Carlene Murphy Ziegler, who is off to a handsome start with the Artisan Small Cap fund.
Ms.
Ziegler decided to run her own fund after 14 years of side-by-side work with Richard Weiss, an acclaimed manager who remains at the Strong funds.


The Man Who Was Chrysler
To the Editor:
It isn't for me to defend Lee Iacocca.
He was the dominant figure in the American auto industry for 30 years and made his own record.
But considering the review of Doron P. Levin's "Behind the Wheel at Chrysler" (July 23), it's worthwhile to remember that the success of today's Chrysler, the profits that keep the company going, come directly from Lee's actions as chief executive.
It was Lee who took the gamble and ordered the mini-van into production, and who bought Jeep for Chrysler.
Without those, there is no Chrysler.
The Chrysler mini-van, by the way, is probably the world's most distinctive example of automotive excellence in the past decade.


At the Casinos
What's happening on stage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place  Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.
PARK CABARET "Legends in Concert," impersonations of Neil Diamond, Judy Garland, Whitney Houston, Roy Orbison, Tom Jones, Elvis Presley, Tina Turner, Madonna, Elton John and the Blues Brothers.
Sunday through Thursday at 7:30 and 10 P.M.; Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $20; $25 on Saturday.


Tiny Retail Arcade, Hidden Off 34th, Sees Dim Future
Gallery 34 is a narrow, curved pedestrian arcade lined with little shops that resembles the old-quarter bazaar of an ancient Middle Eastern city.
But it lingers as an obscure oddity amid the modern squared-off blocks of midtown Manhattan, running between 33d and 34th Streets east of Seventh Avenue.
The alley was built in 1919 as the Pennsylvania Arcade.
But now, its survival is in doubt, with the property's ownership fragmented, most of the operation in bankruptcy and many of its merchants facing eviction.


Miss Granados, Mr. Sawhney
Margarita Diana Granados, a daughter of Graciela and Francisco Granados of Coral Gables, Fla., was married yesterday to Vikrant Sawhney, a son of Drs.
Rama and Shiv Sawhney of Orange, Conn.
The Rev.
John Vaughan performed the ceremony at St.
Hugh's Roman Catholic Church in Coconut Grove, Fla.
Mrs.
Sawhney, 24, graduated from Georgetown University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Miami.
Until recently she was a computer systems consultant in Miami with Andersen Consulting.
Her father is the vice chairman of the international private banking group at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, in Miami and London.


Sequel Suggested For Holocaust Story
Let's have another book to continue the amazing story "Anger Within: A Healer Who Also Suffers"  [ Encounters, Aug. 6 ] .
It is Mr.
Nir's duty to continue his story of "The Lost Childhood."


Susan Dannenberg, Olivier Randoing
Susan Joy Dannenberg, the daughter of Richard B. Dannenberg of Purchase, N.Y., and Arlene Flemming of Newburgh, N.Y., was married yesterday to Olivier Alfred Randoing, the son of Yvon and Jacqueline Randoing of Gemenos, France.
The Rev.
James R. Covington, a Unitarian minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Randoing is a candidate for a Ph.D. in clinical psychology at the Florida Institute of Technology.
She graduated cum laude from Duke University and received a master's degree in special education from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Her father is a senior partner in Lowey Dannenberg Bemporad &amp; Selinger, a law firm in New York.
Her mother is a social worker in Newburgh.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Barbara Dannenberg and of Howard Flemming.


Brown's Scrambling Gives Giants A Headache
Dave Brown's head is hard in more ways than one.
He is a fierce, fearless competitor who will run at any time.
But he is going to have to learn to restrain his competitive instincts.
Otherwise, scary incidents like the one that happened here are going to cut his career as short as Peter McNeeley's.
Brown, watching the offense struggle behind a cannibalized offensive line, made one scramble too many with about five minutes left in the first half of today's preseason game against the Carolina Panthers.


The Shifting Sands of New York Restaurants
NO "Do Not Resuscitate" sign was posted on the bronze-trimmed doors at 5 East 55th Street when Jean-Jacques Rachou, the owner of La Cote Basque, had to close the restaurant last spring after losing his lease to make way for a Walt Disney store.
Mr.
Rachou found another space, about a block west, at 60 West 55th Street.
"I can't fight Disney," Mr.
Rachou, 59, said last week, "but there is too much history here and I'm not ready to retire."


As Once It Was
KONIN  A Quest.
By Theo Richmond.
Illustrated. 543 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $27.50.


TORTS: Inimicus Curiae
Everyone deserves a day in court, but prison inmates are overdoing it.
They filed some 39,000 lawsuits last year, all but a handful summarily dismissed.
This sorry state of jailhouse jurisprudence is driving officials to costly distraction, and the National Association of Attorneys General has provided examples of why.
Among them:
Inmate smoker complains about secondhand smoke in the prison unit. Kansas.


Tea and Scones And What Went With the Lace
Outside the headquarters of the Queens Historical Society last weekend, Flushing was in full cacophonous effect.
Sidewalks teemed with shoppers, ambulances wailed, and children shrieked in delight at a nearby playground.
But in the society's backyard, the scene harked back to the gentility and manners of English manors.
For two hours on the afternoon of Aug. 19, the society's headquarters were transformed for the group's first annual Victorian Tea Party.
Adorned with cameos and bonnets and dressed in lace and pressed suits, 50 people gathered beneath an ancient weeping beech tree at the Kingsland Homestead, which houses the historical society, to munch on scones with marmalade and clotted cream, cucumber sandwiches, seed cakes and lemon tarts the size of quarters.
Cutwork lace tablecloths and napkins and gilt-edged tea sets graced the tables.


Westport Takes to an Olympian
LIKE many other young people in Westport, Tomas Murray spent much of this summer enjoying the good life: barbecues, beachgoing, swimming, movies, visiting local night spots, shooting baskets at Staples High School, watching television and just plain hanging out.
Never in his wildest dreams had Mr.
Murray thought that such a life style lay ahead of him, albeit briefly, when he left his hometown in Panama, Bocas del Toro, in June to participate in the Special Olympics World Games in New Haven in July.


The Other Gorbachev
THIS Gorbachev got rid of the birthmark.
"Want to see?" he asks.


Christina Carter, Robert G. Mann
Christina Ann Carter, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marshall N. Carter of Cambridge, Mass., was married yesterday to Robert Gordon Mann, a son of Marylen Mann of St.
Louis and the late Norman Mann.
The Rev.
Robert R. Walsh performed the Unitarian-Universalist ceremony at the First Parish Church in Duxbury, Mass.
Mrs.
Mann, 29, is studying landscape design at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the State Street Bank and Trust Company in Boston.
Her mother, Missy Carter, is the president of Work/Life Decisions, a career consulting business in Cambridge.


When Half the Diners Jockey for Power Tables
IT'S not for me," the diner insisted. "You can sit me in the kitchen and I'll be happy.
But if I'm going to have a nice evening with my wife tonight I must have table No. 17."
Giorgio Meriggi, Pasquale Cercera and Tony D'Arcangelo, who own Stresa in Manhasset and Navona in Great Neck, listened patiently.
They were sympathetic, but explained that the table being requested had been reserved two weeks earlier by another regular customer.


Lisette C. Kelly, Kirk W. Dailey
Lisette Catherine Kelly, a daughter of Gerald and Noreen Kelly of Lake Placid, N.Y., was married yesterday to Kirk William Dailey, a son of Karl and Mary Dailey of Brighton, Mich.
The Rev.
Thomas Shanley, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Agnes Church in Lake Placid.


Fast-Food Rebel Is Standing Fast On Hostile Turf
Jesus Mendez still flips burgers in the rear kitchen, as he has for the last five years, though now his wrists are more often at rest than in motion.
His wife, Minerva, still works the cash register, but now less money changes hands.
They are the lonely workers of Burger Boys of Brooklyn -- the last tenant on the second floor of the Fulton Market Building, a dogged underdog in a fast-food fight being played out in Federal District Court.
Jay Reidel and Arthur Dash, the scrappy Brooklyn natives who own Burger Boys, say they have no plans to leave the now funereal food court, which once bustled with 22 purveyors of everything from ice cream to egg rolls.
But the Seaport Marketplace Inc., which manages the building, has successfully rid the building of every other small retail shop and fast-food kiosk in a bid to transform the 56,000-square-foot building into the home of a superstore.
Or two.


ON THE TOWNS
An opinionated guide to cultural and recreational goings-on around the state this week.
To submit items for consideration, write to On the Towns, Sunday New Jersey Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or send a fax to (212) 556-7219.
MUSIC ALBERT MUSIC HALL The Pinelands Cultural Society presents "Sounds of the Jersey Pines," a series of Saturday night concerts, through the end of the year.
The program features live presentations of bluegrass, country and Pinelands music.
Show time, 8 P.M.
Admission: $4; $1 for children under 12. 139 Wells Mill Road (Route 532), Waretown. (609) 971-1593.
BRIDGETON'S RIVERFRONT Joe Dales Big Band wraps up the series of free Sunday concerts tonight at 8.
Routes 49 and 77 in Bridgeton. (609) 451-9208.
DUKE ISLAND PARK, BRIDGEWATER The Somerset County Park Commission concludes its free summer concert series with Jan Lewan and his orchestra as they present the sounds of polka.
Tonight at 7. (908) 722-1200, extension 221.
FAIR LAWN SUMMER MUSIC FESTIVAL The Sunday evening concerts continue.
"Musical Hits and Sounds of the Big-Band Era," conducted by Dick Lowenthall.
Tonight at 8.
Next week, community dancing to the music of Alex Watkins wraps up the series on Sept. 3.
Free, but take your own chairs.
Memorial Park and Berdan Avenue, Fair Lawn. (201) 796-6746.
GARDEN STATE ARTS CENTER The Beach Boys with Christopher Cross.
Tonight at 8.
Tickets: $20-$35.
Tony Bennett with the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra.
Tuesday at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $22.50-$47.50.
George Benson with Roberta Flack.
Wednesday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $18-$35.
Alan Jackson with Lee Roy Parnell.
Thursday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $22.50-$40.
Exit 116 on the Garden State Parkway, Holmdel. (908) 442-9200.
GREAT AUDITORIUM, OCEAN GROVE "Golden Oldies and Doo-Wop Show," with Emil Stucchio and the Classics, Eugene Pitt and the Jive Five, Fred Parris and the Five Satins, and Speedo and the Cadillacs.
Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15-$20.
Next week, "Bluegrass Bonanza" with the Reno Brothers, the Nashville Bluegrass Band and Jimmy Martin and the Sunny Mountain Boys.
Tickets: $12.
Pilgrim Pathway, Ocean Grove. (908) 775-0035.
SUMMERFEST '95 CONCERTS The Morris County Park Commission concludes its free concert series with Bill Turner and Blue Smoke.
Today at 3 P.M.
Frelinghuysen Arboretum, 53 East Hanover Avenue, Morris Township. (201) 326-7600.
TURNING POINT Richard Shindell.
Tonight at 7:30.
Tickets: $10.
Open Mike with Rick Ilowite.
Wednesday at 7 P.M.
Admission: $2.
Pete and Maura Kennedy and the Nudes.
Thursday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Kris Kristofferson.
Friday at 7:30 and 10 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Bill Perry Blues Band.
Saturday at 10 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Popa Chubby.
Next Sunday at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $15. 468 Piermont Avenue, Piermont, N.Y. (914) 359-1089.
VILLAGERS THEATER The Garden State Opry, a monthly country music revue, presents the Fox Hill Bluegrass Band; Carol Selick and Robin Foss, country singers; Ed Krizni and Billy Phillips, singers and guitarists; Liz Klosowki, a country folk singer, and the Men's Quartet of the Somerset Community Baptist Church.
Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $7.50, or $5 for children. 475 DeMott Lane, Somerset. (908) 274-2748.
MUSEUMS AND GALLERIES ARTISTS SHOWCASE "Angels and Guardians in Metal: Garden Sculpture and Other Decorative Works," by R. C. Thomas and Edward Casagrande.
"Flowers of Summer: Watercolors and Oils," by Ida Butterfield, Cathy Lang and Barbara Przytuska.
Today, 11:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. 10 Budd Avenue, Chester. (908) 879-9552.
ATRIUM GALLERY "Landscape," an exhibition of photographs by Greg Leshe and Nancy Ori.
Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Through Aug. 31.
Chubb Group of Insurance Companies, 15 Mountain View Road, Warren. (908) 903-2000.
BERGEN MUSEUM OF ART AND SCIENCE "The Spinning Face of Gravity: Tops by Joe Van Putton" consists of a series of giant tops.
Through Sept. 10.
"Kenneth Licht: 10 Years of Art Boxes" displays 85 art boxes filled with collages and collections of objects.
Through the end of summer.
Tuesday through Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Suggested admission: adults, $2.50; children, $1. 327 East Ridgewood Avenue, Paramus. (201) 265-1248.
EVERHART GALLERY "Summer Group Show," with architectural renderings by Lauren V. Walling and photographs by Bill Vandever.
Through Aug. 30.
Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. 117 South Maple Avenue, Basking Ridge. (908) 221-9007.
GALLERY AT SCHERING-PLOUGH "Celebration of Light and Shadow" displays more than 35 oils, pastels and sculptures by Marilyn Ostrich-Nelson.
Through Sept. 29.
Monday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. 1 Giralda Farms, Madison. (201) 822-7000.
GROUNDS FOR SCULPTURE "Spring-Summer 1995 Exhibition," featuring recent works by James Dinerstein, Jesse Moore and Yuyu Yang.
Through Sept. 30.
Tuesday through Thursday, by appointment, and Friday through Sunday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. 18 Fairgrounds Road, Hamilton. (609) 586-0616.
HISTORICAL SOCIETY OF ROCKLAND COUNTY Through objects, stories and photographs, "Hidden Children: The Youngest Survivors of the Holocaust" chronicles the histories of 17 children who escaped Nazi persecution in sanctuaries from convents and farms to underground bunkers.
Through Nov. 12.
Tuesday through Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Suggested donation: $3. 20 Zukor Road, New City, N.Y. (914) 634-9629.
HUNTERDON ART CENTER "NYC Underground," 17 oil canvas paintings of New York City's subway system and tunnels by Alexandra Dell'amore.
Today, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
"The Fine Art of Illustration," an exhibition of the original art of the greatest illustrators past and present, from Norman Rockwell and Charles Dana Gibson to Bernie Fuchs, Milton Glaser and Joseph Bowler Jr., begins next Sunday with a reception from 3 to 5 P.M. 7 Lower Center Street, Clinton. (908) 735-8415.
JERSEY CITY MUSEUM "Albizu Lives," a visual commemoration.
Through Sept. 16.
Tuesday, Thursday, Friday, 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. and Wednesday, 10:30 A.M. to 8 P.M. 472 Jersey Avenue, Jersey City. (201) 547-4514.
JOHNSON ATELIER EXTENSION GALLERY Sculpture by Autin Wright.
Though Aug. 31.
Monday through Thursday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. 60 Ward Avenue Extension, Mercerville.
Off Route 33 West. (609) 890-7777.
LENA DI GANGI GALLERY Bill Block displays his reverse glass piantings.
Starts Friday.
Through Sept. 30.
Tuesday through Friday, 1 to 6 P.M., and Saturday, 1 to 4 P.M.
Reception on Sunday, Sept. 10, from 1 to 5 P.M. 744 McBride Avenue, West Paterson. (201) 345-1210.
LONG BEACH ISLAND FOUNDATION OF ARTS AND SCIENCE "Foundation Member, Student and Faculty Show. " Through Sept. 4.
Monday through Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 4 P.M.
Free. 120 Long Beach Boulevard, Loveladies. (609) 494-3169.
LOUIS ARMSTRONG EXHIBITION Paintings, collages, drawings and collages are used to illuminate the life and music of Louis Armstrong.
The exhibition, subtitled "A Cultural Legacy," is running at two Camden locations through Oct. 7.
The Walt Whitman Cultural Arts Center, 2d and Cooper Streets, Monday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. (609-964-8300), and the Stedman Art Gallery, on the campus of Rutgers University, Monday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. (609-225-6245).
McFAUL ENVIRONMENT CENTER "Bypassed Places," an exhibition of New Jersey landscapes.
Through Saturday.
Monday through Friday, 8:30 A.M. to 4:45 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 1 to 4:45 P.M.
Crescent Avenue, Wycoff. (201) 891-5571.
MERRILL LYNCH GALLERY "Shadows and Memories," photographs by Nancy Ori.
Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. 800 Scudders Mill Road, Plainsboro. (609) 282-3401.
MONMOUTH COUNTY HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION MUSEUM AND LIBRARY "Optical Delights: Stereographic Views of Monmouth County" presents images of Victorian life.
Through February 1996.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M., and Sunday, 1 to 4 P.M.
Admission: $2 for adults, $1 for children and $1.50 for the elderly. 70 Court Street, Freehold. (908) 462-1466.
MONTCLAIR ART MUSEUM "Still Life Works From the Collection" offers 13 paintings by American artists ranging in style from 19th-century realism to 20th-century modernism.
Through September.
"Elizabeth Berdann," a self-titled installation featuring portraits of elderly women in a nursing home.
Through Oct. 1.
"Affinities and Influences: Native American Art and American Modernism," through Oct. 1.
Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: $4, or $3 for the elderly and students with ID. 3 South Mountain Avenue, Montclair. (201) 746-5555.
MORRIS COUNTY HISTORICAL SOCIETY "A Bouquet of Brides" features more than a dozen wedding gowns dating to 1750 and reflecting a variety of styles and histories.
Through October.
Admission: $3.
Thursday, 11 A.M. to 3 P.M., and Sunday, 1:30 to 4 P.M. 68 Morris Avenue, Morristown. (201) 267-3465.
MORRIS MUSEUM The New Jersey Fine Arts Annual features 26 visual artists and crafts people throughout the state and their works in sculpture, photography, textiles, painting and mixed media.
Through September.
"Albert Green: The Celebration of a Master Potter," a posthumous retrospective.
Through Sept. 17.
Monday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Admission: $4; $2 for students and the elderly. 6 Normandy Heights Road, Morristown. (201) 538-0454.
NABISCO GALLERY "Crossing Over," an exhibition of 80 mixed-media works by 20 contemporary Russian artists.
Through Sept. 7.
Daily, noon to 4 P.M.
River Road and DeForest Avenue, East Hanover. (201) 503-3238.
NEWARK MUSEUM "New Jersey Arts Annual: Celebrating Diversity in Crafts" takes a look at traditional and modern works in the state.
Through Oct. 15.
"American Art Pottery: An Uneasy Evolution, 1880-1930." Through Oct. 22.
"Astronauts: The Star Travelers" features photographs of the Apollo XI flight.
Through Dec. 31.
Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.
NEW JERSEY HISTORICAL SOCIETY "Moving Through Memory: Caribbean Folk Arts in New Jersey." Through April 1996.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. 230 Broadway, Newark. (201) 483-3939.
NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM "Baseball in New Jersey: The Game of History." Through today.
Tuesday through Saturday, 9 A.M. to 4:45 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 205 West State Street, Trenton. (609) 292-6308.
NOYES MUSEUM "Drawing Outside the Lines: Works on Paper by Outsider Artists" presents drawings in pencil, crayon and other media, with work by Eddie Arning, Minnie Evans, Bill Traylor and Martin Ramirez.
Through Sept. 17.
Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Admission: $3; the elderly, $1.50; students and children under 18, 50 cents; free on Fridays.
Lily Lake Road, Oceanville. (609) 652-8848.
PATERSON MUSEUM "Now and Then: Sculptures and Paintings by Joe Ruffilo." Starts Friday.
Through Sept. 30.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 12:30 to 4:30 P.M. 2 Market Street, Paterson.
Reception next Sunday from 2 to 5 P.M. (201) 881-3874.
PATERSON PUBLIC LIBRARY "Imagenes Contra el SIDA/Images Against AIDS," a series of silk-screen prints created by 36 Latino artists to heighten awareness of the disease.
Through Sept. 30.
Monday through Thursday, 9 A.M. to 8 P.M., and Friday and Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. 250 Broadway, Paterson. (201) 948-5200.
PETERS VALLEY CRAFT CENTER "Artists in Residence," featuring works in wood, fiber, ceramics, fine metals, blacksmithing metals and photography.
Through Dec. 31.
Sunday through Thursday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Friday and Saturday, 10 A.M. to 9 P.M. 19 Kuhn Road, Route 615, Layton. (201) 948-5200.
PIERMONT FINE ARTS GALLERY "Around the World in 18 Days" presents paintings, sculpture, ceramics, prints, drawings and collage inspired by places near and far.
Through Sept. 10.
Dorothy Dallas discusses "Water Views: England." Today at 5 P.M.
Rosemary Aiello, ceramist, will present a talk and slide presentation on how her travels to New Mexico -- and the history of Indian pottery from A.D. 400 to the present -- have influenced her work.
Next Sunday at 5 P.M. 218 Ash Street, Piermont, N.Y. (914) 398-1907.
POLO GALLERY "Bound Nature-Tamed Land: Studies in Landscapes and Still Life," the works of Opal Jean Antimori.
Through Sept. 16.
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Saturday, 1 to 6 P.M., and Friday, 1 to 7 P.M. 276 River Road, Edgewater. (201) 945-8200.
PRINTMAKING COUNCIL OF NEW JERSEY "Dimension Dementia: Prints Pushed Into Three Dimensions." Through Oct. 7.
"Award Show: Best-in-Show Winners From the 21st Juried Members Exhibit." Through Friday.
Wednesday through Friday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M., and Saturday 1 to 4 P.M. 440 River Road, North Branch. (908) 725-2110.
RINGWOOD MANOR STATE PARK "First Annual Expo" features three of the best works of active members of the Ringwood Manor Association of the Arts.
Through Sept. 10.
Wednesday, Saturday and Sunday, 1 to 4:30 P.M.
Sloatsburg Road, Ringwood. (201) 962-7031.
RIVERRUN GALLERY "Myth in Modern Times," an exhibition of contemporary European and American art inspired by mythology.
Today, noon to 5 P.M., and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. 287 South Main Street, Lambertville. (609) 397-3349.
STEAMROLLER GALLERY "The Black Eddy," a collaborative occurence led by Nell Bernstein.
Through Sept. 17.
Friday and Saturday, noon to 9 P.M. and Sunday, noon to 6 P.M. 52 Bridge Street, Frenchtown. (908) 996-7279.
STONY BROOK GALLERY "Views of Nature," a group show by artists from throughout New Jersey.
Wednesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Buttinger Center, 31 Titus Mill Road, Hopewell Township. (609) 737-7592.
TRENTON ARTISTS WORKSHOP ASSOCIATION "Trenton Takes: 24 Hours in the City," a photo documentary featuring the works of 32 regional photographers.
Through Oct. 8.
Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 3 P.M., and Sunday, 2 to 4 P.M.
Reception on Sept. 9 from 6 to 8 P.M. (609) 989-3632.
UNTITLED (#130) LTD Ginger Schmidt displays her furniture created primarily around animal themes.
Through Sept. 17.
Reception on Friday from 6 to 8 P.M.
Thursday and Friday, 5:30 to 8:30 P.M.; Saturday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 130 Ryerson Avenue, Wayne. (201) 633-6767.
WATCHUNG ARTS CENTER "Red-Hot-Blue," paintings and photographs from the members of the New Art Group.
Through Thursday.
"Annual Member Show" begins on Sept. 5 and runs through Sept. 30.
Reception on Sept. 9 from 7 to 10 P.M.
Monday through Saturday, 1 to 4 P.M. 18 Stirling Road, Watchung. (908) 753-0190.
THEATER EAST LYNNE COMPANY "Tortesa, the Usurer." Wednesday through Saturday at 8:30 P.M.
Through Sept. 9.
Tickets: $14, or $12 for the elderly.
Lyle Hall of the First United Methodist Church, Cape May. (609) 884-6900.
NEW JERSEY SHAKESPEARE FESTIVAL "Artists and Admirers," by Alexander Ostrovsky; directed by Bonnie J. Monte.
Through Sept. 10.
Tuesday, Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M., Wednesday and Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 2 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $16-$30.
Bowne Theater at Drew University, 36 Madison Avenue, Madison. (201) 408-5600.
ROOSEVELT PARK AMPHITHEATER The Middlesex County Department of Parks and Recreation presents Plays-in-the-Park 1995.
"The Odd Couple." Monday through Thursday at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $3.
The summer season will conclude with "Dance-in-the-Park 4." Sept. 7-9 at 8 P.M.
One block south of the Menlo Park Shopping Mall, off Route 1, Edison. (908) 548-2884.
SOMERSET VALLEY PLAYHOUSE "Nunsense," the musical comedy by Dan Googin, as presented by the Somerset Valley Players.
Directed by Linda Giordano.
Tonight at 7, Friday and Saturday at 8:30 P.M., next Sunday at 7 P.M. and Sept. 8-10 and 15-17.
Tickets: $15. (908) 369-7469.
FOR CHILDREN BELLEVILLE PUBLIC LIBRARY Corky the Clown presents a performance Monday at 7:30 P.M.
Free. 221 Washington Avenue, Belleville. (201) 450-3434.
LIBERTY SCIENCE CENTER Visitors have their choice of two films that will take them on a journey into the far reaches of outer space or to the murky depths of the sea.
"Destiny in Space," narrated by Leonard Nimoy, gives viewers a look outside the Earth with footage of nine space shuttle missions.
Daily, noon and 2 P.M.
"The Living Sea," narrated by Meryl Streep, with original music by Sting, sends you into an underwater world with exotic sea creatures.
Daily, 10 and 11 A.M. and 1, 3 and 4 P.M.
Admission: $7 for adults; $6 for students and the elderly; $5 for children under 12. 251 Phillip Street, Jersey City. (201) 451-0006, extension 295.
MEADOW THEATER The Meadow Kids' Summer Clubhouse offers a new show every week with audience participation, songs, games, dancing, improvisations and short plays.
Saturday at 11 A.M.
Tickets: $5.
Galleria Atrium, Bridge Avenue and West Front, Red Bank. (908) 758-0099.
WAYNE PUBLIC LIBRARY "Bead-a-Pin Decoration." Children 7 and older will learn how to make a wearable and colorful bead-a-pin decoration.
Wednesday, 10 to 10:30 A.M.
All materials, save for a small bottle of white glue, will be supplied by the library.
Pre-registration required.
Free. 12 Nellis Drive, Wayne. (201) 694-4272.
ETC.
ACORN HALL The Morris County Historical Society presents an antique car rally and exhibition.
Visitors will have a chance to speak with the owners.
The rally is free, but admission to the hall is $3.
Today, 1:30 to 4 P.M. 68 Morris Avenue, Morristown. (201) 267-3465.
BERGENFIELD LIBRARY AND INFORMATION CENTER The Friends of Bergenfield Library presents a Classic Books on Film series.
The film adaptation of "Pride and Prejudice," by Jane Austen, will be discussed.
Tuesday at 10:30 A.M.
Free. 50 West Clinton Avenue, Bergenfield. (201) 387-4040.
COOPER MILL Take a trip back to the 19th century and the drudgery that was ironing: pushing a hot iron over wrinkles until it was too cool to continue and then replacing it with another hot iron from the cookstove.
Inspect antique irons and other common household objects.
Today, 1 to 4 P.M.
Admission is by donation.
County Route 513, Chester Township. (908) 879-5463.
FLEA MARKET The Chester Lions Club Flea Market offers craft items, linens, books, children's clothing, housewares, plants and produce, makeup, jewelry, scarves, handbags and other accessories.
Sundays, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M., through Dec. 19.
Free.
West Blackwell Street, Morris and Sussex Streets in downtown Dover. (201) 442-1494.
GARDEN STATE EXHIBIT CENTER "Antiques Weekend in Somerset" offers a show and sale for the soon-to-be or newly married: from wedding gowns, engagement rings and other jewelry to heirloom china, silver and furniture.
Other features include a restoration service and a seminar, "Antique Furniture: How to Buy It Right." Today, 10 to 6 P.M.
Admission: $6.
Exit 6 off Route 287, Somerset. (201) 384-0010.
LIBERTY SCIENCE CENTER Can you name the five basic machines upon which all modern machinery is based?
If the answer is no, the "Simple Machines" exhibition on the invention floor will teach you what they are and how they are used in everyday life.
Today, 11:30 A.M. to 1 P.M., and 2 to 4 P.M.
Admission: $9 for adults; $8 for students and the elderly; $7 for children under 12. 251 Phillip Street, Jersey City. (201) 451-0006, extension 295.
MUSEUM OF EARLY TRADES AND CRAFTS Visitors are invited to an "Old-Fashioned Labor Day Picnic" on the museum grounds while enjoying traditional music, a puppet show and puppet-making by the Patchwork Puppet Theater, a bicycle decorating competition and parade and 19th-century games.
Next Sunday, noon to 4 P.M. $10 a family includes music, games and contest registration.
Main Street and Green Village Road, Madison. (201) 377-2982.
MURDER TO GO "Murderous Crossings," an interactive wedding and Agatha Christie-style mystery that challenges the audience to solve "whodunit." Saturdays, 8 P.M.
Through Sept. 30.
Il Giardino Restaurant, Cedar Knolls.
"Killing Mr. Withers," an Alfred Hitchcock-style comic mystery thriller set in the 1950's.
Saturdays, 8 P.M.
Through Dec. 30.
Woodbridge Sheraton, Woodbridge.
The $42 ticket price includes a four-course meal. (201) 301-0562.
RIDGEWOOD RACQUET CLUB Advanced and beginner players are invited to a fall open house next Sunday from 1 to 4 P.M., with free instruction, playing time, refreshment and prizes.
A radar gun will be available to measure your serve's speed.
Loaner racquets are available at the club. 249 Ackerman Avenue, Ridgewood. (201) 652-1991.
ROCKAWAY TOWNSQUARE "Making a Differqnce: One Square at a Time" exhibits 24 quilts made by artisans in the area for children with H.I.V. or AIDS.
Through Sept. 24.
Monday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 9:30 P.M., and Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Route 80 and Mount Hope Avenue, Rockaway. (201) 361-4070.


From AIDS to Volleyball, It's Time for Freshman Orientation
In the coming weeks, thousands of teen-agers in New Jersey will experience a rite of passage awaited with longing and dread.
As summer surrenders to fall, they will flock to college campuses for freshman orientation, an odd but timeless regimen of barbecues, dances and giant twister games.
The routine varies from campus to campus, frequently shedding light on a college's personality.
Some orientation programs focus on academics, while others have a festive aura.
Some last a day or two, while others are more leisurely.


They're New, They're Competitive . . . and They're Coming to Your House
Like younger siblings competing for attention, the two newest additions to network television, UPN and WB, yearn to establish their own identities.
And they will try some tricks to get attention, too, like starting their new programs weeks head of everyone else's in the hopes that plenty of viewers will be back from vacation and sick of reruns and will want to sample something new.
This fall is the first full network season for UPN and WB, both of which began last January.
Some say the two can hardly be called networks, since each brodcasts only two nights a week, UPN on Mondays and Tuesdays (in New York on Channel 9) and WB on Sundays and Wednesdays (in New York on Channel 11).Fox also began slowly, starting with only one show, Joan Rivers's late-night talk show, in late 1986, then adding Sunday-night programming in its second year ("The Tracy Ullman Show" and "Married... With Children") and increasing to four nights by the fall of 1990.
UPN (United/Parmount Network) made its voice heard immediately after it began broadcasting: its "Star Trek: Voyager" on Monday nights was a big success.
But "Voyager" alone remains; UPN has scrapped every other series and this fall will offer only hourlong dramas.
Marching to a different drummer, WB (Warner Brothers) has developed only comedies, most of them family oriented and pitched toward children as much as adults.
Four feature black families and one stars a Hispanic woman, in part because many of WB's affiliated stations are in big cities, many with large black and Hispanic populations.
This season each is adding a few hours of children's programmig on weekend mornings as well.
While the three older networks are to begin their new lineups in early and mid-September and Fox is to start on Thursday, WB began its new season last week and UPN is to start on Monday.
"We want to get a jump," said Michael Sullivan, President of UPN's entertainment division.
"We want UPN to give you a sense of having shows you won't see anywhere else, shows that feel different," Mr.
Sullivan added, acknowledging that the success of "Voyager" sent UPN chasing after similar audiences.
"Plus, we're trying to counter-program, and provide a clear viewing alternative in each hour," he said, to the programs on other networks.
Two of its three new programs are science-fiction series, kin to "Voyager," with its galactic explorers lost on a 24th-century starship (Mondy at 8 P.M).
The third new hour is a soap opera set in a local television station.
"Nowhere Man" (Monday at 9 P.M.) stars Bruce Greenwood (who was Dr. Seth Griffin on "St. Elsewhere") as Thomas Veil, a photographer whose wife, mother, friends and even dog no longer recognize him, whose records have disappeared and who struggles to stay sane as he tries to discover how and why his existence has been erased.
"We wanted to tap into that 'Star Trek: Voyager' audience, but not with another space show, and you can't clone that anyway," Mr.
Sullivan said.
"It's a 'Twilight Zone' feel, like they're out to disburb you."
"In households with people who have more than four years of college education, 'Voyager' gets ratings twice as high as it gets over all," he said.
"and it's not just the sci-fi that interested them; it's the quality of the characters and the quality of the writing. So we've tried to find similar elements."
In "Deadly Games" (Tuesday at 8 P.M.) evil characters from a home-made video game spring to life, armed with the supernatural powers and weapons they have in the game.
The villains are led by Sebastian Jackal (played by Christopher Lloyd, in his first television series since "Taxi" in the 1980's), pitted against the young scientist who created them and inadvertently brought them to life (James Calvert).
Leonard Nimoy is a co-producer of the series.
"Live Shot" (Tuesday at 9 P.M.) is an ensemble drama built around a young single father who has just taken over a television station's news department, where a charismatic reporter, Liz Vega (played by Wanda De Jesus), undercovers the truth behind crime stories.
"The approach to Liz Vega was to write that role as a career guy, then put a female name to it," said Dan Guntzelman.
He and Steve Marshall, who met as writers on "WKRP in Cincinnati," created this series.
"We wanted to avoid the cliches of a female in a high-pressure career, the 'Oh, it's tough to be tough' and 'it's taking such a toll on me,' So we haven't given her much of a personal life yet."
Over on WB, personal lives are the primary focus of just about every show.
In keeping with the Warner Brothers kiddie-cartoon heritage, the network, which had a hodgepodge of poorly received shows last spring, is not aiming young, said its president, Jamie Kellner.
"I have made my life's work to aim young," said Mr.
Kellner, who came to WB from Fox.
"I like kids, teens and young adults. That's who I like to program for."
Three of WB's four Wednesday night programs are returning from last year after a new half-hour of "Sister, Sister" opens the night at 8.
They are "The Parent 'Hood," "Wayans Brothers" and "Unhappily Ever After."
WB is offering nine new half-hour comedies (and a rerun and new episodes of one, "Sister, Sister").
It begins Sunday nights at 7 with a cartoon, "Steven Spielberg Presents Pinky and the Brain," about two laboratory mice, who are spinoff characters from Mr.
Spielberg popular charcters from Mr.
Spielberg's popular "Animaniacs" show on Fox (which has now moved to WB'S morning slate).
After "Sister, Sister," a former ABC show about 15-year old twins separated at birth and reunited by chance, WB plans to broadcast for new comedies.
"Simon" (8 P.M.) stars the comedian Harland Williams as what WB decribes as "a Forrest Gump-like" character trying to make it in Manhattan, with a cynical brother (Jason Bateman) often tripping him up.
It's followed by "Kirt Cameron (late of "Growing Pains"), also about a young bachelor trying to make it in Manhattan. But this fellow is suddenly saddled with three younger siblings, when the aunt who had been taking care of them bails out.
Two series starring female comedians are next.
"First Time out " (9 P.M.) has Jackie Guerra playing a young woman with two roommates who try to make it in Los Angeles.
"Cleghorne" (9:30 P.M.) features Ellen Cleghorne, a "Saturday Night Live" alumna, playing a single mother, bring up a 9 year old daughter while her overbearing parents interfere.
"On Sunday night, there are major female-appeal shows on ABC, NBC and CBS, but they all dump into movies at 9," Mr.
Kellner said.
"And Fox has heavy male comedy then. So we're doing heavy female comedy, an hour for the ladies.".
For ethnic ladies, in particular?
"We did want to develop a show with Hispanic flavor, and looked hard for talent to work with, and found Jackie," he replied.
"With Ellen, we knew she wanted to leave 'Saturday Night Live' and we liked her very much."
Of these shows on WB, Mr.
Kellner said: "If we didn't believe in these programs, we wouldn't do it, but we're also primarily a big-city delivery system and we want our shows balanced toward the demographics of the cities. So it isn't entirely and accident.,"


Who Loves Milken?
To the Editor:
Joseph Nocera's trenchant review of Daniel Fischel's "Payback: The Conspiracy to Destroy Michael Milken and His Financial Revolution" (Aug. 6) is marred by a brief wallow in the black-and-white thinking he accuses Mr.
Fischel of: a claim that I "practically canonized" the financier in my book "Highly Confident: The Crime and Punishment of Michael Milken."


Old 125th St. Warriors Find Peace at 116th St. Market
Ten months ago, street vendors in Harlem picketed, shouted at the police and tried to organize store boycotts to fight Mayor Giuliani's order sweeping them from 125th Street.
Today, they accept credit cards.
And the scorn they once expressed for the market the city set up for them a few blocks away on Lenox Avenue at 116th Street has turned to praise.
"We have a certain air of respectability here," said Carlos Pesante, who sells clothes and toys from a corner booth.
"It's like a store."


Life and Death


Imbalance At the Smithsonian
To the Editor:
Shame on Walter Goodman.
After accepting as gospel Peter Jennings's ABC-TV version of the decision to drop the atomic bomb on Hiroshima -- i.e., it was directed against the Soviet Union -- Mr.
Goodman now recognizes that the issues are at least debatable  [ "Fifty Years Later, Still the Day After," July 30 ] .
At the same time, however, he supports Mr.
Jennings's assertion that criticism of the Enola Gay exhibition at the Smithsonian was censorship, pure and simple.


Ms. Hammerman And Mr. Charnas
Alyson Leigh Hammerman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jeffrey Hammerman of Melville, L.I., was married last evening to Alan Jeffrey Charnas, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eliot Charnas of Beachwood, Ohio.
Rabbi Shelley Kovar Becker officiated at the St.
Regis in New York.
The couple graduated from the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor.


In Suffolk, Affirmative Action Comes Under Attack
IN 1994, when Melissa Hiller was a senior at Central Islip High School, a Suffolk County police officer went there to recruit minorities for a special Police Cadet Program.
With its free college tuition, guaranteed part-time job and promise of an appointment to the force with a passing grade on the entrance exam, it sounded good to her, and she applied.
In the box that asked for her race, Miss Hiller, who is adopted, wrote "unknown."


Visions That Change Even as They Create
THE show by six New Jersey artists at Bristol-Myers Squibb may incorporate ideas that have not worked out, as well as shapes and colors that needed editing along the way.
Still, the art, while plainly not Conceptual, seems to have made it from inspiration to realization without interruption.
So how come the title "Altered Images"?
It turns out that Pamela Sherin, the curator of both the gallery and the show, did not have conscious modifications in mind but, rather, those resulting from the exercise of artistic individuality.
Thanks to the perceptual changes wrought by Cubism, Surrealism and the triumph of abstraction in midcentury, disinterested representation has become virtually impossible.
Some painters and sculptors make an issue of verisimilitude, but few if any depict the observable world without a personal agenda.


Art Deco: Still Not Forgiven for Being Fun
ONE OF THE PERCEPTIONS of Art Deco is that it's trivial," said Paul Greenhalgh, head of research for the Victoria and Albert Museum. Mr. Greenhalgh was addressing the World Congress on Art Deco, which had convened here during the first week of July. "Art Deco is a terribly easy movement to insult," he continued. "It has maintained that most damning of all qualities -- fun.
"The movement has been denied, as it were, its right to seriousness. It has largely been judged by yardsticks which are inappropriate to it. The avant-garde has never really forgiven it for being successful."


The Clintons Back Parley On Women
Celebrating women's suffrage in the first place in the world to grant it, President Clinton today denounced efforts to portray the United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women as a radical, anti-family event, and he and his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton, defended her decision to lead the American delegation as an attempt to improve the lot of women worldwide.
In their most extensive remarks on Mrs.
Clinton's participation in the conference in Beijing next month, the President and First Lady went out of their way to emphasize the diverse, bipartisan makeup of the official American delegation.
And without citing China by name, Mr.
Clinton made it clear that many nations still have a long way to go in assuring basic rights for women.


A WAR IN THE FAMILY
Cohen's article tapped into so many emotions.
It made me sad, angry, confused, disappointed and uneasy: while this is happening on the other side of the world I'm relaxing in my Manhattan apartment, enjoying a rainy Sunday.
Is there anything that individuals can do to help the victims of this horror (other than rely on politicians to make selfish decisions)?
CHRISTINA PATTERSON New York


If You Want to Go Far, Go With the Long Ball
The season was different from the first pitch.
The strike forced a reduction in the schedule from 162 games to 144.
Then, because the strike forced cancellation of the playoffs last year, this year's playoffs were granted uniqueness, featuring wild-card, or nonchampionship, teams for the first time.
The idea, then, would fit in with the unusual nature of the season.
Instead of having three rounds of playoffs in competing cities all over the country, let the division champions and wild cards send their four top home run hitters and their four best pitchers to Colorado and settle this year's championship in one mammoth home run contest at Coors Field, Home of the Home Run.


The Retired Navratilova Still Has Fans' Attention
Though she is gone from singles tournament competition, Martina Navratilova is hardly forgotten.
And for that matter, she hardly seems to be gone a year after officially retiring from the women's pro tennis circuit.
That has been great news for the promoters and sponsor of the $550,000 SNET Classic, a three-day, eight-player exhibition event to which Navratilova, almost single-handedly, has drawn huge crowds for the second year in a row.


The Many Shades Of Basic Black
Usually, when all-black appears on Fifth Avenue and New Yorkers start moving from light to dark colors, it means that summer's end is near.
This year, though, devotees of all-black were faithful from season to season.
At a time when the one dominant look has surrendered to the credo of freedom of choice, there's nothing like black to help a woman negotiate fashion chaos with a sense of decorum.
It avoids fashion's pitfalls and makes all styles, from micro-mini to ankle-length, look effortlessly at ease.


The Needy Zucchini
Zucchini are the embarrassment of August -- so many, so big, so bland.
They don't start out that way, of course.
In fact, the first crop of green crookneck squash elicits (as first encounters often do) a flutter of excitement.
They are small and firm, with a delicate, willing flavor.
But as summer lengthens, so do the zucchini.
Which is not necessarily such a good thing.
By the last Saturday in August, when Harrisville, N.H., traditionally held its annual Zucchini Festival, there would be so many zucchini that only the freaks of nature (zucchini the size of dolphins, curled like bagels, attached like Siamese twins) grabbed the spotlight.
Only a less-than-jaded eye could appreciate the charm of a normal zucchini, with its individual crook, its striations and sheen.
And only a discerning palate, it seemed, could appreciate its taste.


Brown Hit Triggers Some Bad Feelings
When a quarterback is injured, especially on a rough hit, emotions always run high.
And that's what led to the confrontation between two former Giants teammates after Giants quarterback Dave Brown was knocked out with a concussion this afternoon.
The former Giants linebacker Carlton Bailey, now with the Carolina Panthers, and Giants tight end Howard Cross got into a heated argument right after the Brown hit, which occurred with about five minutes left in the first half.
Both players tell different versions of what happened.


Saying 'I Do' Again
The Stouffer Renaissance resort in Wailea on the island of Maui is pitching its Renew Your Vows package as a chance for a husband to "tell her that you'd marry her all over again." Assuming that his wife doesn't feel as if she would be making the same mistake twice, the package at the Hawaiian resort costs $1,680, excluding taxes.


Country Club: The End of the Line
In 1991 the Country Club, then an elegant supper club, opened on East 86th Street with an opulent party to benefit the Princess Grace Foundation.
Ten days ago, after what the police said were eight assaults since January as well as 180 summonses for disorderly behavior and hundreds of complaints from neighbors, the State Liquor Authority seized the club's liquor license.
Its owner, Myles Chefetz -- a real-estate lawyer turned restaurateur whose landlord is trying to evict him in a rent-payment dispute -- says he does not expect to reopen.
And he accused residents of racism against club patrons, who in the last year were mostly young black and Hispanic men and women from outside the neighborhood.


School Budget: Where, oh Where, to Cut?
As he wrestles with ways to trim the school budget, William Casey, the superintendent of Community School District 15, worries that every saving has its price.
The district, which takes in Boerum Hill, Carroll Gardens, Cobble Hill, Park Slope, Sunset Park, Windsor Terrace and Red Hook, expects to enroll about 20,310 students in grades kindergarten through eight.
It received $54.2 million from the Board of Education this year, about $2 million less than last year, Mr.
Casey said.


The Nation; The Servant Class Is at the Counter
AS the gap between the working poor and the working rich grows, the servant class is making a comeback of sorts.
Servants haven't disappeared. They just moved out.


Sarah H. Tiffin, B. Scott Gioffre
Sarah Hopkins Tiffin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. Tiffin of Hingham, Mass., was married there yesterday to B. Scott Gioffre, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruno J. Gioffre of Rye Brook, N.Y.
The Rev.
Ned H. Martin officiated at the Hingham Congregational Church.
The Rev.
Edward Warnken, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Gioffre, 27, is the director of development at Project Reach Youth, a youth services agency in Brooklyn.
She graduated cum laude from Lafayette College.
Her father is the principal of Tiffin &amp; Tiffin, a law firm in Boston.


Accessible Broadway: The Cheap Seats
Tickets to Broadway shows may cost more than $65 apiece these days, but reduced-price tickets for many shows are available at the two TKTS booths -- the main one in Duffy Square at 47th Street and Broadway, and a satellite at 2 World Trade Center.
Tickets for selected shows are sold at Duffy Square beginning at 3 P.M. on the day of performance for evening shows and at 10 A.M. for Wednesday and Saturday matinees, noon for matinees on Sunday.
The World Trade Center booth opens at 11 A.M. and also sells matinee tickets for the next day.
Tickets cost either 50 percent or 75 percent of box-office prices, determined by the producers, plus a $2.50 service charge per ticket.
Only cash and traveler's checks are accepted.
Information: (212) 768-1818.


A Snoop's Story: The Confessions Of a Private Eye
THE call came about 10:30 on a Sunday night.
"O.K.," a voice said.
"They want you to go find her."
Marie Schembri left off doing the dinner dishes and went up to the "Batcave," the third-floor office of her Boerum Hill brownstone.
Her eyes flicked over a series of wigs, an array of tiny cameras, glasses.
No, she thought.
Not tonight, not for the streets, not for the drug dealers.
The best angle would be a social worker, Red Cross, somebody totally humanitarian.
Harmless.


K. R. Workman, Gary E. Freilich
Katherine Raskin Workman, a daughter of Carolan and Peter Workman of New York, was married last evening to Gary Edward Freilich, a son of Sandra and Arnold Freilich of Worcester, Mass.
Rabbi Stanley M. Davids performed the ceremony at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.
Ms.
Workman, 27, is keeping her name.
She is an editor at Clarkson N. Potter Inc., the New York publishing house.
She graduated from George Washington University.
Her father is the owner, founder and president of Workman Publishing in New York.
Her mother is the company's director of international marketing.


Stockholm
To the Editor:
So often your articles bring back warm memories.


Julie Rhinehart, Martin P. Pohl
Julie Rhinehart, a daughter of Donald and Ella Rhinehart of Syracuse, was married yesterday to Martin Philipp Pohl, a son of Wolf Pohl of Mainz, Germany, and the late Gerda von Danwitz Pohl.
The Rev.
Susan Marlan, an interfaith minister, officiated at the Shelburne Murray Hill Hotel in New York.
Ms.
Rhinehart, who is keeping her name, is an international marketing coordinator at Lancaster Group Worldwide, a fragrance and cosmetics company in New York.
She graduated from New York University.


Maurice Rosenburg, Law Professor, 75
Maurice Rosenburg, a professor at Columbia University's School of Law who became a well-known advocate for judicial reforms on the state and Federal levels, died on Friday at his home in White Plains.
He was 75.
The cause was a progressive neurological disease, a son, Dr. Richard Rosenburg, said.


Over the Rainbow? Give Them Time
MOUTHS agape, the young bluebirds cry out to be fed.
The nesting season for bluebirds runs from April through August, and the four nestlings are the last brood of the year in this bluebird box.
Every 10 minutes or so, their parents fly in with a large spider, a juicy worm or a red honeysuckle berry.
As the birds grow, the once-spacious wooden box becomes as crowded as a rush-hour subway car.
To encourage the young birds to fledge, the adults slow down the feeding schedule and stop removing fecal sacs.
Finally, 24 days after hatching, the young bluebirds peek out of the hole in their box and with a few encouraging musical phrases from their parents, they fly off to learn how to rustle up their own grubs.


A Hair-Care Arrival in New Rochelle
NEW ROCHELLE can boast far fewer corporate headquarters than communities like Armonk, Purchase or White Plains.
But the city had a definite appeal for Shark Products Inc., a manufacturer of hair-care products formulated for black consumers, which moved its corporate headquarters here from Brooklyn in March.
"We had an 18-month search process," said the company's president, Brian K. Marks.
"We wanted to be close to New York City, because we were taking some employees with us from Brooklyn. Westchester was desirable, because we were able to benefit from corporate downsizing at places like Kraft General Foodsand I.B.M.


How the du Ponts Lived at Longwood
The 300-year legacy of Longwood Gardens, the 1,050-acre former estate of the chemical magnate Pierre du Pont, near Kennett Square, Pa., is traced in a new permanent exhibition in the Peirce-du Pont House on the grounds.
The house itself reopened last month, having been closed to the public for two years while preparations for the exhibition were under way.
The Longwood Heritage Exhibit draws on the estate's photographs and documents to examine the history of the property, from the Lenni Lenape tribe that dwelled there at the end of the 17th century to construction projects planned for the 21st century.


Eight Straight, the Latest a Shutout
Randy Johnson prolonged the agony for the Yankees as their wretched trip continued producing loss after loss.
Johnson was probably the last pitcher the Yankees wanted to see tonight, and the 6-foot-10-inch left-hander confirmed their anxiety and extended their losing streak to a season-high eight games in the Mariners' 7-0 victory before 41,182 spectators in the Kingdome.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
The perfect soldier is one who has the ability to obey any order, no matter what he thinks of it, as well as to command.
Maj.
Christopher Ritter, in THE PERFECT SOLDIER, by Ralph Peters (Pocket Books, $23), is indeed that soldier.
Wounded on assignment in a former Soviet republic, he returns to Washington to work for Charlene Whyte, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Humanitarian Assistance.
She is interested in American prisoners of war captured by the Soviets during and after the Korean War.
Are any still alive?
The author, who has written five novels, is a major in the United States Army.
His subjects in this new book include the execution of P.O.W.'s, the wars that sprang up after the demise of Communism, the rise of ambitious strongmen struggling for absolute power, torture, ethnic cleansing, poverty, disease, corruption.
No wonder the ending is cynical -- or realistic, depending on one's perspective. (Certainly there has been little in the last 10 years or so to suggest that mankind has changed much since the days of Vlad the Impaler.) Major Peters has done his homework, and the words coming from the mouths of Russian characters who lived through the Stalinist period seem to be based on fact.


Police Join Social Workers to 'Take Back Parks' From Homeless
A week after a homeless man shot three other transients and a police officer -- and killed a police dog -- near a homeless encampment in Golden Gate Park, officers accompanied by social workers and public health personnel are combing the 1,000-acre park, telling homeless people that they cannot sleep there.
The shooting came just one day after a Federal District court ruling here summarily dismissed a lawsuit challenging an effort started in August 1993 to keep the homeless away from downtown areas like Union Square that attract $4 billion from tourists every year.
In the suit several homeless people charged that the program was unconstitutional because it unfairly focused on the homeless.


Advancing on the Japanese Bear's Retreats
ONE of the more remarkable short-term recoveries in world equity markets is taking place in Japan.
The Nikkei 225 stock index has risen 22.4 percent since midyear.
The bellwether, at its current level of 17,770, remains 9.7 percent below where it started the year, but its recent surge has far outpaced gains in markets around the globe.
In the United States, the Nasdaq composite index has gained 9.3 percent since midyear.


Travelers Enjoying The Dollar's Comeback
It has been an expensive year-and-a-half for Americans traveling abroad.
The dollar dropped precipitously in value starting early in 1994, effectively making hotel rooms, restaurants, souvenirs and anything else purchased in a foreign currency costlier.
It was not a matter of nickels and dimes, either.
In many European nations, for example, the dollar lost more than 20 percent of its value.
But now the dollar is bouncing back, giving American travelers a bit of relief.
The dollar has by no means recovered all the ground it lost.
By mid-August, though, it was enjoying its strongest gains in years against the other two benchmark international currencies, the Japanese yen and the German mark, and had risen correspondingly against other major currencies as well.


Involuntary Immigrants
THE BLACK DIASPORA  By Ronald Segal. 477 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $27.50.


Adoptive vs. Fugitive


Ellen Yost And Louis Lafili
Ellen Ginsberg Yost and Louis Lafili, both lawyers, are to be married today in Buffalo.
Justice M. Dolores Denman, the presiding justice of the Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court in Rochester, is to officiate at the Buffalo Club.
The bride is a founding partner of Griffith &amp; Yost, a law firm in Buffalo.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College and received her law degree from the State University at Buffalo.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Irwin A. Ginsberg of Buffalo.


A Failing Grade on the Crisis Test
YOU'D think that by now they'd have some kind of high-tech laser-gun gizmo they could stick on the front of trains to vaporize any tree limbs or farm animals that happened to be blocking the tracks ahead.
But they don't, at least not on New Jersey Transit.
Therein lies a tale, and in the tale lies a moral: this state needs an all-purpose crisis persona.
It needs, in other words, a gimmick, a mind-set that it falls back on in times of stress, the way New York City trots out the "pulled together" cliche when it has one of its mega-calamities.
You've seen the smug, vaguely annoying TV clips: in the background, average New Yorkers are performing Heimlich maneuvers on each other or rescuing small children from sinking ferryboats or whatever, and in the foreground the Mayor is saying, "It's another example of what New Yorkers do so well: pull together in a crisis." Nobody likes a showoff.


Mattgilla Gorilla Takes Cane
Mattgilla Gorilla, a 26-1 shot, upset David's Pass and a number of bettors at Yonkers Raceway tonight, coming from behind to win the $384,375 Cane Pace.
Driven by David Ingraham, Mattgilla Gorilla was third around the final turn behind I Saw Him First, who was three lengths ahead of the field, and David's Pass, who was second along the rail and seemed to be getting in gear.


Undercover


Ms. Zuckerbrot, Rabbi Finkelstein
Bluma Sara Zuckerbrot, a daughter of Pearl and Irving Zuckerbrot of Englewood, N.J., was married on Monday to Rabbi Joel Martin Finkelstein, a son of Carolyn and Bernard Finkelstein of Far Rockaway, Queens.
Rabbi Ralph Pelcovitz performed the ceremony at Congregation Beth Sholom in Lawrence, L.I.
The bride, 30, was until recently the director of Middle Eastern affairs for the Anti-Defamation League in New York.
She is a candidate for a Ph.D. in politics at New York University.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a master's degree in Middle Eastern studies from Harvard University.
Her father retired as a lawyer and accountant in Englewood, where her mother is a clinical social worker.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN  BATTERY PARK CITY  $198,000  380 Rector Place  (Liberty Terrace)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 700-sq.-ft. condo in an 8-year-old building; 24-hr. doormen, concierge, 2 exposures, Hudson River view; common charge $397; taxes $3,700, listed at $220,000, 2 weeks on market (Brokers: Tabak; D.J. Knight)  INWOOD  $90,000
57 Park Terrace  (Park Terrace Gardens)  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; elevator, dining area, 600-sq.-ft. terrace, h/w floors; maintenance $1,218, 34% tax-deductible, listed at $99,500, 1 1/2 years on market (Broker: New Heights)  SOHO  $450,000
473 Broome Street (Wooster St.)  2,400-sq.-ft. open-loft co-op in a prewar building; elevator, 2 baths, 12-ft. ceilings, tin ceilings, exposed-brick walls, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,322, no tax deduction, listed at $475,000, 17 weeks on market (Brokers: Meisel; Ambrose Mar-Elia)  UPPER WEST SIDE  $1.06 million
160 West 66th Street  (3 Lincoln Center)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,675-sq.-ft. recently built condo; 24-hr. doormen, concierge, dining el, 2 exposures, health club and pool; common charge $905, taxes $4,896, listed at $1.06 million, 3 weeks on market (Broker: Corcoran Group)  BRONX
CITY ISLAND  $215,000  407 Hunter Avenue 3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 50-year-old detached cape cod; dining area, eat-in kitchen, recreation room, Eastchester Bay view; taxes $2,000, listed at $215,000, 3 weeks on market (Broker: Jacquelene Kyle Kall)  RIVERDALE  $195,000
5140 Post Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old detached frame house; dining room, sun porch, fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $1,500, listed at $225,000, 34 weeks on market (Broker: Susan E. Goldy)  BROOKLYN
CANARSIE  $263,000
549 East 85th Street  2-family, 31-year-old brick and brownstone house; 4 bedrooms, 3 baths, dining room, eat-in kitchen in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, dinette in other; 2 bedroom, 1 bath hospitality suite; taxes $1,500, listed at $264,500, 10 weeks on market (Brokers: Sure Home Sales; Lauaro)  DITMAS PARK  $232,500
302 Westminster Road  6-bedroom, 3-bath, 90-year-old detached house; double parlor, dining room, remodeled kitchen, jacuzzi, rear deck, artist studio with cathedral ceiling; taxes $1,700, listed at $250,000, 1 year on market (Broker: J. Shayovitz)  PARK SLOPE  $177,000
742 Union Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. duplex condo in a brownstone; dining area, spiral staircase, recreation room, renovated kitchen, private garden; common charge $161, taxes $1,680, listed at $185,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Warren Lewis)  QUEENS
FOREST HILLS  $265,000
71-40 Kessel Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 75-year-old detached frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,500, listed at $299,000, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Sarah Jones)  STATEN ISLAND
OAKWOOD  $168,000
62 Blythe Place  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 7-year-old semi-attached house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement; taxes $1,430, listed at $175,000, 15 weeks on market (Brokers: Vitali-Sunshine; Century 21/Papp)  ST.
GEORGE  $44,750
350 Richmond Terrace  (Skyline Terrace)  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 934-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; dining ell, remodeled kitchen, h/w floors, harbor view; maintenance $580, 30% tax-deductible, listed at $44,750, 24 weeks on market (Broker: Gateway Arms)  NEW JERSEY
BOGOTA  $190,000
153 Central Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 50-year-old two-family; 2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath owner unit and 2-bedroom, 1-bath rental unit; eat-in-kitchen and w/w carpeting in each; 3-car garage; taxes $5,035, listed at $205,000, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential Higgins)  ERMA  $89,900
668 Route 9  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old ranch; eat-in-kitchen, nearly 2 acres, 2-car garage, porch; taxes $1,813, listed at $89,900, 9 weeks on market (Broker: Demusz)  MANTOLOKING  $638,000
13 Falls Road  5-bedroom, 4-bath, 50-year-old contemporary; 3-zone heat, ocean view, new air-conditioner, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $8,633, listed at $675,000, 26 weeks on market (Broker: Weichert)
RIVER VALE  $384,900
428 Faletti Circle  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 12-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, finished basement, c/a, h/w floors; taxes $9,000, listed at $384,900, 1 week on market (Broker: Prudential Higgins)  WESTCHESTER
MAMARONECK  $613,000
12 Huguenot Drive  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 64-year-old Tudor; beamed living room, fireplace, screened porch, attic; taxes $14,488, listed at $659,000, 15 weeks on market (Brokers: Julia B. Fee; Merritt Associates)  SCARSDALE  $618,000
44 Springdale Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 24-year-old colonial; modern eat-in kitchen, 2-level deck, Jacuzzi; 1/3 acre; taxes $18,610, listed at $669,500, 23 weeks on market (Broker: Julia B. Fee)  WHITE PLAINS  $278,000
61 Smith Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 73-year-old colonial; side hall, den, fireplace, patio, sun room, 2-car garage; taxes $3,305, listed at $289,000, 6 weeks on market (Brokers: Century 21 Wolff; Coldwell Banker Schlott)  YONKERS  $105,000
2 Bronxville Road  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 45-year-old co-op; entry hall, dining area, terrace; maintenance $655, 50% tax deductible, listed at $109,000, 9 weeks on market (Brokers: Bronxville/Ley; Re/Max Prime Properties)  CONNECTICUT  GREENWICH  $625,000
40 Ettl Lane  (Ettl Park)  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath condo in an 11-year-old building; 3 fireplaces, h/w floors, terrace, deck, hospitality suite, 2-car garage; common charge $328; taxes $5,154, listed at $625,000, 3 weeks on market (Brokers: Coldwell Banker/Schlott; William Pitt)  OLD GREENWICH  $789,000
58 Tomac Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 69-year-old colonial; family room, fireplace, stained-glass windows, wraparound front porch, cathedral ceilings in master bedroom; taxes $5,605, listed at $789,000, 3 weeks on market (Brokers: William Pitt; Coldwell Banker/Schlott)  STAMFORD  $425,000
123 Harbor Drive  (Palmer Landing)  3-bedroom, 3-bath condo unit; fireplace, Jacuzzi; common charge $392; taxes $5,870, listed at $435,000, 13 weeks on market (Broker: Coldwell Banker/Schlott)  STAMFORD  $405,000
50 Michael Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 31-year-old colonial; family room, playroom, flagstone patio, 1 acre, on cul-de-sac; taxes $5,333, listed at $449,000, 12 weeks on market (Brokers: Coldwell Banker/Schlott; William Pitt) LONG ISLAND
BAY SHORE  $420,000
23 Lawrence Lane  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 45-year-old waterfront colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, 2-car attached garage, 110 feet of bulkheading; taxes $11,300, listed at $450,000, 40 weeks on market (Broker: Eric G. Ramsay Jr. Associates)  CORAM  $109,000
29 Grand Canyon Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 20-year-old ranch; den, study, skylights; taxes $4,700, listed at $111,900, 7 weeks on market (Broker: ERA Manzoni)  GLEN COVE  $260,000
11 Norfolk Lane  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 39-year-old farm ranch; eat-in kitchen, den, attic, 2 fireplaces, beamed ceilings, porch, 1-car attached garage; taxes $6,700, listed at $325,000, 12 weeks on market (Brokers: Douglas Elliman-Jane Hayes; Daniel Gale Associates with Piping Rock Associates)
GREAT NECK  $630,000
12 William Penn Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 48-year-old Tudor; eat-in kitchen, attic, finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $7,500, listed at $659,000, 14 weeks on market (Broker: Great Neck Realty Better Homes and Gardens)


The Rise of the House of Tsutsumi
THE BROTHERS  The Hidden World of Japan's Richest Family.
By Lesley Downer. 418 pp.
New York: Random House. $25.


Diane Keane and William Foster 3d
Diane A'Hearn Keane, the director of consumer protection for Westchester County, was married on Friday to William J. Foster 3d, a lawyer.
The Rev.
Michael Palazzo performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Resurrection in Rye, N.Y.
The bride, 62, graduated from the State University College at Purchase, N.Y.
She is a daughter of Margaret A'Hearn of Fort Myers, Fla., and the late Charles A'Hearn.


Karen M. Diulio, Robert J. Ceske
Karen Marie Diulio, a daughter of Rosemary and Dr.
Eugene A. Diulio of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday to Robert Joseph Ceske, the son of Janet and Joseph V. Ceske of Rolling Hills Estates, Calif.
The Rev.
J.
Peter Conroy officiated at the Fordham University Church in the Bronx.
The couple graduated from Cornell University.


Dana Gonsalves and Brian Hotaling
Dana Margaret Gonsalves, a daughter of Norma and John P. Gonsalves of East Meadow, L.I., was married yesterday to Brian Alton Hotaling, the son of Beverly and Alton S. Hotaling of Durham, N.H.
The Rev.
James F. Drew performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of the Sacred Heart in North Merrick, L.I.
Ms.
Gonsalves, 30, is keeping her name.
She is a senior designer at Belk-Mignogna Associates, a marketing communications firm in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father retired as an assistant principal of Junior High School 162 in Brooklyn.
Her mother retired as an English teacher at Intermediate School 383, also in Brooklyn.


... And More Exceptional In Queens Than Manhattan
To the Editor:
As an adult Manhattanite, who wants to read more books than he cares to buy, it was heartening to read about the Queens Public Library.
In my sad branch of the New York Public Library, there are few new books on the shelves.
Other than dividing the new books into non-fiction and fiction, new books are shelved randomly without regard to Dewey Decimal number or author.
You have a better chance of winning the lottery than finding on the shelf a library copy of a recently reviewed book.
And books cannot be reserved until they are listed in the library book catalogue, which is usually months after publication.
MARVIN H. SCILKEN  Manhattan


Hanan Ashrawi's Story
To the Editor:
David B. Green, in his review of Hanan Ashrawi's memoir, "This Side of Peace" (July 30), concludes: "Mrs. Ashrawi . . . is not yet capable of relinquishing her narrative and acknowledging that both peoples have deep, real roots in the land."


Ice Cream for Everyone (Even the Insatiable)
A 9-year-old strawberry ice cream stalwart took a detour down vanilla lane the other weekend at Sea Shell Ice Cream at the Jersey Shore.
"It was worth it," said Paul, the ice cream maverick.
"But it's like describing the taste of clams: you can't really explain it."


Caroline Kampel, Mitchell Danziger
Caroline Joelle Kampel, a daughter of Susan and Stewart Kampel of East Northport, L.I., is to be married today to Mitchell Joel Danziger, a son of Edwin J. Danziger of the Bronx and the late Sandra M. Danziger.
Rabbi Morton Shein is to officiate at the Jericho (L.I.) Jewish Center.
The bride, 30, teaches kindergarten at Public School 103 in the Bronx.
She graduated from the State University at Buffalo and received a master's degree in elementary education from Hunter College.
Her father is the editor of the Long Island Weekly section of The New York Times.
Her mother is a social service representative of the Social Security Administration in Melville, L.I.


To the Airports
To the Editor:
The Q-60 Bus, $1.25 fare, 60 cents for senior citizens, leaves from 60th Street and Second Avenue and goes to Kew Gardens, its last stop.
You can get a transfer and at the last stop, take a Q-10 bus to Kennedy for all airlines.
One fare.
Reverse for the return.
GLADYS SCHUTZ  New York


THRILLS OF OLD
Peter Passell's "Where the Thrills of Old Keep Coming Round" (July 23) sent me into a serious fit of nostalgia.
Nearly 70 years ago, the highest point of my year was the annual school picnic at Kennywood Park.
Reading your article, I was again on its dusty paths, under its trees, a hot, plump, ecstatic little girl, clutching the cut-price tickets for rides on the Racer and the Tilt-a-Whirl.


'Gracious Neighbor'
To the Editor:
Erik Entwistle's article on Rudolf Firkusny's recent recordings of Martinu  [ "At Life's End, a Tribute to an Old Friend," Aug. 13 ]  brings to mind a lovely memory of Firkusny, who was a most gracious neighbor in our West Side building.


On an Instrument Made to Soar, Too Many Plod
DON'T GET ME WRONG: I LOVE the electric guitar.
One of my favorite guilty pleasures is strapping on my Fender Stratocaster and Hendrixing around my living room for half an hour.
So I should, in theory, be thrilled by the increasing frequency with which electric guitars are invading new-music concerts.
But I'm not, and the recent Tanglewood Festival of Contemporary Music here afforded an occasion to ponder the reasons.
At a Steve Reich retrospective on the opening evening, Mark Stewart, a guitarist heard most often as a member of the Bang on a Can All-Stars, negotiated the gentle repetitions and expansions of Mr.
Reich's "Electric Counterpoint," a work in which a live guitar line is woven into a layered texture of recorded guitars.
I have heard the piece many times, and it has its fascinations as a step in Mr.
Reich's compositional journey.
As an electric-guitar piece, it is irritatingly tepid, and it seemed especially so here.


Corrections
A chart on Aug. 6 with the What's Doing column, about Denver, carried an outdated taxi fare for the ride from the airport.
From the city's new airport, Denver International, the fare is about $39.
The figure listed, $14, was for a ride from Stapleton International.


Bard Beachhead
Laurence Olivier's magnificent version of "Henry V" (1945) really welded Shakespeare to the movie map.
With the director (pictured with Renee Asherson) in the title role (like Kenneth Branagh in his more recent version), it provides stunning pageantry in sight and sound.
There's a clever, transitional fade-in: a bored stage actor at the Old Globe.
William Walton's mercurial score surges throught the Battle of Agincourt.
It's on Saturday at 1:45 P.M. and Saturday/Early Sunday at 1:30 A.M. on Bravo.
Howard Thompson


Whitaker Fends Off Jacobs for Decision
Pernell Whitaker was floating along the canvas gracefully, perfecting his hit-and-run attack and coasting to another unanimous-decision victory tonight when something interrupted his game plan.
A knockdown in the 11th round, perceived or real, will do that.


Congress Slows Clinton's Air-Traffic Reform
To the Editor:
"Aging Control System Brings Chaos to Air Travel" (front page, Aug. 20) raised some important and troubling points about the nation's air traffic control system.
What it failed to discuss, however, are the efforts of the Clinton Administration to address the problems that it inherited.


A Chaotic Show, but With Many Pieces Worth Another Look
ON Friday, Yale University Art Gallery reopens after a month's hiatus and, with it, the show "Richard Brown Baker Collects From Pollock to Lichtenstein."
Since there are more than 1,600 works in Mr.
Baker's collection, this exhibition is only an excerpt -- but what an excerpt!


DIARY
SPECTACLES A Day That Will Live in Hoopla History  Honk if you've had it up to here with Windows 95. (No! Stop! Not that loud!) You've got to admit that it all got pretty silly. (You'd think even Bill Gates would admit it, too, but you never know with him.) Colored lights on the Empire State Building.
Taking over a day's run of The Times of London.
Hype.
Balloons.
Free pizza.
An on-line party from Microsoft headquarters -- "Lake Bill," to be exact.
In all, a staggering $150 million global marketing campaign.
Come on already!
It's just some stuff you put in your computer.
But guess what: the public lapped it up.
People lined up to buy software when they should be sleeping, with a spokesman for Egghead stores saying all the to-do had "created two Christmas seasons" (a frightening thought).
All this doesn't mean the Justice Department is easing up on the antitrust front.
Janet Reno made a point of saying, on Windows 95 Day itself: "The investigation continues." TOBACCO Just Follow the Nicotine To make cigarettes, Philip Morris mixes crushed tobacco leaves and stems, and then adds back the lost nicotine.
Is this "spiking" with nicotine, or "recombining" ingredients?
This would seem mere semantics -- and a mere quibble, considering smoking's vast health toll.
But the word "spike," used by ABC News, set off a multi-zillion-dollar lawsuit -- one the industry and smoking foes were watching with care.
Then last week, out of the blue, ABC put its tail between it legs and apologized -- on prime time, yet -- to Philip Morris and R.J.
Reynolds.
But that isn't the end of it: Philip Morris filed a ton of documents in the case, and Representative Henry Waxman, a vocal tobacco foe, figures there's some damning stuff in those papers and asked that they be made public.
TELEVISION A Network of His Own?
Some people dream of vacation houses, new boats, more hair, writing a novel.
Barry Diller's wish list is short and constant: for some reason, he wants his very own TV network, and isn't going to rest till he gets it.
As head of QVC last year, he almost bought CBS.
And last week he got control of Silver King Communications, which owns 12 UHF stations that could be the basis for a new network.
He and Rupert Murdoch, after all, started Fox with a few stations, but the difference is that Mr.
Diller will be relying on cable now.
Given the spread of cable, that's no big obstacle, but is there room in a cluttered public mind for yet another network?
GARMENT INDUSTRY Sweating It Out in California It's a familiar trend: under ferocious pressure from bargain-hunters, garment-making jobs are driven overseas.
But some in the industry have found a way to essentially send jobs abroad but really keep them right in Southern California, an area decimated by lost aerospace jobs.
The trick: bring in Asian workers illegally and put them to work in sweatshops.
A raid last week -- the second this month -- found 56 illegal immigrants, mostly Thais, apparently recruited to sew garments headed for big department stores.
And of course, like everything else these days -- including that headache you have -- it's Bill Clinton's fault.
The Administration has "allowed slavery to exist for years in the United States," said Gov.
Pete Wilson of California.
Mr.
Wilson wants to be President.
TECHNOLOGY What Next?
E-Bananas?
E-checks?
Oh, why not.
There's E-everything else.
E-mail.
E-speak.
E-think.
E-love (that has its limits).
E-ads.
So, yes, last week a group of banks and E-companies said they'd design an "electronic check" system, to begin tests next year.
No, this isn't E-bill-paying, already offered by banks.
These are real checks (well, as real as anything in computer never-never land) -- they can be sent for birthdays as well as doctors' bills, and can bounce as high as paper.
There will be electronic checkbooks -- cards inserted into computer slots.
And there will be security codes called "digital signatures" promising safety and security. (Right: like all the other ways we're promised privacy as more and more machines peek into our brains.)  SECURITIES LAW Insider Trading, Redefined A quiz: A lottery director buys stock in a company, then gives that company a lucrative state contract.
Is it insider trading?
Not to a Federal appeals court, which recently threw out the securities-fraud conviction of the director, Elton Bryan of West Virginia.
By this court's definition, only those who work for the target company in a takeover would be barred from trading; anyone else with the inside scoop could cash in.
If this ruling becomes widely accepted, insider-trading cases could rapidly become rare.
Not that Mr.
Bryan rejoiced at the reversal: he was also convicted of perjury, mail fraud and wire fraud, and he's as much in jail as he ever was.
INVESTING Those Manly Mutual Funds You know those mutual funds that, like Indiana Jones scouring the jungle for treasure, vow bold investments at the earth's far corners?
Definite guy-type investments.
Well, maybe all that overheated language gets funds a bit too excited.
Some of them, it seems, threw money at a company that, on close inspection, might end up being fool's gold.
Arakis Energy's promises were lavish -- a huge pipeline project in Sudan, a big investment from a Saudi prince -- and funds lapped it up, sending its market value above $500 million last month. (Not bad for a company with about $1 million in the till.) But that close inspection came last week, as regulators asked the Canadian company just what it was made of.
Trading was halted, the stock was delisted in Vancouver, and Arakis said nothing to persuade Nasdaq to resume trading.
THE NUMBERS An Economic Roller Coaster On Tuesday, the economy was fine.
The proof: The Fed didn't ease up on interest rates.
On Thursday, durable-goods orders plunged unexpectedly, and suddenly the economy was on the rocks.
On Friday, sales of existing homes shot up to the highest level in more than a year, and all was sunny again.
What are you going to do?
PUBLISHING Harper Lee Speaks! (Sort Of)  "Introductions inhibit pleasure, they kill the joy of anticipation, they frustrate curiosity." But they do help sell books, especially a rerelease after many years.
So for the 35th anniversary edition of "To Kill a Mockingbird," HarperCollins trumpets "A New Foreword by the Author." What does that foreword consist of?
Well, those bits of wisdom above, for one thing, plus this plea from the author, Harper Lee: "Please spare 'Mockingbird' an Introduction." Ms.
Lee, you see, hasn't spoken to a clamoring public since 1962 and had no intention of starting now.
Her words -- a mere 100 of them will grace the new edition -- were from a letter to her agent.
That's show business.


The World; Peace in Rwanda Is Ugly, Too
TORN apart by genocidal violence last year that killed an estimated half million people, Rwanda is seeking to bring the killers to account.
The quest for justice (and, some would say, for vengeance) has opened another chilling chapter in the central African nation's history.
Its overcrowded prisons offer grim support to the claims of Rwandan refugees in squalid camps in Zaire -- mostly members of the Hutu tribe -- who say they cannot risk returning for fear of reprisals from the minority Tutsi now in power.
Last week the hard-pressed Zairean Government began a mass expulsion to rid itself of the estimated one million refugees, but suspended it after an international outcry.
Few refugees have joined a voluntary United Nations repatriation program offered in its place.


Corrections
The caption on page 101 of Fashions of The Times, Part 2 of The Magazine today, misstates the surname of the jazz singer shown.
She is Cassandra Wilson, not Cassandra Williams.


Tonja F. Harding, Charlie Ward Jr.
Tonja F. Harding, a recent law school graduate, was married yesterday to Charlie Ward Jr., a point guard for the New York Knicks.
The Rev.
Dr.
Cameron M. Alexander performed the ceremony at the Antioch Baptist Church in Atlanta.
Mrs.
Ward, 24, graduated from Spelman College and received her law degree in May from the University of Miami.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Harding of Atlanta.
The bride's father is the principal of Pitts Elementary School, and her mother, Wendolyn Harding, teaches music at Kennedy Elementary School, both in Atlanta.


C. A. Johnston, Robert A. Hopkins
Cassandra Alane Johnston, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles D. Johnston of Colorado Springs, was married there yesterday to Robert Adam Hopkins, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
L.
Nelson Hopkins 3d of Buffalo.
The Rev.
Jerry Kelleher, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Shove Memorial Chapel at Colorado College.
Mrs.
Hopkins, 28, is an environmental analyst with the General Electric Company in Fairfield, Conn.
She graduated from the University of Miami and received a master's degree in environmental studies from Yale University.
Her father is the president of Philips Laser Magnetic Storage, a manufacturer of data storage devices in Colorado Springs.


Small Park Opens, 'Behemoth' Project Still Faces Delays
When Hunter's Point Community Park opened earlier this month, it was billed as the first step toward completion of the multibillion-dollar Queens West waterfront development plan, a 74 1/2-acre residential and commercial project.
But after 15 years of planning and only the small park at Fifth Street and 48th Avenue to show for it, a target date for the rest of the project is still uncertain.
Construction of Queens West's first apartment building, a 42-story tower planned to go up across the street from the new park, has been delayed while the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development decides whether to grant a request by the building's developer, M.O.
Associates, for $85 million in mortgage insurance..


THE ANTIDOTE IS CIVILIZATION
Wow!
Did Molly O'Neill have a bad car day or what when she describes her irritating drive from Tuscany to the south of France ("The Antidote Is Civilization," Aug. 6)?
Everyone knows Italians drive to a different drummer and eat to a different beat, so maybe she should stick to food and leave the social commentary to others.
PAT BRUNO Chicago


Pork Is a Cool Choice for a Sweltering Day
ROAST pork might not seem the ideal dish to serve guests on a sweltering weekend.
But recently, as the mercury on the thermometer outside my kitchen soared into the 90's, I decided that I could not bear the thought of sweating over a hot stove while I had people over.
"Why not serve a room-temperature meal?" suggested one of my house guests, who I'm sure was thinking longingly of her air-conditioned house in the city.
So I decided to get all the hot work over early in the day.


On Highways and Crossings, 13 Spots to Avoid (if You Can)
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.
1.
ROUTE 95: Teaneck.
Southbound right lane ramp closed on local and express roadways.
Through Sept. 10.


Sarah M. Ward, Edward A. Gargan
Sarah Mary Ward, a partner in Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, the New York law firm, was married yesterday on Martha's Vineyard to Edward A. Gargan, the chief of the Hong Kong bureau of The New York Times.
Susan Cooperstreet, a justice of the peace, officiated at the Lambert's Cove Country Inn in West Tisbury, Mass.
Ms.
Ward, 36, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Princeton University and received her law degree from Fordham University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John M. Ward of Carrboro, N.C.
The bride's father retired as an orthodontist in Westfield, N.J.


Corrections
Another chart in the Neighborhood Report that listed coming reductions in bus and subway service misstated the number of northbound No. 7 trains that will run from 4 P.M. to 6 P.M. starting Sept. 10.
There will be 37, not 7.


Suburban Dreams and Nightmares
MOTHER is alcoholic.
Dad is broke.
Sister is promiscuous and brother is a superficial fool.
Welcome to "A Cheever Evening," a sampler of the lowly emotional, psychic and moral estate of elite wannabes, as disserved by A. R. Gurney at the Westport Country Playhouse.
Although Mr.
Gurney has long labored under the influence of John Cheever, the similarity between the two writers is skin deep; the differences as disparate as hollowness and vastness.
Cheever wrote with a sense of mortal pain that does not intrude on Mr.
Gurney's terrain.
It's not for nothing that Mr.
Gurney has been, by now tiresomely, labeled the official chronicler of WASP culture.


Brian Wilson: A Talent for Music To Escape By
"He was a happy kid" Audree Wilson says of her son in the opening moments of "Brian Wilson: I Just Wasn't Made For These Times," a documentary film that the Disney Channel is showing free Sunday at 9 P.M.
Indeed, the film's first glimpse of the legendary Beach Boys frontman is of him cruising, top down, through Southern California in search of his childhood home -- and finding the site paved over.
The documentary, which debuted earlier this year at the Sundance Film Festival and is finishing a two-week run at the Film Forum, is no nostalgic surfing safari.
Directed by Don Was in black and white, it depicts the journey of a childlike soul on the hazardous road of celebrity.
Musicians ranging from Linda Ronstadt to John Cale comment on Mr.
Wilson's phenomenal success as a songwriter, and on the influence of albums like "Pet Sounds" on rock music.
But more important, home movies and frank reminiscences from Mr.
Wilson and his family give music fans a picture of an intensely private man who collided with fame but keeps rolling on.
Caitlin Lovinger


Starving Artists Making Unenviable Choices
THE artist scrimps to survive, putting aside a ruble here, a ruble there, to get through the week.
Under such circumstances, only an admirer with money and social prominence is useful.
The devotee who applauds from the gallery and sends verses, even bouquets, cannot rival the patron of the arts who can buy out the orchestra seats, at benefit prices.
In "Artists and Admirers," produced by the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival, the 19th-century playwright Alexander Ostrovsky is not making such a pragmatic pronouncement out of the depths of cynicism or with a reach for satire.
This statement seems wrested from a soul devoted to art but wounded by the ways of the world.


August 20-26; Two Comebacks, One With Guards
The world was treated to a pair of long-awaited comebacks last week when Monica Seles, the dominator of the tennis court, and Mike Tyson, the terminator of the boxing ring, returned to their respective sports.
Both revealed themselves to be in prime fighting form after long absences -- she for more then two years, he for four years -- due to circumstances as different as they were shockingly violent.
Twenty-eight months ago, Seles, who was just 19 and the world's number one tennis player, was stabbed in the back in mid-match by Gunther Parche, a fanatical supporter of Seles's chief rival, Steffi Graf.
This summer the Serbian-born Seles emerged from two years of hiding, healing and a lengthy depression.
But because her German assailant's sentence was twice suspended, bodyguards are still a way of life for Seles.


Killers, Scoundrels and Spies
At the insistence of its new Director, John Deutch, the Central Intelligence Agency is finally tackling a job it should have completed long ago: establishing safeguards to prevent the indiscriminate recruitment of foreign agents.
After years of reckless recruitment that put the C.I.A. in business with killers, torturers and scoundrels of every persuasion, the agency is now trying to define when the misconduct of a foreign agent exceeds the worth of the intelligence information he can provide.
Jeffrey Smith, the C.I.A.'s general counsel, who is charged with developing the guidelines, starts with the premise that some misconduct, even extreme misconduct like torture and murder, may be acceptable if the intelligence is important enough to the country.


A Snoop's Story: The Confessions Of a Private Eye
THE call came about 10:30 on a Sunday night.
"O.K.," a voice said.
"They want you to go find her."
Marie Schembri left off doing the dinner dishes and went up to the "Batcave," the third-floor office of her Boerum Hill brownstone.
Her eyes flicked over a series of wigs, an array of tiny cameras, glasses.
No, she thought.
Not tonight, not for the streets, not for the drug dealers.
The best angle would be a social worker, Red Cross, somebody totally humanitarian.
Harmless.


New Front In Drug War: Seventh St.
Residents of East Seventh Street fed up with people brazenly smoking crack on their stoops and a drug gang operating on the corner of Second Avenue volunteered to be the eyes and ears of the police at a volatile community meeting on Wednesday night.
Dissatisfied with protection from law-enforcement officials, residents repeatedly asked, "What can we do?" at the standing-room-only meeting, held at Cooper Union.
More than 100 members of two block associations and a dozen police and city officials attended, including representatives from the offices of the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, and City Councilman Antonio Pagan.


Manhattan Community Board Meetings
DISTRICT 1 Battery Park, TriBeCa.
Next meeting Sept. 19, 5:30 P.M.; Smith Barneys, 388 Greenwich Street; (212) 442-5050.
Agenda: General.
DISTRICT 2 SoHo, Little Italy, West Village, Greenwich Village, parts of Chinatown.
Next meeting Sept. 21, 7 P.M.; Cronin Auditorium, St.
Vincent's Hospital, Seventh Ave. and West 11th Street; (212) 979-2272.
Agenda: To be announced.
DISTRICT 3 Lower East Side, East Village.
Next meeting Sept. 19, 6:30 P.M.; P.S. 20, 166 Essex Street, between Houston and Stanton Streets; (212) 533-5300.
Agenda: To be announced.
DISTRICT 4 Chelsea, Clinton.
Next meeting Sept. 6, 7 P.M.; St.
Clare's Hospital, auditorium, 426 West 52d Street, between Ninth and Tenth Avenues; (212) 736-4536.
Agenda: Health Center, proposal for police precinct boundary changes.
DISTRICT 5 Central Park South, central business district, theater district, Flatiron district, the garment district, Little India, Rockefeller Center.
Next meeting Sept. 14, 6 P.M.; Fashion Institute of Technology, 227 West 27th Street, Dubinsky Center; (212) 465-0907.
Agenda: The public space in the IBM building on 590 Madison Avenue is up for review.
DISTRICT 6 Murray Hill, Turtle Bay, Gramercy Park, Stuyvesant Square, Stuyvesant Town, Peter Cooper Village, Beekman, Sutton.
Next meeting Sept. 13, 7 P.M.; New York University Medical Center, 550 First Avenue at 31st Street; (212) 679-0907.
Agenda: Capital and expense budget priorities for fiscal 1997; presentation on keeping Bellevue Medical Center as a public hospital.
DISTRICT 7 Upper West Side.
Next meeting Sept. 5, 7 P.M.; Goddard Riverside Community Center, 593 Columbus Avenue at West 88th Street; (212) 362-4008.
Agenda: To be announced.
DISTRICT 8 Upper East Side, Yorkville, Roosevelt Island.
Next meeting Sept. 20, 7 P.M.; Nightingale-Bamford School, 20 East 92d Street, beteen Fifth and Madison Avenues; (212) 427-4840.
Agenda: To be announced.
DISTRICT 9 Morningside Heights, Manhattanville, Hamilton Heights.
Next meeting Sept. 21, 6:30 P.M.; Community Board Office, 565 West 125th Street. off Broadway; (212) 864-6200.
Agenda: To be announced.
DISTRICT 10 Central Harlem.
Next meeting Sept. 6, time to be announced; Adam Clayton Powell State Office Building, 2d Floor Art Gallery, 163 West 125th Street; (212) 749-3105.
Agenda: To be announced.
DISTRICT 11 East Harlem.
Next meeting Sept. 19, 7 P.M.; La Guardia Memorial House, 307 East 116th Street, between First and Second Avenues; (212) 831-8929.
Agenda: To be announced.
DISTRICT 12 Washington Heights, Inwood.
Next meeting Sept. 19, 7:30 P.M.; New York State Psychiatric Institute, 8th Floor Auditorium, 722 West 168th Street; (212) 568-8500.
Agenda: To be announced.
Schedules for meetings of community boards in other boroughs will appear in subsequent issues.


Debra Wasserman, M.R. Amdursky
Debra Lisa Wasserman, a daughter of Sandra and Bert W. Wasserman of Old Westbury, L.I., was married last evening to Monty Ross Amdursky, the son of Madeline Amdursky of Rockville, Md., and the late Arnold Amdursky.
Rabbi Marc A. Gellman performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Amdursky, 26, is the Northeastern director of the National Jewish Democratic Council, a nonprofit voter-education organization in New York.
She graduated from the University of Michigan and is a candidate for a master's degree in public administration at Columbia University.
Her father retired as an executive vice president and the chief financial officer of Time Warner Inc. in New York.


No Headline
"Things are going to have to change a hell of a lot more in this world before a female can ride into some little Texas town and tell the sheriff, 'I'm the resident ranger on this case.' I don't care if she's 9 foot tall and meaner than a barrelful of snakes. He's not going to talk to her." -- Joaquin Jackson, a Texas ranger.  [ 22:3 ]


The Job Is Undoable, And That Is the Easy Part
IN A FAIRER WORLD, A SELECT FEW JOBS that inevitably entail sustained bouts of the worst kind of stress would carry a compensatory guarantee of a charmed life outside the office: being Mayor of New York, for example, or manager of the New York Yankees, or general director of the New York City Opera.
But the world is not altogether fair, as Christopher Keene of City Opera can attest; the last few years have brought him personal trials of almost biblical proportions.
Two years ago, having coaxed the company back from its latest dance at the financial precipice, Mr.
Keene inaugurated a muted celebration of its 50th anniversary.
But just as the festivities were to reach their height with a series of three world premieres, he took a leave of absence and entered the Betty Ford Center in Rancho Mirage, Calif., to be treated for alcoholism.


Jammed Schools Sprout Rooms, But Outside
Auditoriums, gymnasiums and lunchrooms have already been carved into classrooms.
Teachers have turned bathrooms into offices.
Now, the unending battle against school overcrowding has moved on to a new front: playgrounds.
With little money available for new school buildings, the Board of Education has begun installing portable classrooms, prefabricated trailer-type structures, on the open lots generally used during recess.
Queens schools, which are the most crowded in New York City, will get more portable classrooms than any other borough.


But Is Phillips Still Eligible?
Athletic officials at the University of Nebraska continue to wait for a decision by the National Collegiate Athletic Association on an apparent minor violation that could affect the eligibility of running back Lawrence Phillips.
Phillips, the leading rusher from last season's national champions, has repaid an agent's recruiter for a lunch last November, an amount reported to be slightly more than $100.
The lunch, with Jack Verner, a representative of the agent Steve Feldman, could be considered a violation of rules that bar athletes from receiving extra benefits.


Russian Vote Result Wasn't a Surprise
To the Editor:
Eduard Rossel's election as governor of Sverdlovsk oblast in Russia was hardly the "stunning" surprise suggested by your front-page account of Boris Yeltsin's new party being beaten in its own province (news article, Aug. 23).


Reading Around Seattle: The Bibliophile's Tour
EVERYONE knows about the rain and the coffee, Mount Rainier and Puget Sound, but the casual visitor to Seattle may not realize that this is one of America's great bookstore towns.
Dozens of independent booksellers in and around the city cater to readers of all tastes, ages, political persuasions, cultural outlooks and sexual orientations.
Making the rounds of literary Seattle is not only an inspiring pilgrimage for serious readers, but it's also a fine way to veer off the beaten tourist track and poke around in some of the city's out-of-the-way corners.
One might as well start at the summit -- Elliott Bay Book Company, a literary emporium that can hold its own with Rizzoli, Denver's Tattered Cover or Wordsworth in Cambridge, Mass.
This is bibliophile paradise: More than 140,000 titles spread over a multilevel, multiroom, cedar-shelved maze; creaking wood floors; library-like stacks of fiction and poetry, travel and computer books; tables groaning with "staff recommendations"; and a downstairs cafe-restaurant where you can sip and read undisturbed.


Chirac Backs Hunger Strike Over Bosnia
A group of French artists has been on a hunger strike since early August, calling for a firm Western military commitment to preserve the territorial integrity of Bosnia.
President Jacques Chirac, who has often called for tougher Western action in Bosnia, has sent the strikers letters of support, his office and the artists said today.


Whole Lot of Shakin'
The legends who forged a path into the American psyche for rock-and-roll -- and the hall that immortalizes them -- are saluted on "The Concert for the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame," an inaugural celebration broadcast live from Cleveland's Municipal Stadium on Saturday at 7:30 P.M. on HBO.
The all-night jam session united the inductees Chuck Berry, James Brown, Johnny Cash, Aretha Franklin, Jerry Lee Lewis (above, with Bruce Springsteen), Little Richard and Robbie Robertson with the current crop of stars their ground-breaking performances inspired, including Sheryl Crow, Annie Lennox, John Mellencamp, Natalie Merchant, the Pretenders and Bruce Springsteen.
Kathryn Shattuck


POSTINGS: Bogner to Occupy an 1880 Rowhouse; Skiwear Store Moving Up Madison
It didn't hurt the Bogner skiwear company's image when Jayne Mansfield and Marilyn Monroe flaunted Bogner ski stretch pants off the slopes in the 1950's.
The style caught on, and became known as "Bogners."
The Munich-based company, founded in 1932, is known for more than its sleek skiwear these days.
It has now outgrown its retail shop, 2,400 square feet of of ground-floor space at 655 Madison Avenue, at 60th Street, and will be moving uptown to a five-story, 1880 brick rowhouse at 821 Madison Avenue, between 68th and 69th Streets.


Kendall Turns Down A Season of Sundays For Fourth B.C. Year
Pete Kendall could have been somewhere else Sunday.
Instead of taking his repaired right hamstring muscle into the Kickoff Classic, the Boston College left tackle, a starter for a fourth season, could have been completing the first exhibition season of his National Football League career.
Instead of having to deal with both Ohio State's defensive line and an inability to sprint at full speed, Kendall could have been mastering a new system and making regular trips to the bank.
For a while last winter, he was nearly on his way.


All Stars
Artists &amp; Writers softball game, East Hampton, L.I., Aug. 19.


No Peace Yet, but the 175th Street Market Gets a Grant
The success of the 116th Street vendors' market has raised expectations in other parts of the city.
In Washington Heights, vendors in a market on 175th Street say they see how prosperous such a market can be and hope to replicate the Harlem model, using a $30,000 grant.
Like 116th Street, the 175th Street market was set up by the city to encourage vendors to stay off a street from which they had been banned, 181st.
But the 175th Street project faltered when the police did not enforce vending laws on 181st Street, city officials said, leaving vendors at 175th at a disadvantage.


To the Airports
To the Editor:
Your article "To and From N.Y. Airports" (July 16) caused an old question to resurface.
In 1980, I took the JFK Express subway from Times Square to Howard Beach.
The train made no stops, and even had guards on board to protect travelers.
It was fast, cheap and direct.
True, one had to board a bus for the final leg to Kennedy Airport, but the system was vastly preferable to the current situation.


Timeout! What's With All the Preseason Games?
Anxiety stalks the sidelines for every final preseason game in the National Football League.
It's the last game for players to make an impression on coaches before the final cutdown.
Coaches hearts pound a little faster because they don't want to get a valuable starter hurt in the last dress rehearsal.


Work: The Sequel
Maybe you curl up with the latest issue of "Royalty" magazine.
Maybe you whittle paperweights.
Or maybe you visit an on-line "chat room" focused on the cinematic meaning of Miss Moneypenny, James Bond's long-suffering secretary.
If you have an offbeat way to shed the worries of the workplace, send your story to On the Job, Money and Business, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Or by E-mail to onthejob@nytimes.com.
Include your phone number.
All submissions become the property of The Times and may be republished in any medium.


COMPANIES PRESS CLINTON TO LIFT EMBARGO ON CUBA
A growing number of American businesses have for the first time begun pressing Washington to reconsider the trade embargo against Cuba, complaining that it forces them to stand by as foreign competitors lock up an attractive emerging market.
A handful of corporate executives have spoken out publicly against the embargo in recent months, and others have testified before Congress.
But most of the pressure has come in private meetings with Clinton Administration officials.


S. N. Simonds, David R. Lamarre
Stephanie Nichols Simonds, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
G.
Nichols Simonds of Long Lake, Minn., was married yesterday to David Richard Lamarre, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gilbert Lamarre of Longmeadow, Mass.
The Right Rev.
John M. Allin, a former Presiding Bishop of the Episcopal Church, performed the ceremony at St.
Ann's Episcopal Church in Kennebunkport, Me.
The couple received law degrees from Stanford University and are associates at San Francisco law firms: she at McCutchen, Doyle, Brown &amp; Enersen and he at Pillsbury Madison &amp; Sutro.
The bride, 29, graduated from Princeton University.
The bridegroom, also 29, graduated from Harvard University.


Amid Much Deterioration, Library's an Exception. . .
To the Editor:
Regarding the Soapbox essay about the Queens Public Library ("Speaking Volumes," July 30): As a lifetime resident of Queens, I have seen a deterioration of many services.
However the library system seems to be continually improving.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
WINGATE  A Evening of Calypso, And a Health Clinic, Too
Those calypso purveyors of enlightened social commentary, the Mighty Sparrow (below) and the Black Stalin, will entertain at the Caribbean Music Festival tomorrow night in Wingate Field.
That should make the needle a little easier to take at the festival's free health clinic, which will offer pediatric immunizations and H.I.V. testing.
The Mighty Sparrow, born Slinger Francisco and also known as "The Calypso King of the World," has captured the title of Trinidadian Calypsonian Monarch at the Trinidad and Tobago Carnival 11 times in his 40 years of performing -- more often than anyone else.
He met his match in this year's winner, the Black Stalin (born Leroy Calliste).
The free concert, the finale in the Martin Luther King Jr. concert series, begins at 7:30 P.M.
Bring chairs and blankets.
Wingate Field, Winthrop Street between Brooklyn and Kingston Avenues, opposite Kings County Hospital.
Health clinic opens at 6 P.M.; concert begins at 7:30 P.M.; free; (718) 469-1912.
HARLEM  A Contemporary Look At the 'Other Half'
The photojournalist Jacob Riis jolted the nation over a century ago with his searing images of the city's poor in his book "How the Other Half Lives." Now, the Museum of the City of New York is examining urban poverty in the 1990's in "The Other Half . . . Revisited," a one-hour film by the contemporary photographers Margaret Morton, Eli Reed and Jacob Holdt.
The film, which will be shown on Saturday at 2 P.M., coincides with the museum's current exhibition, "A Century Apart: Images of Struggle and Spirit, Jacob Riis and Five Contemporary Photographers." The Riis works on view are from the museum's collection of prints made from original negatives and lantern slides (e.g., left, "Italian Mother and Her Baby in Jersey Street").
1220 Fifth Avenue, at 103d Street.
Wednesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.; closed Monday.
Suggested admission of $5; $3 for children, students and the elderly, and $8 for families; (212) 534-1672.
EAST HOUSTON  An All-Night Party To Benefit Hale House
In 1993, Lisa Ludwig founded Music + Love in memory of her brother, Richard A. Kesten, who died of AIDS.
The group, which aims to raise social consciousness as well as funds to help people with AIDS through music, is holding a benefit for Hale House on Tuesday night at the Mercury Lounge.
Hale House is the Harlem charity that cares for babies born drug addicted or with H.I.V. and their families.
It was founded in 1969 by Clara McBride Hale, who died in 1992, and her daughter, Dr.
Lorraine Hale.
The K-Rock deejay Maria Milito will host the all-night jam with New York bands including the Rake's Progress, the Interesting Guys, Black Flamingo, N.Y.
Loose, Handel, Invaders and Divers.
Mercury Lounge, 217 East Houston Street.
At 8:30 P.M.
Admission: $10; (212) 260-1484.
ALSO AROUND TOWN SOFTBALL The championship of the women's division of the Therapeutic Community of America Softball League is today from 9 A.M. to 1 P.M. in Van Cortlandt Park, West 243d Street and Broadway, Field 5, the Bronx; (212) 979-8800.
WILDLIFE THEATER Until Labor Day, children can learn about the wilderness through interactive skits at the Central Park Wildlife Theater, Fifth Avenue and 64th Street.
Performers from All-Star Improv Jam at the West End Gate use special puppets and props to educate kids about wildlife and conservation; free with regular zoo admission.
Daily, 11 A.M., 1 P.M., 1:30 P.M. and 3 P.M., with a 4:30 P.M. show on weekends.
Admission: $2.50; $1.25 for the elderly; 50 cents for those 3 to 12; under three, free; (212) 861-6030.
KATHRYN SHATTUCK


Fire Damages a Landmark Hotel in Brooklyn
In what would have amounted to a 16-alarm fire if officials counted that high, more than 500 firefighters battled an early morning blaze that gutted a portion of the landmark St.
George Hotel in Brooklyn Heights yesterday and heavily damaged two buildings that were once part of it, including a 30-story co-op.
Where a grand staircase and twin pillars formerly led to the front desk of the largest hotel in New York City, only the exterior walls remained standing.


Lynne Benedict, Henry Wilson
Lynne Margaret Benedict, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce Whitlock Benedict of Ridgewood, N.J., was married yesterday to Henry Knox Sherrill Wilson, a son of the Rev. and Mrs.
Mason Wilson Jr. of Asheville, N.C.
The bridegroom's father, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Union Chapel in Siasconset, Mass., on Nantucket Island.
The couple graduated from St. Lawrence University.


U.S. Recommends Hepatitis A Vaccine
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has recently released recommendations for the use of the hepatitis A vaccine by travelers.
The vaccine was approved by the Food and Drug Administration last February.
People traveling to any country other than Australia, Canada, Japan, New Zealand and countries in Western Europe and Scandinavia should receive either the hepatitis A vaccine or immune globulin before departure.
The vaccine is preferred for people who travel repeatedly or plan to reside in high-risk areas.
Immune globulin, also called gamma globulin, is recommended for travelers under age 2.
Hepatitis A is a viral inflammation of the liver spread through close person-to-person contact and by contaminated food and water.
Symptoms include severe fatigue, nausea, vomiting and fever.
The disease is especially prevalent in developing countries with poor sanitary systems and standards of hygiene.


Accessible Broadway: The Cheap Seats
Tickets to Broadway shows may cost more than $65 apiece these days, but reduced-price tickets for many shows are available at the two TKTS booths -- the main one in Duffy Square at 47th Street and Broadway, and a satellite at 2 World Trade Center.
Tickets for selected shows are sold at Duffy Square beginning at 3 P.M. on the day of performance for evening shows and at 10 A.M. for Wednesday and Saturday matinees, noon for matinees on Sunday.
The World Trade Center booth opens at 11 A.M. and also sells matinee tickets for the next day.
Tickets cost either 50 percent or 75 percent of box-office prices, determined by the producers, plus a $2.50 service charge per ticket.
Only cash and traveler's checks are accepted.
Information: (212) 768-1818.


Conductive Education: The Cost Per Family
I would like to clarify a point in your excellent story "Alternative for Children With Cerebral Palsy" (June 30).
In relating the cost of the six-week Conductive Education summer program organized by parents in Riverdale, the article states, "The cost, which is borne by the parents, is $10,000." Readers should be aware that this figure referred to the aggregate cost of organizing the program, which was shared among eight families.


Spreading the Costs
To the Editor:
Your review of Marc Fisher's "After the Wall" (July 23) includes a statement that may mislead your readers about the origin of funding received by the American Institute for Contemporary German Studies (of which I am chief development officer), an affiliate of Johns Hopkins University.
The review says the institute "receives support from the German Government."


IN SHORT: FICTION
KING OF A SMALL WORLD  By Rick Bennet. Arcade, $21.95.
"You go see a movie, or read a romance novel, and everybody who needs to love each other does," reflects Joey Moore, the 25-year-old narrator of Rick Bennet's first novel.
Then he adds, bitterly: "But not in life, I don't think. Not in real life." Joey is all too familiar with the pressures of real life, but despite his romantic entanglements the only thing he truly loves is gambling.
"King of a Small World" relates Joey's education in some discouraging truths, the bleak est being that gambling will never be an exact science.
"There's no such thing as the law of averages," he reminds himself after a particularly devastating loss.
"You never have to win again." Joey believes that a perfect life is one devoid of responsibility, but he soon finds his confidence shaken.
As Mr.
Bennet's novel charts Joey's progress away from his single-minded passion, it argues that life is composed of dangerous extremes, and that only a lucky few find a safe middle ground.
KEITH DIXON


August 20-26; When the Sky is Not Enough


Ideas &amp; Trends; It's Hot, Has Four Letters And Legs
AMID all his earnest patter about personal computers being tools of empowerment, Bill Gates, the billionaire chairman of Microsoft, offered CNN's Larry King three words last week that finally touched on what all the fuss over a software program was really about.
"Software is cool," Mr. Gates said.


Reporters at War
REPORTING WORLD WAR II  Part 1: American Journalism 1938-1944.
Part 2: American Journalism 1944-1946.
Illustrated. 1,882 pp.
New York:  The Library of America.
Two volumes, $35 each.
TYPEWRITER BATTALION  Dramatic Front-Line Dispatches From World War II.
Edited by Jack Stenbuck.
Introduction by Walter Cronkite. 397 pp.
New York:  William Morrow &amp; Company. $23.


Congress Slows Clinton's Air-Traffic Reform; Trust Fund Obstacle
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 20 report on frequent computer shutdowns at air traffic control centers ("Aging Control System Brings Chaos to Air Travel") was a dramatic reminder that the busiest segments of our air traffic control system are becoming increasingly fragile.


Out of Crass Commerce Arises the New Auteur
LaVONN BATTLE, TABITHA DUNCAN and Athena Cage, three petite young rhythm-and-blues singers known collectively as Kut Klose, are strutting down a glistening SoHo sidewalk, smiling and miming the lyrics to their latest Elektra single, "Lovely Thang." An evening summer downpour soaks their high-heel sneakers and wilts their ornately styled braids.
It is the second and final day of the shoot for Kut Klose's new music video, however, and their director, David Nelson, has no choice but to keep the film rolling.
"Keep it hype!" an assistant with a megaphone exhorts a soggy crowd of club-kid extras, who obediently continue dancing.


Uncle Sam Is No Match for the Marlboro Man
IF, as the joke goes, an intellectual is someone who can listen to the "William Tell" overture without once thinking of the Lone Ranger, perhaps an antismoking activist is someone who can listen to the score of "The Magnificent Seven" without once thinking of Marlboro.
Nearly a quarter of a century after cigarette advertising disappeared from the airwaves, those stirring strains remain inextricably linked to the world's best-selling smoke.
For millions of people, the bold "BUM-bum-bah-dum, BAH-bah-bah-bah-bah-dum" that called them to Marlboro Country can still conjure up potent images of free-spirited cowboys who act out their masculinity and command their own destinies by smoking continuously.


Submarine Veterans Remember Their Own
WHEN the black granite panels that make up the Submarine Wall of Honor were delivered to Groton last month, Robert H. Moore walked down from his insurance office nearby to look for the name of Joseph Frontino.
Mr.
Frontino, Mr.
Moore's classmate in torpedo school more than 50 years ago, had been seasick during his passage to Australia in preparation for a war patrol in the Pacific, and Mr.
Moore urged him to claim chronic seasickness to get out of the submarine service.


.. . And More Exceptional In Queens Than Manhattan
To the Editor:
As an adult Manhattanite, who wants to read more books than he cares to buy, it was heartening to read about the Queens Public Library.
In my sad branch of the New York Public Library, there are few new books on the shelves.
Other than dividing the new books into non-fiction and fiction, new books are shelved randomly without regard to Dewey Decimal number or author.
You have a better chance of winning the lottery than finding on the shelf a library copy of a recently reviewed book.
And books cannot be reserved until they are listed in the library book catalogue, which is usually months after publication.
MARVIN H. SCILKEN  Manhattan


Summer, Open and Shut
WHEN I was a child, one of the great occasions of each year was the day we opened our summer house, a process that began the moment my sisters and I, queasy and restless in the back seat of an overpacked station wagon, spied the glinting steel cables of the Sagamore Bridge arching over Cape Cod Canal.
The ensuing argument over who saw the bridge first occupied us for the next half hour until we turned off Route 6 and other landmarks appeared -- a fence made of wagon wheels, a blue glimpse of the bay, the old Acme Laundry building.
As we shrieked at each familiar sight, the summer began to unfurl before us, endlessly sunny, while the school year rolled away behind us, gray as fog.
A sea wind buffeted our hair from the car's open windows, smelling of salt and pine needles.
The first herring gull was identified.
We all fell to contemplating secret plans and ambitions, and then macadam turned to sandy dirt under the tires, and pitch pines gave way to a green lap of lawn, and finally, almost too quickly, we were there.


Clan of Many Knees (and Some Bad Actors)
WHEN learning new things about plants, "many knees" is easier to remember than polygonum.
But for those who know their Greek, the name is easy.
Polygonum is the generic name for a large clan or genus of plants.
The name comes from the Greek: "poly," meaning many; "gony," meaning knee.
All polygonums have many knees, the swollen stem joints that are important clues for the genus identity.


To the Airports
To the Editor:
About Betsy Wade's "To and From N.Y. Airports": One of New York's best-kept secrets, known only to airline employees and a few frugal travelers, is that to get to La Guardia, you can take the E or F train to Roosevelt Avenue and the Q-33 bus from there, or to Kennedy, the E or F train to Kew Gardens and the Q-10 bus from there.
Price: two tokens, $2.50.
Buses and trains run 24 hours a day.
JESSE BRYANT  New York


Cecil, Elmer, Leonardo: Just Who Are These Guys?
New Jersey has 21 counties and 567 cities, boroughs, villages, towns and townships, but that isn't the half of it.
The State Department of Transportation's directory "New Jersey Local Names" lists more than 3,000 "locales, areas and municipalities" -- most of them unincorporated hamlets, neighborhoods, communities, nooks or crannies that someone, at some time, decided to call by a name.
Here are three of them.
CECIL Part of Monroe Township, Gloucester County.
The area was settled by English immigrants called Coles in 1860 and named Coles Mills.
The family cleared the land, cultivated a cranberry bog, and built a water mill, a granary and three large barns.
Still, the Coles were unhappy in the United States and returned to England in 1868 after selling their property to T. E. Chew.
His son inherited the land and in 1888 wrote to Washington requesting a permit for a post office.
He received consent, on the condition that the town be renamed (perhaps because New Jersey already had a Coles Mills).
He settled on Cecil, in honor of Lord Cecil of Exeter, the birthplace of the Coles family.


Observing The Chaos, Feeling The Heat
Outside the bedroom window, the night sky was orange.
The acrid smell of burning wood filled the apartment, and the sound of exploding windows filled the night.
My wife awoke first. "The St. George is on fire," she said, shaking me awake at 4 A.M.


The View From: Westbrook; A Walk Through the Magical World of Fungi
FOR Douglas White, turkey tails, tapioca slime, witches' butter and umbrella polypores are the stuff of art -- and of science, too.
So are all the other fungi that he finds, studies and photographs, from delicious chanterelles to deadly amanitas.
"A lot of people are not familiar with this whole realm," Mr.
White said.
He aims to open people's eyes to the beauty, and the biology, of fungi -- mushrooms, to most.


Q. &amp; A.
Replacing Windows In a Co-op Q Can a board of directors compel an owner-occupant of a co-op apartment to replace the windows of the apartment even though the proprietary lease states that the lessee shall keep the interior of the apartment in good repair but specifically excludes "windows, panes, frames, etc." Additionally, are windows considered part of the outer wall of the building? . . .
R.
S.
Cohen, the Bronx.
A James G. Samson, a Manhattan lawyer who specializes in co-op law, said that under the standard proprietary lease used in New York, the responsibility for maintaining the facade of a residential co-op is generally assigned to the co-op corporation as a whole.


Croats Finding Homes, Where Serbs Used to Live
If this were upstate New York, or western Connecticut, it is easy to imagine the ad: quaint, two-bedroom house, with attic in quiet rural setting one hour from the capital; needs work; large orchard.
Vera and Zoran Pranic, and another couple, stopped to look at it.
Then, in their small white Yugo, the couples, in their 30's, moved on to examine other available houses in the area.
Another couple, Anton and Mira Homa, looked for a house that would be near a school for their two boys.


THE EXPERIMENTS OF DR. OZ
The use of energy in healing assumes that everything has ch'i, or energy (also known as prana or ki).
When there is an imbalance of energy, something goes awry with a person's health.
A trained healer can use his hands or a needle to adjust the yin and yang energy in a patient.
These are some of the ideas behind modalities like acupuncture, ch'i-development exercises, meditation and others.


No Peace Yet, but the 175th Street Market Gets a Grant
The success of the 116th Street vendors' market has raised expectations in other parts of the city.
In Washington Heights, vendors in a market on 175th Street say they see how prosperous such a market can be and hope to replicate the Harlem model, using a $30,000 grant.
Like 116th Street, the 175th Street market was set up by the city to encourage vendors to stay off a street from which they had been banned, 181st.
But the 175th Street project faltered when the police did not enforce vending laws on 181st Street, city officials said, leaving vendors at 175th at a disadvantage.


Sandra Toslosky, William Patterer
Sandra Ann Toslosky, the daughter of Carol A. Toslosky and the stepdaughter of Joseph Zoba of Hazleton, Pa., was married there yesterday to Lieut.
William Joseph Patterer, the son of Maureen and William R. Patterer of Liverpool, N.Y.
The Rev.
P.
Lawrence Homer performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Most Precious Blood Church.
The couple graduated from Villanova University.
Mrs.
Patterer, 24, was until recently an account executive with the McClure Group, an advertising agency in Valley Forge, Pa.
Her mother is a trust officer with First Valley Bank in Hazleton.
Her stepfather is an owner of the Urania Engineering Company, a manufacturer of electronic and medical equipment in Hazleton.


INSIDE
Facing South Africa's Past
Seeking justice for those who suffered under South Africa's three decades of brutal apartheid is proving emotionally and politically difficult for the new Government.
Page 3.
Clintons Defend Conference
The Clintons defended the upcoming world conference on women, denouncing those who call it a radical event and saying women still lack basic rights in many places.
Page 10.
Crash on Block Island
A single-engine seaplane attempting to land off Block Island, R.I., crashed into a restaurant and exploded, killing five people.
Page 12.
Brooklyn Hotel Burns
More than 500 firefighters fought a blaze that gutted part of the landmark St.
George Hotel, heavily damaging a 30-story co-op.
Page 31.


L.I. Vines
Petite Chardonnay Peconic Bay Vineyards, Cutchogue, 1993. About $10.
Ray Blum, the owner of Peconic Bay Vineyards, calls this simple, basic lubricant petite because, he said, "It is non-oaked and not bold."


Mallory Easter, Preston Polk Jr.
Mallory Mason Easter, a daughter of Wilfred O. Easter Jr. of Oakland, Calif., and Mary Moore Easter of Northfield, Minn., was married yesterday to Preston Charles Polk Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Polk of Newark, Del.
The Rev.
Jewelnel Davis, the chaplain of Carleton College in Northfield, Minn., performed the ceremony at the Skinner Memorial Chapel there.
Mr. and Mrs.
Polk, both 29, graduated from Swarthmore College.
She is a consultant at DDM Development and Services, housing consultants in New York.
The bridegroom, who received an M.B.A. from Harvard University, is an associate at Booz Allen &amp; Hamilton, the consulting firm in New York.


State's Economy Is Sleeping, And Tax Cuts Can't Wake It
To the Editor:
The essay "Tax Cuts: The View From Town Hall," by Mayor James E. McGreevey of Woodbridge (Soapbox, July 23), correctly points out the costs of Governor Whitman's dramatic income tax cuts.
But Mr.
McGreevey omits an even greater criticism of the Governor's tax policy: the cuts have failed to provide the economic benefits she promised.


Red Sox Skidding: 2 in a Row
Athletics 11, Red Sox 4
Stan Javier had three runs batted in and Oakland used a six-run third inning to defeat the Red Sox, 11-4, yesterday, handing Boston its first back-to-back losses in a month.


Disabled Travelers
Magellan's, which publishes a catalog of products designed to help travelers, has included a section on products for travelers with disabilities in its newest catalog.
They include a folding wheelchair that weighs 23 pounds ($895), a travel pack for diabetics that keeps insulin cool ($36.50) and a vibrating alarm clock ($49.50) for travelers with hearing difficulties.
For a catalog, call (800) 962-4943.
JOSEPH SIANO


Elizabeth Sinnott, C. C. Schreiber
Elizabeth Kathleen Sinnott, a daughter of Eileen and John T. Sinnott of Bedford, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Christopher Charles Schreiber, a son of Mary A. Schreiber of Fort Myers, Fla., and the late Edward C. Schreiber.
The Rev.
John Kauta performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Schreiber, 31, works in New York as a vice president of structured finance for CIBC Wood Gundy, a Canadian investment banking concern.
She is a graduate of William Smith College.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Marsh &amp; McLennan Inc., an international insurance brokerage company in New York.


New Age Mists Envelop Traditional Irish Songs
AS YET ANOTHER SIGN that it's a small world after all, yesterday's Mongolian field recordings are today's accompaniment for Upper East Side wine and cheese parties.
Ambient techno bands pepper their spacy noodlings with the bleatings of Asian folk singers; last year's brunch album of choice was a collection of centuries-old Gregorian chants.
It was only a matter of time before the same transformation overcame traditional Celtic music.
Several years ago, the Irish folk-pop band Clannad had a worldwide hit with "Theme from Harry's Game," but it's unlikely that anyone did the jig to it.
The song, with its breathy harmony singing and utter lack of rhythm, was the musical equivalent of a dark, tranquil moor.
It could have easily passed for a movie theme or a car commercial.
In fact, it was both -- the soundtrack of "Patriot Games" and the music for a Volkswagen ad.


Allison George, Michael Newbold
Allison Carr George, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert C. George of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday to Michael Fleming Newbold, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Newbold of Summit, N.J.
The Rev.
Harold E. Masback 3d performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church in New Canaan, Conn.
The couple graduated from Yale University, he cum laude.
They received law degrees from Duke University.


Beth A. Ginsburg, Simon Jeremy Hix
Beth Alison Ginsburg, the daughter of Sigmund and Judith Ginsburg of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., is to be married today to Simon Jeremy Hix, the son of Godfrey and Maureen Hix of Brighton, England.
Rabbi Edward Schecter is to perform the ceremony at the Water's Edge, a restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.
The bride and the bridegroom, both 26, are the co-founders of the Migration Policy Group, an organization based in Brussels that studies immigration worldwide.
They plan to open a Washington office in October.


Chris-Ann Sandie And Peter Zogas
Chris-Ann Sandie, a clothing industry executive in New York, was married yesterday to Peter Nicholas Zogas, a lawyer in Melville, L.I.
Msgr.
Martin T. Geraghty officiated at St.
Dominic Roman Catholic Church in Oyster Bay, L.I.
Mrs.
Zogas, 37, is the vice president of sales and merchandising for Pollinaise Intimate Apparel, a manufacturer.
She graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Sandie of Long Beach, L.I.


Anybody Home?


City Weighing Rules on Water
As New York City headed for a record in consecutive rainless days and had no significant rain in sight, city water officials said yesterday that they had begun drawing up a list of mandatory water conservation measures that could be implemented as early as Sept. 13.


Delays Keep the Mayfair's Doors From Being Nailed Shut
When the Mayfair Theater on Fresh Meadow Lane was temporarily shut by the city in May as part of a municipal campaign to reduce the spread of the AIDS virus, neighbors thought it was the end of what they saw as a community nuisance.
But efforts to permanently close the Mayfair, which was shut after health inspectors reported more than 80 instances of high-risk sex among the men who patronized it, have been met with continued resistance from the theater's owner, Mousa Soudour.
Mr.
Soudour and his lawyers have not shown up over the last three months for scheduled court hearings on an eviction proceeding by the building's landlord and a lawsuit by the city Corporation Counsel seeking to close the theater permanently for violating the public health law of the sanitation code.


ALSO INSIDE
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 2 Facelifts and ownership changes await some of the city's highest profile restaurants.
INSIDE QUEENS 3 A changing world catches up with Elks Lodge No. 878 in Queens.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 17 A 20-block block party in Murray Hill; A Caribbean music festival in Brooklyn.
MOVIE CLOCK 16  What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 18 A tour of the East Village; the engaging American fare at Danal; the informality of Habib's Place.
SOAPBOX 19  Speaking up for Pier 84.
And a plea against the subway free-for-all.
And letters.


When Despair Meets Hope, That's Symbolism
SYMBOLIST ART IS USUALLY seen as a kinky sideshow to Post- Impressionism.
But for Jean Clair, chief curator of "Lost Paradise: Symbolist Europe," on view at the Montreal Museum of Fine Arts through Oct. 15, the two movements are of roughly equal importance.
If Post-Impressionism led to the formal innovations of modern art, Symbolism defined its subject matter: the profound angst that resonates through 20th-century painting and sculpture, both figurative and abstract.
This year's Venice Biennale, also organized by Mr.
Clair, featured a thought-provoking retrospective of the modern figure.
"Symbolist Europe" provides, in effect, the prelude to the story told in Venice.
The Symbolists rejected the scientific rationalism of late 19th-century society.
Instead, they sought new sources of faith, turning to pagan myth, Oriental religion and the childlike, uncritical Christianity of peasants.
Or they decided that the real truth of human nature lay in the instinctual drives toward death and reproduction.
The Symbolists dreamed of rape, seduction, murder, suicide, drugs, travel -- anything to escape from the suffocating banality of everyday life.


Ruth Allen, Jonathan Cox
THE first thing Jonathan William Cox, 28, noticed about Ruth Barnett Allen, also 28, was her hands: they were petite and delicate -- and fit perfectly into his.
He found this out the first time he took her into his arms, and it happened long before their first date.
They met in a ballroom dancing class at the gymnasiumlike DanceSport studio on the Upper West Side in February 1993.
Mr.
Cox, now a graduate student in business at Columbia University, had enrolled with an old friend from high school, Darby Harper.
They signed up for the class because, as Ms.
Harper recalled, "We were both going through a real dry spell at the time, love-life-wise."


Camden's Changing Waterfront Resounds With Music and Hope
Last fall, truckloads of dirt were dumped on a flat, vacant lot on the Camden waterfront at a rate of one a minute, 10 hours a day, for three months.
The 475,000 cubic yards of dirt formed an outdoor amphitheater capable of seating 18,000 people on lawn chairs.
That was the beginning of what has become known as the E-Center.
The outdoor seating supplements the 7,000 seats under the roof of the amphitheater, the latest in this city's redevelopment efforts.


Whole Lot of Shakin'
The legends who forged a path into the American psyche for rock-and-roll -- and the hall that immortalizes them -- are saluted on "The Concert for the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame," an inaugural celebration broadcast live from Cleveland's Municipal Stadium on Saturday at 7:30 P.M. on HBO.
The all-night jam session united the inductees Chuck Berry, James Brown, Johnny Cash, Aretha Franklin, Jerry Lee Lewis (above, with Bruce Springsteen), Little Richard and Robbie Robertson with the current crop of stars their ground-breaking performances inspired, including Sheryl Crow, Annie Lennox, John Mellencamp, Natalie Merchant, the Pretenders and Bruce Springsteen.
Kathryn Shattuck


THE REAL CHINESE THREAT
ALMOST NO ONE NOTICED, BUT THIS summer the Pentagon drew a line in the sand.
Washington committed itself to using American military force, if necessary, to keep international shipping lanes open in the South China Sea.
International, at least, in American eyes.
But Beijing's maps put the entire area within China's territorial waters.
If a stronger China eventually tries to enforce its national law, which governs shipping in the area, then American forces could be called upon to confront a China that has developed enormously since its troops battled ours to a stalemate in Korea.


RISE IN UNINSURED BECOMES AN ISSUE IN MEDICAID FIGHT
Since President Clinton's plans for universal health care coverage collapsed a year ago, another million Americans have lost their health insurance, a trend the Clinton Administration and some private analysts say would be almost doubled by Republican proposals to rein in Medicaid spending.
Estimates of the number of uninsured Americans now run as high as 43.4 million, more and more of whom are from the working poor.
The rate at which the ranks of the uninsured have been growing has increased slightly but steadily in recent years, to a current annual rate of 1.2 million, by the latest estimates.


Amy N. Crane, Andrew Morris
Amy Nickerson Crane, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Burdette Crane 3d of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to John Andrew Morris, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Morris of Mahwah, N.J.
The Rev.
Margaret Minnick performed the ceremony at St.
Mark's Episcopal Church in New Canaan.
The bride graduated from Smith College and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is an associate in corporate finance at Praxair Inc., an industrial gas company in Danbury, Conn.
Her father is a director of Parker Benjamin Inc., an investment bank in Farmington, Conn.


Privately Run Prisons Don't Offer Great Saving
To the Editor:
Your article on prison privatization in Tennessee (Aug. 19) leaves the impression that privately operated prisons deliver superior-quality services at substantially lower costs than public prisons.
But the evidence from the report you cite leads to the opposite conclusion: that privately operated prisons do not provide superior-quality services and do not result in substantial savings.


Defending Class Actions
To the Editor:
Your article on the losses suffered by shareholders in Retail Property Investors ("For Some REIT Investors, Time Is Short," Street Smarts, July 16) is more an attack on class-action lawyers than on the corporate officers who mismanaged the company.


A Champion of Racial Justice When Little Prevailed
IN HER DAY, HELEN TAMIRIS WAS one of the most tempestuous of all modern dancers.
Like Martha Graham and Doris Humphrey, Tamiris ranks among the innovators who, in the 1920's and 30's, made modern dance a great American art.
And although she died in 1966, her vibrancy can still be sensed on stage.
Two long-neglected works by her set audiences cheering at this summer's American Dance Festival in Durham, N.C.
In mid-June, the Cleo Parker Robinson Dance Ensemble, a Denver group, offered a revival of the 1937 "How Long Brethren?", an austere piece set to black protest songs.
A few days later, Dianne McIntyre electrified everyone at the 1995 Samuel H. Scripps Award presentation by performing five excerpts from "Negro Spirituals," a cycle of solos that Tamiris began in 1927 and to which she subsequently kept adding items.
This year's Scripps Award of $25,000 was presented posthumously to Tamiris and Pearl Primus, another strong dancer and choreographer; the money will go toward scholarships at the festival's school.


ON THE MAP


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Guidebook for the Disabled Visiting Cultural Institutions Hospital Audiences Inc., a nonprofit organization that provides cultural opportunities for people with physical and mental disabilities, has recently issued a new guide: "Access for All: A Guide for People With Disabilities to New York City Cultural Institutions."
This guide to more than 300 museums, theaters, concert halls and other cultural institutions in the city covers entrances, parking, alternative entrances for people in wheelchairs, the availability of auxiliary aids and services (like touch tours and infrared hearing devices), restrooms, telephones and water fountains.


A Cleanup Program Helps the Unemployed
The City of Bridgeport, Conn., is hiring residents who are unemployed or on welfare to clean up trash in some poor neighborhoods.
The program is focused on areas that are blighted by illegal dumping and abandoned buildings.
Residents who own pickup trucks are paid $30 a ton to haul the trash to a regional incinerator.
City officials estimate that about 9,000 tons of trash have accumulated on private property in the area covered by the project.


Sleepers Sparked The Season
THE IMPERILED ASTRONAUTS OF APOLLO 13 have to navigate within a two-degree margin of error if they want to hit their target rather than crash and burn.
That challenge isn't so different from the one faced by "Apollo 13" itself, along with every other big Hollywood film this summer: to find the narrow corridor reserved for films with across-the-board commercial appeal, and then make viewers care deeply about what they see.
If that sounds easy, consider the fact that only "Apollo 13" got it right.
It has made $150 million so far while stirring the imaginations of adults and children alike, whereas most of this summer's big-ticket movies barely made anything but a financial dent.
A gross of $178 million (as of last week) says that "Batman Forever" is still the hit of the season.
And if so, we'd better rethink our standards.
Leaving "Batman Forever," you couldn't feel much more than glad to go home.


Kathryn E. Jones, Robert C. Nucci
Kathryn Elizabeth Jones, the daughter of Robert and Maxine Jones of Amherst, Mass., was married on Tuesday to Dr.
Robert Cyrus Nucci, the son of Dr.
Maria Bergamo Nucci of Bedminster, N.J., and the late Dr.
Cyrus G. Nucci.
Msgr.
Giovanni Carnazzi performed the ceremony at St.
Alessandro Roman Catholic Church in Bergamo, Italy.
Mrs.
Nucci, 25, graduated from Vassar College.
Her father is a professor of Russian history at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.
Her mother is the librarian at Amherst Junior High School.


Block Party's a Celebration and a Farewell
IT'S touted as "the world's largest block party," and it was created to celebrate the city's volunteerism.
But today's event will also mark the curtain call of We Care About New York, a nonprofit environmental group that works with individuals, community groups, schools and businesses to clean up the city.
"The board decided we had pretty much accomplished what we set out to accomplish 13 years ago," says Emory Jackson, the organization's president, "so we wanted to throw the largest party New York has seen."


Miss Greisman And Mr. Zilkha
Gabrielle Greisman, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Alfred D. Greisman of Rumson, N.J., was married last evening to Nazim Zilkha, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Moris Zilkha of Manhasset, L.I.
Rabbi Emanuel Gold performed the ceremony at the Essex House in New York.
Mrs.
Zilkha, 26, teaches the third grade at Public School 206 in Rego Park, Queens.
She graduated from Syracuse University and received a master's degree in early childhood and elementary education from New York University.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon in Red Bank, N.J.


MOVIES THIS WEEK
A somber drama, a fantasy, two special children's movies and a hilarious caper stand out on the film roster this week.
Perceptively restrained Luchino Visconti's "Death in Venice" (1971) exudes a haunting power in depicting a doomed artist (Dirk Bogarde) and his platonic obession with a youth at the same hotel.
Thomas Mann's famed allegorical tale has been adapted with skill and sensitivity at authentic sites, to highly effective Mahler music, Bogarde is superb -- Monday at 11 P.M. on Bravo.
It's still hard to beat Disney's technical wizards for adroit surprises.
To name one: "Parade of the Pink Elephants" in the enchanting, animated "Dumbo" (1941).
This brilliantly clever dream sequence is the pivot of the plot, after the circus's baby elephant sips some champagne.
Even if you don't see the whole picture, tune in toward the end -- Friday at 6 P.M. on Disney.
A live-action treat, via Marguerite Henry's book for children, is James B Clark's "Misty" (1961), about a brother and sister drawn to a wild horse.
Set on Chincoteague Island, off the Virginia coast, the trenchantly scenic yarn has an appealing human element in young David Ladd and Pam Smith (in picture), and Arthur O'Connell and Anne Seymour as their parents -- Thursday at noon on Disney.
For a brisk, flavorsome adventure mixing castaways and prehistoric animals, to stunning music (Bernard Herrmann, who else?) -- with a humorous edge -- try Cy Endfeld's "Mysterious Island" (1961).
Gary Merrill, Joan Greenwood, Michael Craig, Michael Callan and Herbert Lom pitch in.
A sporting team, no lulls -- Tuesday at 12:30 P.M. on Cinemax.
The same goes for a sassy, contagious grin of a movie: Ossie Davis's "Cotton Comes to Harlem" (1970).
Derived from a Chester Himes story, this sly caper centers on a con scheme that tilts a neighborhood.
The marvelously limber cast includes Raymond St.
Jacques, Godfrey Cambridge, Calvin Lockhart, Redd Foxx and Judy Pace.
Hold tight -- Saturday at 8 P.M. on TNT.
Howard Thompson


Sapphire Ring -- 95% Off
WE ARE approaching the first anniversary of Theodore Johnson's moment of truth.
As yet no parades or ceremonies are planned, which is fine with Johnson -- he's happy just to be out of jail.
But we shouldn't let the historic occasion pass unnoticed.
Shortly after midnight last Labor Day, you may recall, robbers left Tiffany with $1.9 million worth of jewelry.
It was the most daring and costly theft ever carried out at the store, but what followed was even more remarkable.
If the heist was the Midnight Snack at Tiffany, what happened two days later was the Miracle on 44th Street.
That Wednesday Johnson took some of the loot to 44th Street and Third Avenue, where he pulled out four gold rings studded with emeralds, sapphires, and diamonds.
And then, for one brief, shining moment, there was an unprecedented sight in midtown Manhattan: a man on a sidewalk peddling new brand-name jewelry that was not fake.


Sports of The Times; Yanks Offer Bad Example For Strike
BASKETBALL players -- except for Michael Jordan, who can afford such bizarre diversions -- don't contemplate baseball very much.
Boring sport.
All that standing around.
But before the basketball players decide to follow that flaming radical labor leader A. Philip Randolph Mother Jones John L. Lewis Jordan onto the picket line, they should cast an eye on poor clueless baseball.
And most noticeably the Yankees, currently in free fall.


Pork Is a Cool Choice for a Sweltering Day
ROAST pork might not seem the ideal dish to serve guests on a sweltering weekend.
But recently, as the mercury on the thermometer outside my kitchen soared into the 90's, I decided that I could not bear the thought of sweating over a hot stove while I had people over.
"Why not serve a room-temperature meal?" suggested one of my house guests, who I'm sure was thinking longingly of her air-conditioned house in the city.
So I decided to get all the hot work over early in the day.


Taking to the Skies Again (With a Little Help)


Happy Sprague, William Rowe 2d
Eliza Hapgood Sprague, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Phineas Sprague of Prouts Neck, Me., was married there yesterday to William Stanhope Rowe 2d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Whitney Rowe of San Francisco.
The Rev.
Charles Newbery performed the ceremony at St.
James Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Rowe, 26, is known as Happy.
She is a portfolio assistant at the Freedom Capital Management Corporation in Boston.
She is a graduate of Denison University.
Her father, who is retired, was a financial manager at Portland Engineering, which manufactured nuclear power components in Portland, Me.


Jake Brown and Ann Melissa Olson
Ann Melissa Olson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eldon Olson of New York, was married yesterday to John Fitzgerald Brown, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph T. Brown of Eldridge, Iowa.
The Rev.
Dr.
Donald R. Hubbard performed the ceremony at Calvary Baptist Church in New York.
The couple received law degrees from New York University.


Paris Tightens Security In Subways and Buses
Police are on high alert in Paris after two bombs killed seven and injured at least 97 people in the past 33 days.
Following the first bombing on July 25 at the St.-Michel subway station that killed 7 passengers and injured more than 80, twelve units of 80 policemen each have been sent out to reinforce the 16,000 uniformed officers on the city's streets.


Secret's Out for 2 Million Fans
The West Indian-American Day Carnival has grown from meager beginnings in Harlem social halls in the 1940's to become one of the city's largest parades: This year city officials expect more than two million revelers to throng Eastern Parkway on Labor Day.
And, for the first time, the carnival will be broadcast live.
It is a watershed for the Caribbean community, giving the carnival the visibility of ethnic gatherings like the St.
Patrick's Day Parade.
Although the carnival has long drawn West Indians from around the city and as far away as Toronto and Trinidad as well as vote-seeking politicians, organizers hope that television will attract more New Yorkers from other ethnic backgrounds.


Cristina Turnbull, James K. Schwartz
Cristina Lee Turnbull, a daughter of Christine and Grant W. Turnbull of South Windsor, Conn., is to be married today to James Kahn Schwartz, the son of Carol and Roy J. Schwartz of Riverdale, the Bronx.
The Rev.
Ned Edwards is to officiate at the First Church of Christ Congregational in Farmington, Conn.


Pulsipher Misses Pitching a Shutout by One Out
Immediately after the Padres' Melvin Nieves deposited his last-gasp grand slam off Mets reliever Doug Henry into straightaway center field last night, the Shea Stadium scoreboard read 7-7.
The scoreboard was wrong.
But then again, Bill Pulsipher didn't have it right, either.
He was sitting in the training room getting treatment for his scraped-up left hand and thinking that he had not only lost his first complete-game shutout with two down in the ninth but that he and his teammates had just blown a huge lead as well.


Liberty Cable vs. Time Warner
In its biggest challenge yet to Time Warner Cable, Liberty Cable has received permission to provide cable service to Stuyvesant Town and Peter Cooper Village, the sprawling developments owned by Metropolitan Life Insurance Company.
For more than two years, Met Life had resisted allowing Liberty Cable access to the complexes, which have a total of 12,221 apartments.
The State Attorney General's office has been investigating the relationship between Time Warner Cable and Metropolitan Life for possible anti-trust violations.


F.Y.I.
A Rat Revealed Q.  Why is there a sculpture of a rat crawling up one of three wires that holds the awning over the Graybar Building entrance to Grand Central Terminal on Lexington Avenue?
A.
Good eye.
That rat (above) is not easy to spot.
The architects of the Graybar building, Sloan &amp; Robertson, included three cast-iron Norway rats in the design for the building.
The sculptures depict sharp conical baffles on the mooring lines of ships, which were intended to discourage rats from climbing aboard.
One of the three rats was stolen, and the other is being used to fashion a replacement, said Patricia Raley of Metro-North Railroad, which manages the terminal.
"Billy's" Bawdy Roots Q.  On the southwest corner of Avenue of the Americas and 24th Street is Billy's Topless Dance Bar.
Above the sign is a cement block in the building that says "The Corner 6th Avenue." On the other side one says "The Corner 24th Street." "The Corner" is also cut into the cornice.
Was this the name of the building?
A.
This small red-brick building is all that remains of one of the most popular entertainment spots in the Gay 90's.
Built in 1879, it was called "The Corner" and was the beer hall annex to Koster &amp; Bial's Vaudeville Theater/Concert Hall, where Victor Herbert conducted his 40-piece orchestra.
Milton Anthony, who runs Billy's Topless Bar, says he still considers the establishment "The Corner" only now, "it's Billy's corner."  Name That Bridge Q.  Q. How did the Bronx-Whitestone Bridge and the Throgs Neck Bridge get their names?
A.
The Bronx-Whitestone Bridge was so named because it connects the Bronx to the northern Queens neighborhood of Whitestone.
More interesting, perhaps, is the origin of Whitestone.
"The Dutch discovered a white glacier boulder at the spot where the East River meets the Long Island sound hence the name," said Al Stern, a researcher at the Queens Historical Society.
The Throgs Neck, which connects Throgs Neck in the Bronx to Beechurst and Bayside in Queens, was named for John Throckmorton, who settled in the Bronx in 1643, said Frank Pascual, of the M.T.A.
Bridges and Tunnels.
"Throgs is a contraction and neck is a small point that juts out into the water," he explained.
MONIQUE P. YAZIGI Questions (and answers) may be sent to F.Y.I., The City, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Corrections
Another chart in the Neighborhood Report that listed coming reductions in bus and subway service misstated the number of northbound No. 7 trains that will run from 4 P.M. to 6 P.M. starting Sept. 10.
There will be 37, not 7.


Children's Books
RUNAWAY OPPOSITES  By Richard Wilbur.
Illustrated by Henrik Drescher.
Unpaged.
San Diego: Harcourt Brace &amp; Company. $15. (Ages 5 and up)


McEnroe Puts His Candor to Work
John McEnroe'S saucy mouth landed him in loads of trouble with officials during his scintillating, stormy career as a tennis player.
But as a tennis analyst for NBC and the USA Network, he has reinvented himself as a candid nd occasionally witty dispenser of blunt commentary.
McEnroe, who called the French Open and Wimbledon for NBC this summer, is in such demand that he will be working for CBS, as well as USA, at the United States Open over the next two weeks.
Like most top-level sports analysts, McEnroe possesses a rapid grasp of what occurs during an event.
His thoughts rarely dawdle before they tumble, often ungoverned, from his tongue.
And unlike some analysts, who are afraid to offend, he rarely resists using a verbal saber.
There will be enough descriptions of "abysmal" play from McEnroe to remind viewers that the 36-year-old winner of four United States Open singles titles has not turned into a soft-spoken wimp.
He says he has not retro-fitted his playing style for television.
"I purposely tailor myself to what my father told me as a kid, which was to be honest, although I'm not always totally critical of someone," he said.
He admits that talking in the booth with Dick Enberg of NBC or Tim Ryan of CBS is not similar to the on-court competitive situation that used to light his fuse of frustration.
"In the booth, it's a team, not me versus everybody," he said.
"I like that. But what am I going to do, yell and scream in the booth? That part of my personality doesn't translate to TV."
McEnroe, who is divorced from the actress Tatum O'Neal but sees their three children regularly, added: "I don't feel frustrated in the booth. Having children makes me more patient. That has tempered me. To me, the first responsibility is to be a good father."
People in tennis have detected a calmer, happier McEnroe, evident in a wittier on-air demeanor. (this is perhaps related to his relationship with the rock singer Patty Smythe.) "His life clearly has more order to it," said Enberg.
"Time has matured and ripened him. Last year, if I alluded to his past, he'd say, "Why are you picking on me?" This year, that wasn't the case. He was self-deprecating."
McEnroe, whose playing style and penchant for protest bordered on the improvisational, prefers to remain spontaneous in the television booth as well.
"We're not upset when he's not in the booth five minutes before air time," Enberg said.
"He doesn't do it all from the top of his head, but he's capable of doing it."
The tennis will certainly be the center-ring attraction at the United States Open.
But one of the interesting side shows will be the back and forth between McEnroe and the veteran CBS analyst Mary Carillo, one of the sport's leading voices.
Childhood friends and ex-doubles partners, the two have feuded in recent years over McEnroe's contentions that only champions like himself can adequately call top-level tennis and that only men should call men's tennis
Will Johnny Mac behave?
Maybe.
He praises Carillo for her superior preparation but insists tht she cannot know what he does from experiencing the heights of victory.
"You feel you're in a select group, you're No. 1, you know strategies and have been in that position hundreds of times moe than anyone," he said.
Listening to these two analysts back up their insights might prove to be as interesting as watching Andre Agassi and Pete Sampras attempt passing shots.
"The bottom line is to be entertaining," Mc Enroe said.
"And I add some flavor, like barbecue sauce." More like tabasco.


Standing Up for Immigrants
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani struck a blow for decency and common sense when he criticized Congress's proposed crackdown on both legal and illegal immigrants.
In an interview last week with David Firestone of The Times, Mr.
Giuliani argued that measures taking shape in Congress would play havoc with New York City and other large urban centers.
A bill requiring schools to turn away students who have immigrated illegally, or have been born here of illegal immigrant parents, could throw 60,000 children onto the streets and deprive them of the education they desperately need to become productive citizens.


Corrections
Another chart in the Neighborhood Report that listed coming reductions in bus and subway service misstated the number of northbound No. 7 trains that will run from 4 P.M. to 6 P.M. starting Sept. 10.
There will be 37, not 7.


Watercraft Stir a Mix Of Irritation And Thrills
William Hughes glared across the waters of Barnegat Bay at the buzzing swarm and looked as if he wanted to swat every one of them.
Headed his way was a ragged line of personal watercraft, otherwise known by brand names like Jet Ski, Waverunner and Sea-Doo.
To Mr.
Hughes and many others living or relaxing on coastal waters or lakes, the machines that are the high-speed craze of American waterways are summer pests about as welcome as mosquitoes.


Daniel Salzman and Pamela Mignone
Pamela Anne Mignone, a daughter of Drs.
Mario and Lois Mignone of Stony Brook, L.I., is to be married today to Daniel Mark Salzman, a son of Sonia and David Salzman of Beverly Hills, Calif.
Rabbi Shimon Paskow is to perform the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The couple graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.


Insider Trading: A Law In Disarray
The trouble with judge-made law is that you can be left with almost nothing when you get new judges.
Nowhere is that clearer than in securities law.
Over time, the judges have expanded and contracted the law, creating a blizzard of sometimes contradictory opinions.


To Catch a California Wave Or a Brooklyn Bridge Ollie
DOWNTOWN -- Brian Wilson, the still-handsome, still-hulking, still-psychologically askew force behind the original Beach Boys sound, was given an extremely wide berth at S.O.B.'s, the music club on Varick Street, on Aug. 16.
Like a caged bear, he sat in the back in a special guarded area roped off from a crowd of reporters, musicians and industry honchos who had just come from seeing "I Just Wasn't Made for These Times," a documentary about him at the Film Forum, around the corner.


Row, Row, Row: A Banner Year For Kayaking On the Delaware
In summers past, more rain meant more kayaking in the Delaware River.
This summer's dry, hot weather has meant the same thing.
With record-breaking demand for power to run air-conditioners, two hydroelectric power plants in the Upper Delaware Basin need a lot more water from upstream reservoirs.
When they discharge that water, it speeds river flows for kayakers.


Lee Krasner, Before and After the Ball Was Over
VIEWING "LEE KRASNER: The Nature of The Body, Works from 1933 to 1984," which will run at Guild Hall in East Hampton until Oct. 15, it's hard to resist dividing the artist's work into three categories -- B.P., D.P. and A.P. -- before, during and after Jackson Pollock, the legendary Abstract Expressionist who was her husband from 1945 to 1956.
This is partly because Krasner, who died in 1984, continually reinvented herself, making wildly different images in different periods: realisitic studies at the Art Students League, Cubist figure drawings under the tutelage of Hans Hofmann, giant abstractions at the end of her life.
But it is also because of the show's timing.
Its gala opening was Aug. 11, the 39th anniversary of the night that Pollock, while drunk, ploughed his Oldsmobile into a pair of elm trees off Fireplace Road near his house here, killing himself and a female passenger and injuring his mistress.


Who's Conservative?
To the Editor:
Your analysis of "The Contract, Partly Fulfilled" (editorial, Aug. 20) aptly states the realities of the political balancing in Washington.
But I wonder if there is not an element missing.


A Season of First Looks, Last Looks and In-Betweens
Take a good long look at the landscape.
It will not appear the same tomorrow.
A new, improved alliance of bowl games promises to make things better for this college football season.
By the night of Jan. 2, when the two highest-ranked available teams meet in the Fiesta Bowl, we could be talking about a matchup of Bowden vs.
Bowden (Bobby and Florida State against Terry and Auburn).
Or we might anticipate a game between Nebraska and Texas A&amp;M, a meeting that could not have happened when most conference champions were contractually chained to specific bowls.
Or maybe we will be right back where we were last January, wishing for a game that still cannot happen.
Maybe Southern California and Penn State will stage their own championship game in the Rose Bowl.
Or perhaps the system will leave us demanding a Penn State-Nebraska rematch when they couldn't get together even once.
That could leave another frustrated group of fans to purchase the latest version of the T-shirt that surfaced in Happy Valley: PENN STATE JOE PATERNO'S NATIONAL CHAMPIONS
An industry that has been marketed to emphasize its tradition and its ability to make things feel the way they once were, continues to unravel into profit-oriented chaos.
Here's something to look forward to: Three years from now, under the rotating schedule within the divisional structure of the Big 12 conference, Nebraska and Oklahoma will not meet.


A Tale of an American Royal, from Postum Labels to Mar-a-Lago
SHE was an American royal.
She lived a fast, flamboyant life generously lubricated by gushers of inherited dollars, some of which she gave away.
She built lavish homes on a memorably grand scale, accumulated vast stores of art and treasure, and married four times, and although she was perplexed about the changing husbands, she had an all-around good time.
Other than that, why should anyone be interested in the largely happy story of Marjorie Merriweather Post?


THE EXPERIMENTS OF DR. OZ
I hope you're planning a series on other groovy types of medicine.
Crystal power, perhaps.
Or, how about a piece on auras and gallbladder surgery?
JOE NICKELL Buffalo


Winning at the (Steam) Tables in Atlantic City
IN the middle of a sweltering New York summer, a few days in Atlantic City seemed like a swell idea.
But staying on Boardwalk was essential, and, as anyone who has ever played Monopoly knows, hotels on Boardwalk do not come cheap -- especially on a weekend, the only time that my husband, Tom, and I were able to go.
After many telephone calls, I booked a weekend package at the Ramada Plaza Suites for $139 a night, with a two-night Friday-Saturday minimum.
Since we are not beachgoers, we planned instead to see every sight.
I personally planned to win a big jackpot.


The PATH War; Giuliani's Call for a Fare Increase Provokes Anger and Veiled Threats
When Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani called for a fare increase on the PATH commuter line last week, opening a new front in the border wars with New Jersey, it almost seemed as if he were complaining about a railway whose route was entirely west of the Hudson and never entered New York City.
The PATH does come into the city, of course, making nearly as many stops in Manhattan as in New Jersey.
So if the system provides service in both states, why does Mr.
Giuliani keep attacking it and its owner, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, declaring that the city is being shortchanged?
In other words, who actually benefits from the PATH?


Camilla Corballis, Ashton McFadden
Camilla Corballis, the daughter of Cathy Haberland of Bedfordview, South Africa, and Edward Corballis of Westport, Conn., is to be married today to Ashton Stewart dos Santos McFadden, the son of Lynn McFadden of New York and the late George McFadden.
The Rev.
Erl Gould Purnell is to perform the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Riverside, Conn.
The bride, 29, graduated from Rollins College and expects to begin studying this winter for a master's degree in social work at Fordham University.


Where Have You Gone, Orrin Knox? The Decline of the Washington Novel
"ALLEN DRURY has a new book out?" my friend the been-there-wrote-that Washington journalist said, unable to hide his amazement.
"Allen Drury is still alive?"
Well, yes.
Thirty-six years after "Advise and Consent" spawned one of the most successful literary genres in American pop fiction, Mr.
Drury has brought out his 13th novel set in Washington, "A Thing of State" (Scribner).
Although Orrin Knox, Bob Munson and the other characters featured in "Advise and Consent" and its five increasingly dire sequels took early retirement long ago, Mr.
Drury is still up to his familiar tricks: bad guys in the Middle East, bad guys in the White House, bad guys in the Washington press corps (the only thing Mr. Drury hates more than a wimpy politician is a liberal columnist), all simmering gently in a rich stew of adjectives.
Raymond Cass Stanley, the Secretary of State, is "long, lean, lanky" and possessed of "a flintlike honesty and integrity." Joan Cohn-Bourassa, the Assistant Secretary for Near Eastern Affairs, is "small, dark, driving, and intense, intense, intense." And the world, as ever and always, is in, shall we say, a parlous state: "Nowhere in all the vast expanse of humanity's desperate strivings is there any really convincing evidence for hope."


A Fee Grows in Woodside


Study Finds Worldwide Decline In Elections of Women to Office
The percentage of women elected to national legislatures worldwide has dropped by nearly a quarter in the last seven years, the Inter-Parliamentary Union said today in a new study of how political power is distributed.
The decline followed the collapse of Communism in Europe and the resurgence of democracy there and in Africa, said Pierre Cornillon, secretary general of the organization, which is based in Geneva.


Plane Hits Block Island Restaurant, Killing 5
A seaplane trying to land in the waters off Block Island, R.I., crashed into a restaurant and exploded yesterday, killing five people, including the pilot and all three passengers.
The plane, a single-engine Cessna 185 making its third attempt to land, apparently struck a power line before it slammed into a car and then skidded into the restaurant, G.R.
Sharkey's, about 1:15 P.M., officials said.


F.Y.I.
A Rat Revealed Q.  Why is there a sculpture of a rat crawling up one of three wires that holds the awning over the Graybar Building entrance to Grand Central Terminal on Lexington Avenue?
A.
Good eye.
That rat (above) is not easy to spot.
The architects of the Graybar building, Sloan &amp; Robertson, included three cast-iron Norway rats in the design for the building.
The sculptures depict sharp conical baffles on the mooring lines of ships, which were intended to discourage rats from climbing aboard.
One of the three rats was stolen, and the other is being used to fashion a replacement, said Patricia Raley of Metro-North Railroad, which manages the terminal.
"Billy's" Bawdy Roots Q.  On the southwest corner of Avenue of the Americas and 24th Street is Billy's Topless Dance Bar.
Above the sign is a cement block in the building that says "The Corner 6th Avenue." On the other side one says "The Corner 24th Street." "The Corner" is also cut into the cornice.
Was this the name of the building?
A.
This small red-brick building is all that remains of one of the most popular entertainment spots in the Gay 90's.
Built in 1879, it was called "The Corner" and was the beer hall annex to Koster &amp; Bial's Vaudeville Theater/Concert Hall, where Victor Herbert conducted his 40-piece orchestra.
Milton Anthony, who runs Billy's Topless Bar, says he still considers the establishment "The Corner" only now, "it's Billy's corner."  Name That Bridge Q.  Q. How did the Bronx-Whitestone Bridge and the Throgs Neck Bridge get their names?
A.
The Bronx-Whitestone Bridge was so named because it connects the Bronx to the northern Queens neighborhood of Whitestone.
More interesting, perhaps, is the origin of Whitestone.
"The Dutch discovered a white glacier boulder at the spot where the East River meets the Long Island sound hence the name," said Al Stern, a researcher at the Queens Historical Society.
The Throgs Neck, which connects Throgs Neck in the Bronx to Beechurst and Bayside in Queens, was named for John Throckmorton, who settled in the Bronx in 1643, said Frank Pascual, of the M.T.A.
Bridges and Tunnels.
"Throgs is a contraction and neck is a small point that juts out into the water," he explained.
MONIQUE P. YAZIGI Questions (and answers) may be sent to F.Y.I., The City, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Women Rangers: Struggle in a Macho Bastion
Of all the rugged souls who roamed the vast and bloody frontier of Texas, none are more storied than the Texas Rangers, the lawmen who patrolled the prairie and quelled mass disturbances by their lonesomes, giving rise to the laconic motto: "One riot, one ranger."
And no figures could be more macho.
"The rangers were a completely masculine society, with a deep camaraderie born of open spaces and the campfire," wrote T. R. Fehrenbach in "Lone Star," the encyclopedic history of Texas.


Calm and Collected While the A.C. Screams
ONE more week before the movers and shakers chopper back to town, but fall is already beginning to take shape.
The bagel man's attitude is driving people back to Westchester, and I'm hoping the National Association for Female Executives does the right thing.
You may call these quality-of-life issues, but I say if it can make you crazy, it is a quality-of-health issue.
Near my bedroom window, the giant twin air-conditioning units at the rear of the Comstock Building seem to have found a new voice.
Usually, they sound like nuts and bolts rattling over a waterfall, but now they sound like a lonesome freight train on rickety tracks.
At night, there is also an intermittent ringing noise; I hope something is breaking.


Deborah Ward, Ivan Gonzalez
Deborah Elizabeth Ward, the daughter of Helen Kaprelian Ward of Mendham, N.J., and Stuart Elmore Ward Jr. of Bryn Mawr, Pa., was married yesterday to Ivan DeJesus Gonzalez Sanmiguel, the son of Elizabeth Sanmiguel of New York and the late Ivan DeJesus Gonzalez Forero.
The Rev.
Thomas E. Robinson performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Mendham.
Mrs.
Ward de Gonzalez, 28, is a candidate for a Ph.D. in political science at Columbia University.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a master's degree in public administration from Columbia.
Her father is the president of the Woodward Group, a health care brokerage firm in Bryn Mawr.
Her mother is the manager of executive development and planning in the network systems group at AT &amp; T in Basking Ridge, N.J.
The bride is a great-great-granddaughter of Adm.
William F. Halsey, the commander of the Third Fleet in the Pacific in World War II.


Unpalatable Deer Food on Fire I.
GARDENERS on Fire Island don't have to guess who is coming to dinner.
They know it will be the island's plentiful white-tailed deer.
The problem is how to keep these uninvited guests from eating you out of house and home.
With more than 600 deer accustomed to feeding on the flowers and vegetables planted on Fire Island, gardeners are deciding whether to fence in their property or switchto deer-proof plants.


The Sun Is Setting Quickly On the Yankees' Season
Three startling days in the last 41 have burdened the Yankees more than any others and have showered immense doubts on whether they will slither into the post-season.
Designate these days as dark, darker and darkest in a dreadful season that suddenly could be beyond salvaging.
The dark day was their doubleheader loss to the lowly White Sox July 18, the darker day was another doubleheader dive against the awesome Indians 16 days ago and the darkest day was Thursday night's debacle when the Yankees self-destructed in the ninth inning against the Mariners.
After each defeat, the Yankees have been described as nearing death.
Now that death knell -- accentuated by still another loss to the Mariners tonight -- is becoming difficult to ignore.


A Mysterious Pop Genius, Still Unsolved
FOR MORE THAN 30 YEARS, I'VE listened to the Beach Boys with the anger of true love.
Until now it has been a private torment, one that began when I first heard "Surfer Girl" coming through a car window in a parking lot in a small Iowa town in 1963.
When people talk about the Beach Boys, they usually talk about surfing and teen-age girls with T-Birds and the homespun exoticism of Southern California beaches, things that seemed almost impossibly remote from my life in the heart of the corn belt.
But I knew how to recognize unqualified yearning -- almost any 11-year-old does -- and I fell in love with the terrible sweetness, the optimism and the melancholy of the Beach Boys' music.
That music is almost wholly the creation of Brian Wilson, a recluse who has caused much perplexity over the years and who now, at 53, is the subject of a documentary called "I Just Wasn't Made for These Times." It will be shown tonight at 9 and on subsequent dates on the Disney Channel during its free fall preview.
When the documentary opened at the Film Forum in Manhattan 10 days ago, Janet Maslin, writing in The New York Times, said it "ought to fascinate anyone who's ever turned on a car radio in America."


CONVERSATIONS / Randy Weaver; He's a Rallying Cry of the Far Right But a Reluctant Symbol
THREE years ago Aug. 21, a pet Labrador named Striker heard a commotion in the woods of a northern Idaho mountain and scampered off to investigate.
That set off a series of events that left three people dead, two people injured, several families devastated and the integrity of the United States government wounded.


Hiroshima
To the Editor:
The reviews of books about the decision to drop the atomic bomb in 1945 brought to mind a popular radio comedian of that era, a so-called Baron Munch ausen.
His favorite and oft repeated expression was "Vas you dere, Sharlie?"


Glory of Elkdom Fading for Lodge 878
IN its heyday, the neoclassical palazzo of Elks Lodge No. 878 on Queens Boulevard in Elmhurst was a kind of social nexus, a place so vibrant that if you didn't get tickets two months in advance, you were locked out of the annual six-day Elks bazaar, the borough's premier social extravaganza.
Three decades ago, the lodge's 6,600 members included some of the borough's most prominent residents.
The Elks raised funds for charity, held grand balls and otherwise reveled in their own brotherhood.
"This was the place to be," recalled Paul Reilly, 61, a retired police detective.
"You'd have to fight to get near the bar."


Sex and Frank Kermode
To the Editor:
I was surprised to read the protests of Frank Kermode's review of Marjorie Garber's recent book, "Vice Versa." Both Ms.
Garber and James Kincaid give the impression that all Mr.
Kermode said was disdainful; in fact, he praised some parts of the book while he criticized others.


No Peace Yet, but the 175th Street Market Gets a Grant
The success of the 116th Street vendors' market has raised expectations in other parts of the city.
In Washington Heights, vendors in a market on 175th Street say they see how prosperous such a market can be and hope to replicate the Harlem model, using a $30,000 grant.
Like 116th Street, the 175th Street market was set up by the city to encourage vendors to stay off a street from which they had been banned, 181st.
But the 175th Street project faltered when the police did not enforce vending laws on 181st Street, city officials said, leaving vendors at 175th at a disadvantage.


Marianne Goldstein, Donald Berman
Marianne Elaine Goldstein, a writer in New York for People magazine's on-line computer service, is to be married today to Donald J. Berman, a producer and director in New York for "Entertainment Tonight," the syndicated television program.
Rabbi Richard Jacobs is to perform the ceremony in the Faculty House at Columbia University.
Ms.
Goldstein, 37, is the daughter of Prof.
Kenneth K. Goldstein of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Irene F. Goldstein.
The bride's father is a professor of journalism at Columbia.
Her mother was an administrator at the Scarsdale Adult School.


Clan of Many Knees (and Some Bad Actors)
WHEN learning new things about plants, "many knees" is easier to remember than polygonum.
But for those who know their Greek, the name is easy.
Polygonum is the generic name for a large clan or genus of plants.
The name comes from the Greek: "poly," meaning many; "gony," meaning knee.
All polygonums have many knees, the swollen stem joints that are important clues for the genus identity.


To the Airports
To the Editor:
While I found the article on getting to New York airports very interesting, there was, I think, a significant omission.


For Many in Troubled Co-Op, Maintenance Rise Is Last Straw
Margaret Mack, 68, a retired secretary, thought she had heard the worst when she and other shareholders of the Big Six Towers learned in March that their cooperative housing complex was $20 million in debt after a decade of mismanagement, bad investments and possible fraud.
But earlier this month, she found a note under her door saying that the co-op board planned to ask the city for a 25 percent increase in the maintenance.
If the proposal is approved by the city, Ms.
Mack, whose current maintenance fee is $327.17 a month for a one-bedroom apartment and a terrace, would be paying more than $400.


Hiroshima
To the Editor:
I read with interest your reviews of recently released books on the dropping of the atom bomb on Japan 50 years ago (July 30).
With all due respect to President Harry Truman and his advisers -- that is, giving all of them the benefit of the doubt -- I am nevertheless left with one huge question.
Assuming that America's using the bomb in fact saved countless American lives, intimidated and cowed the Soviets and served to demonstrate power awesome enough to engender Japan's surrender, explanations are not yet complete.
In fact, only in the review of Ronald Takaki's "Hiroshima" is it even acknowledged that there were "blasts" and "bombs." There were two bombs -- of differing size, yet.
There were two cities.
When does someone answer the question to my satisfaction: Why Nagasaki?
JEANNE M. REED  New York


'I Was Quick. I Was Agile. I Had the Heart.'
Bobby Riggs was much more a tennis champion than the hustler he is now famous for being.
He won three Wimbledon titles in 1939, the United States championship in 1939 and 1941, and numerous senior titles.
But many fans know him only because in 1973 he lost to Billie Jean King in the "Battle of the Sexes." The 77-year-old Riggs, who has been in failing health the past few years, recently reflected on the past and present -- the game's and his own -- in an interview with Samantha Stevenson.
Q.  What was your greatest moment in tennis?


Suburban Dreams and Nightmares
MOTHER is alcoholic.
Dad is broke.
Sister is promiscuous and brother is a superficial fool.
Welcome to "A Cheever Evening," a sampler of the lowly emotional, psychic and moral estate of elite wannabes, as disserved by A. R. Gurney at the Westport Country Playhouse.
Though Mr.
Gurney has long labored under the influence of John Cheever, the similarity between the two writers is skin deep; the differences as disparate as hollowness and vastness.
Cheever wrote with a sense of mortal pain that does not intrude on Mr.
Gurney's terrain.
It's not for nothing that Mr.
Gurney has been, by now tiresomely, labeled the official chronicler of WASP culture.


.. . And More Exceptional In Queens Than Manhattan
To the Editor:
As an adult Manhattanite, who wants to read more books than he cares to buy, it was heartening to read about the Queens Public Library.
In my sad branch of the New York Public Library, there are few new books on the shelves.
Other than dividing the new books into non-fiction and fiction, new books are shelved randomly without regard to Dewey Decimal number or author.
You have a better chance of winning the lottery than finding on the shelf a library copy of a recently reviewed book.
And books cannot be reserved until they are listed in the library book catalogue, which is usually months after publication.
MARVIN H. SCILKEN  Manhattan


Keeping Your Eye on the Private Eyes: The Life Under Investigation May Be Your Own
IF you apply for a job or a loan or even, in some cases, a college scholarship, you are more likely than ever before to be checked out by a private investigator.
"Without question, the likelihood is greater than it was in the past," said Robert McCrie, a professor of security at John Jay College of Criminal Justice in Manhattan.
"And the trend will continue in the future."


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: August 27, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
THE BODY FARM, by Patricia Cornwell. (Berkley, $6.99.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates the murder of a small North Carolina girl.
2
2
INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Signet, $7.50.) A widower and a widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold a sinister force at work in a Maine town.
3
10
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Bantam, $6.99.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
4
16
THE STONE DIARIES, by Carol Shields. (Penguin, $10.95.) The journey of a woman from childhood to motherhood through old age.
5
9
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $7.50.) Jack Ryan vs. a Japanese plot.
6
5
EVERYTHING TO GAIN, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) An act of violence destroys a woman's family life.
7
22
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $7.50.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing.
8
4
THE 13TH JUROR, by John T. Lescroart. (Island/Dell, $6.50.) A lawyer undertakes the defense of a woman accused of murdering two husbands and her young son.
9
1
THE LAST INNOCENT MAN, by Phillip Margolin. (Bantam, $6.50.) A lawyer defends an attorney who may have killed a vice cop.
10
5
BORN IN ICE, by Nora Roberts. (Jove, $5.99.) An Irishwoman who owns a bed-and-breakfast plays host to a mystery writer from America.
11
1
PLAYING FOR THE ASHES, by Elizabeth George. (Bantam, $6.50.) A case involving arson, infidelity, cricket and murder in the English countryside.
12
5
REMEMBRANCE, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $6.99.) A writer who was jilted finds consolation when she travels back to Edwardian England.
13
6
WHITE SHARK, by Peter Benchley. (St. Martin's, $6.50.) An underwater monster.
14*
3
THE NIGHTINGALE LEGACY, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $6.50.) In Regency England, a young woman finds romance with a nobleman.
15
1
TRUST ME, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $6.50.) A canceled wedding leads to a curious romance between the groom and the caterer.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
6
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Anchor/Doubleday, $6.99.) Fighting a deadly virus.
2
9
APOLLO 13, by Jim Lovell and Jeffrey Kluger. (Pocket, $6.50.) The 1970 moon mission.
3
22
REVIVING OPHELIA, by Mary Pipher. (Ballantine, $12.50.) Dangers that beset teen-age girls.
4
49
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.)
5
85
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
6
616
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (+)
7
16
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Delta, $12.95.) Experiencing loss.
8
128
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) A memoir. (+)
9
37
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships.
10*
50
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
11
48
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.)
12
7
THE CATCHER WAS A SPY, by Nicholas Dawidoff. (Vintage, $13.) The life of Moe Berg.
13*
1
DANGEROUS MINDS, by LouAnne Johnson. (St. Martin's, $4.99.) Teaching in an inner city.
14*
47
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) Monotheism over 4,000 years.
15
70
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $6.50 and $12.) Menopause.
16*
10
THE KENNEDY WOMEN, by Laurence Leamer. (Ivy, $7.99.) Five generations of a family.
17*
26
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Vintage, $12.) A reporter's memoir.
18*
26
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.)
19*
1
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $5.99.) Humor.
20*
14
MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $6.99.) Inspirational essays.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
48
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Uplifting stories. (+)
2
17
A 2ND HELPING OF CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) One hundred more stories. (+)
3
1
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $8.95.) The 1995 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
4*
9
TEN STUPID THINGS WOMEN DO TO MESS UP THEIR LIVES, by Laura C. Schlessinger. (Harper Perennial, $10.) Counsel by a
therapist. (+)
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 12, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
A dagger (+) indicates that some bookstores report receiving bulk orders for a book.


THE EXPERIMENTS OF DR. OZ
Thank you for Chip Brown's report "The Experiments of Dr. Oz" (July 30).
As someone with an incurable liver disease who is also, as a registered nurse, a member of the mainstream medical community, I've been investigating complementary therapies for years.


A Beach Boogie Benefit
$350,000 is raised to fight AIDS; Fire Island, L.I., Aug. 20.


Senate Can Clean Up the Arms Bazaar
To the Editor:
Re "America and the Arms Bazaar," editorial, Aug. 20:


If You Can't Go Abroad Without a Telephone
Travelers in Europe can rent cellular telephones through a British company called Global Cellular Rental.
The telephone can be reserved before leaving the United States, and, with 48 hours' notice, the number provided before departure.
Telephones are delivered to and picked up from hotels and offices throughout Britain and most of Western Europe for $50, a fee that is waived for rentals of more than 15 days.
They can be arranged daily ($11.50, two-day minimum), weekly ($75) or monthly ($200).
Calling charges vary from country to country, depending on distance and time of day, and range from about 40 cents a unit (about 30 seconds) in Britain to $5 in some parts of Europe.
Thus a 10-minute call from London to New York, for example, would cost $8; there is no charge for incoming calls in Britain.


INDISE
INVESTING IT /Page 3  Margin debt is up.
And that has some Wall Street watchers worried.
By Bill Alpert.
MUTUAL FUNDS /Page 4  Breaking from the pack -- and the past -- seems to suit Carlene Murphy Ziegler and her Artisan fund just fine.
By Edward Wyatt.
EARNING IT /Page 9  More and more, moving doesn't have to mean leaving a job behind.
By Kathleen Murray.
VOICES /Page 12  Now that Bill Gates Day is mercifully done, it's time to start planning for the rollout of Windows 98.6.
By Joe Queenan.


Elizabeth Horwitz And Yuval Marcus
Elizabeth Anne Horwitz, a daughter of Inez Horwitz of Sayville, L.I., and Irwin Horwitz of Woodbury, L.I., is to be married today to Yuval Hod Marcus, a son of Dr.
Judith R. Marcus and Dr.
Ivan G. Marcus of New Rochelle, N.Y.
The bridegroom's father, a rabbi, is to perform the ceremony at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.
The bride, 29, is a curatorial assistant in the drawings and prints department of the Cooper-Hewitt National Design Museum in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College and received a master's degree in art history from Hunter College.
Her father owns Restful Ethan Allen, a furniture store in Bayshore, L.I.
Her mother is the public program coordinator for the Connetquot Public Library in Bohemia, L.I.


David Chapman and Phoebe Himes
Phoebe Jeanette Himes, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond R. Himes of Boca Raton, Fla., was married yesterday to David Shields Chapman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Chapman of Fort Pierce, Fla.
The Rev.
Kirk A. McCormick performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Boca Raton.
Mrs.
Chapman, 24, is an agent at Judy Pittman Inc., a real estate company in Dallas.
She graduated from Southern Methodist University.
Her father is an executive vice president and an owner of Colman &amp; Hirschmann, a manufacturers' representative company in New York.


Quietly Upscale In the East Village
DANAL ++ (212) 982-6930; 90 East 10th Street, near Third Avenue; $; all major credit cards
A charming mismatch of pretty chairs, tables, couches, old lamps and lanterns contributes to a relaxed country atmosphere at this popular little restaurant.
Befitting the setting, the kitchen serves an engaging roster of homey American fare that changes daily.
Appetizers might include chilled creamy tomato and basil soup; a salad of beets and endives seasoned with an herb dressing; a little tart of tomato, mozzarella and goat cheese, and even individual pizzas of smoked chicken, grilled onions and melted mozzarella.
For entrees, there might be herb-crusted salmon on a bed of couscous with a citrus sauce and a fennel salad on the side; grilled breast of chicken topped with a gazpacho sauce and served with steamed rice; roast tenderloin of beef with horseradish cream and fluffy mashed potatoes, and farfalle tossed with shrimp, scallops, olives, garlic and roasted peppers. ($25 and Under: 11/20/92)  HABIB'S PLACE ++  (212) 979-2243; 438 East Ninth Street, near First Avenue; $; no credit cards
For many neighborhood residents, this little North African and Middle Eastern restaurant feels like home, from the informal setting and communal tables to the warm greeting and delightful cooking of Habib Belkadi, the chef, owner and caretaker.
At Habib's Place the food is cheap, plentiful and delicious, and although Mr.
Belkadi generally cooks by whim, one can almost always count on the availability of the terrific falafel sandwich.
Other good starters include the familiar platters of hummus, baba gannouj, grape leaves and tabbouleh.
Recommended main courses include couscous with chicken, lamb, merguez sausages or vegetables, and juicy lamb kebabs served with grilled pita and a small salad. ($25 and Under: 6/16/95)  DOK SUNI'S ++  (212) 477-9506; 119 First Avenue, at Seventh Street; $; no credit cards
Perhaps the first Korean restaurant to go trendy in Manhattan, Dok Suni's offers Korean food with American flair, in a fashionable East Village decor and ambiance.
The cooking, if not quite true to Korean tradition, is light and tasty.
Appetizers include potato pancakes with a soy-and-vinegar dipping sauce, spring rolls, fried dumplings filled with a ground vegetable mixture, and kimchi pancakes, also served with a soy-and-vinegar sauce.
Among the main courses are bulgogi, or grilled slices of marinated beef in a spicy sauce served with lettuce leaves; mildly flavored seafood pancake, made with oysters, squid and shrimp; fried chicken with a jalapeno and garlic sauce with a hint of soy sauce, and broiled pork ribs in a hot sauce of chili pepper and garlic. ($25 and Under: 5/12/95)  LANZA ++  (212) 674-7014; 168 First Avenue, near 10th Street; $; all major credit cards
There are no pretenses at this cheerful and comfortable neighborhood favorite.
The old-fashioned cooking is the real thing too: solid, robust and well priced.
Sweet melon and prosciutto, sauteed mushrooms in garlic and olive oil, roasted peppers and mozzarella, and plump little clams oreganato all can be had as appetizers.
For pastas, there is fusilli in a tomato sauce with onions and prosciutto, and linguine with white clam sauce.
Main courses include grilled shell steak with mushrooms; sauteed chicken breast in a creamy fennel sauce; a fisherman's stew of calamari, clams and shrimp in marinara sauce; baked veal scaloppine with tomato and fresh mozzarella cheese, and a whole trout, pan-roasted with rosemary and brushed with olive oil and garlic. ($25 and Under: 1/22/93)  L'UDO


Dole, in a New Bow to Right, Returns Gay Group's Money
Scrambling to enhance relations with conservatives, Senator Bob Dole's Presidential campaign said today that it was returning $1,000 from a gay Republican group.
The campaign said it had accepted the June donation by mistake, and would never have taken money from an organization that supported causes Mr.
Dole opposed, like allowing homosexuals in the military.
But correspondence made public today by the president of the group, the Log Cabin Republicans, showed that Mr.
Dole's national finance chairman had sought the group's help in raising money as recently as May.


Saying No to Wild Card Foils a U.S. Teen-Ager
Not quite a year ago, an American, Meilen Tu, was beating a fellow teen-ager, Martina Hingis, to win the United States Open junior girls title.
Both have since turned professional, but barring some last-minute developments, there will be no rematch this year in the main draw at Flushing Meadows.


MOVIES THIS WEEK
A somber drama, a fantasy, two special children's movies and a hilarious caper stand out on the film roster this week.
Perceptively restrained Luchino Visconti's "Death in Venice" (1971) exudes a haunting power in depicting a doomed artist (Dirk Bogarde) and his platonic obession with a youth at the same hotel.
Thomas Mann's famed allegorical tale has been adapted with skill and sensitivity at authentic sites, to highly effective Mahler music, Bogarde is superb -- Monday at 11 P.M. on Bravo.
It's still hard to beat Disney's technical wizards for adroit surprises.
To name one: "Parade of the Pink Elephants" in the enchanting, animated "Dumbo" (1941).
This brilliantly clever dream sequence is the pivot of the plot, after the circus's baby elephant sips some champagne.
Even if you don't see the whole picture, tune in toward the end -- Friday at 6 P.M. on Disney.
A live-action treat, via Marguerite Henry's book for children, is James B Clark's "Misty" (1961), about a brother and sister drawn to a wild horse.
Set on Chincoteague Island, off the Virginia coast, the trenchantly scenic yarn has an appealing human element in young David Ladd and Pam Smith (in picture), and Arthur O'Connell and Anne Seymour as their parents -- Thursday at noon on Disney.
For a brisk, flavorsome adventure mixing castaways and prehistoric animals, to stunning music (Bernard Herrmann, who else?) -- with a humorous edge -- try Cy Endfeld's "Mysterious Island" (1961).
Gary Merrill, Joan Greenwood, Michael Craig, Michael Callan and Herbert Lom pitch in.
A sporting team, no lulls -- Tuesday at 12:30 P.M. on Cinemax.
The same goes for a sassy, contagious grin of a movie: Ossie Davis's "Cotton Comes to Harlem" (1970).
Derived from a Chester Himes story, this sly caper centers on a con scheme that tilts a neighborhood.
The marvelously limber cast includes Raymond St.
Jacques, Godfrey Cambridge, Calvin Lockhart, Redd Foxx and Judy Pace.
Hold tight -- Saturday at 8 P.M. on TNT.
Howard Thompson


Informer on Racist Gathering by Agents Was Ex-Police Officer With Ax to Grind
For several weeks last month, the press carried reports of a rowdy, racist event, an annual redneck campout in the hills of Tennessee where Federal agents got drunk, made obscene jokes about blacks and hung a banner warning, "Nigger check point."
It was the first mention most people had ever heard of the Good Ol' Boys Roundup, an annual three-day event for law-enforcement officers and Federal agents, but the reports were disturbing enough to prompt hearings by the Senate Judiciary Committee, an investigation by the Justice Department and expressions of alarm by President Clinton.


Accessible Broadway: The Cheap Seats
Tickets to Broadway shows may cost more than $65 apiece these days, but reduced-price tickets for many shows are available at the two TKTS booths -- the main one in Duffy Square at 47th Street and Broadway, and a satellite at 2 World Trade Center.
Tickets for selected shows are sold at Duffy Square beginning at 3 P.M. on the day of performance for evening shows and at 10 A.M. for Wednesday and Saturday matinees, noon for matinees on Sunday.
The World Trade Center booth opens at 11 A.M. and also sells matinee tickets for the next day.
Tickets cost either 50 percent or 75 percent of box-office prices, determined by the producers, plus a $2.50 service charge per ticket.
Only cash and traveler's checks are accepted.
Information: (212) 768-1818.


Block Party's a Celebration and a Farewell
IT'S touted as "the world's largest block party," and it was created to celebrate the city's volunteerism.
But today's event will also mark the curtain call of We Care About New York, a nonprofit environmental group that works with individuals, community groups, schools and businesses to clean up the city.
"The board decided we had pretty much accomplished what we set out to accomplish 13 years ago," says Emory Jackson, the organization's president, "so we wanted to throw the largest party New York has seen."


Dr. Pschirrer And Dr. West
Dr.
Elizabeth Rebecca Pschirrer and Dr.
Loyd Avery West, medical residents in obstetrics and gynecology, were married yesterday in Edgerton Park in New Haven.
The Rev.
Ronald L. Krauss, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony.
Dr.
Pschirrer, 33, is known as Rebecca.
She is an administrative chief resident at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
She graduated magna cum laude from Denison University and received her medical degree from Dartmouth College.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
A.
Richard Pschirrer Jr. of New Haven.
The bride's father is the medical director of the Temple Surgical Center of the Yale-New Haven Ambulatory Services Corporation in New Haven, and is an associate clinical professor of anesthesiology at Yale University.
Her mother, Peggy Pschirrer, is an associate at Marcarelli &amp; Naizby, a New Haven law firm.


Famous Long Ago
HYPATIA OF ALEXANDRIA  By Maria Dzielska.
Translated by F. Lyra. 157 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. $29.95.


Guatemalans Negotiating Future Role of Military
On the battlefield they continue to hold the upper hand against the leftist guerrillas they have been fighting for 34 years.
But at the negotiating table, where the struggle will ultimately be decided, Guatemala's military leaders are increasingly on the defensive as they come under pressure from the United States, the United Nations and domestic critics.


Bookshelf
THE GREAT FIRE.
By Jim Murphy.
Scholastic. $16.95. (Ages 10 and up) Here's an engrossing account of the 1871 fire in Chicago, a disaster that drove 100,000 people from their homes.
The book is handsomely illustrated with photographs and drawings.
The engaging text draws heavily on the recollections of four survivors.
NO!
NO!
NO!
Written and illustrated by Anne Rockwell.
Macmillan. $14. (Ages 3 to 6) A little boy tells us about a miserable day -- even the toothpaste was awful, and his blocks fell down.
What he wants us to know is that he heard a good story at bedtime, had a wonderful dream, and has woken up to a better day.


Bard Beachhead
Laurence Olivier's magnificent version of "Henry V" (1945) really welded Shakespeare to the movie map.
With the director (pictured with Renee Asherson) in the title role (like Kenneth Branagh in his more recent version), it provides stunning pageantry in sight and sound.
There's a clever, transitional fade-in: a bored stage actor at the Old Globe.
William Walton's mercurial score surges throught the Battle of Agincourt.
It's on Saturday at 1:45 P.M. and Saturday/Early Sunday at 1:30 A.M. on Bravo.
Howard Thompson


Panel to Investigate Atrocities of the Apartheid Era
Sibongile Hadebe's husband was shot dead on his way home from an African National Congress meeting here one evening in 1992, killed with a single bullet aimed neatly below his ear.
There was not much of an investigation, let alone an arrest.
But now Mrs.
Hadebe, like thousands of others who lost husbands, brothers or children under South Africa's brutal apartheid system, wants her questions answered and, if possible, the killers held accountable.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a listing of restaurants and hotels with an article on Aug. 13 headed "Breaking Bread With Stars" misstated the telephone number for Eclipse, a restaurant in West Hollywood.
It is (310) 724-5959.


Scaling Up (Not a Lot) to Opera
IT MAY SEEM SURPRISING THAT Ned Rorem, with his affinity for vocal music, has not written more operas.
Many commissions and expensive productions have been handed over to aspiring American opera composers with no such affinity.
In a career spanning more than half a century, Mr.
Rorem has composed hundreds of songs.
And although critics who prefer their contemporary music on the cutting edge may find Mr.
Rorem's essentially diatonic language too conservative, few knowledgeable commentators would dispute his skill at setting the English language or his gift for musical characterization, his distinguished choice of texts or his felicitous shaping of melodies.


Americanisms Rooted in Africa
To the Editor:
In her essay "Performing Art Is Always Theater"  [ Aug. 6 ]  Margo Jefferson translates the Wolof word "degga" -- which was used as the title for the collaborative piece by Toni Morrison, Max Roach and Bill T. Jones -- as "to understand." It brings to my mind several Americanisms that may once have been Africanisms.
For example, jive had the original meaning among African-Americans of "misleading talk"; it can be compared to the Wolof "jev," meaning "to talk disparagingly."


Children's Books
TOO FAR AWAY TO TOUCH  By Leslea Newman.
Illustrated by Catherine Stock. 32 pp.
New York: Clarion Books. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9)  MY TWO UNCLES  Written and illustrated by Judith Vigna.
Unpaged.
Morton Grove, Ill.: Albert Whitman &amp; Company. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9)


125th's Vendors Finding New Home Fine, Thanks


Liberties; We Like Mikes
Cicada, again. Michael Ovitz is shown to Michael Eisner's table.
Mr.
Eisner has pre-ordered his lunch with the chef. (Halibut, nothing on it.) Mr.
Ovitz orders something not on the menu. (Lemon pasta, nothing on it.)


Officer, 30, Kills Himself
A 30-year-old police officer shot himself to death outside his apartment in Queens early yesterday as a group of his friends looked on, the police said.
The officer, Jean Revelo, 30, was assigned to the Ninth Precinct for the last three years.
By late May, three police officers had killed themselves this year, said Officer Kathleen Kelly, a police spokeswoman.


In This Corner Of the Field, A Tough Champ
Tom Osborne, the coach of the Nebraska Cornhuskers, does not remember the opponent or the score two seasons back, but he cannot forget the sight.
Lawrence Phillips, then months removed from high school, had had the ball stripped from his grasp at the opposition's 10-yard line, where it was beginning to bounce in the direction of the end zone, toward a touchback and a wasted possession.
That setback would not transpire.
"He was on his hands and knees," Osborne recalled.
"He clawed and scratched and he got that ball one way or another. It was almost a desperation thing."


Great Caesar's Ghost!
"I HAVE come in search of Caesar," David Slavitt boomed as he crossed the pedestrian bridge linking a vast parking garage ringed with classical statues to Caesars Atlantic City casino hotel.
Which Caesar?


Tapes Have No Place In the Simpson Trial
To the Editor:
I believe you erred in advocating the admission into evidence in the O. J. Simpson case of tapes of Mark Fuhrman's 1985 comments to a screenwriter ("The Relevance of the Detective's Tapes," editorial, Aug. 18).


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Guidebook for the Disabled Visiting Cultural Institutions Hospital Audiences Inc., a nonprofit organization that provides cultural opportunities for people with physical and mental disabilities, has recently issued a new guide: "Access for All: A Guide for People With Disabilities to New York City Cultural Institutions."
This guide to more than 300 museums, theaters, concert halls and other cultural institutions in the city covers entrances, parking, alternative entrances for people in wheelchairs, the availability of auxiliary aids and services (like touch tours and infrared hearing devices), restrooms, telephones and water fountains.


Casbah? Gem? Arcade Sees Dim Future
Gallery 34 is a narrow, curved pedestrian arcade lined with little shops that resembles the old-quarter bazaar of an ancient Middle Eastern city.
But it lingers as an obscure oddity amid the modern squared-off blocks of midtown Manhattan, running between 33d and 34th Streets east of Seventh Avenue.
The alley was built in 1919 as the Pennsylvania Arcade.
But now, its survival is in doubt, with the property's ownership fragmented, most of the operation in bankruptcy and many of its merchants facing eviction.


Wider Recycling Plan Considered by Board
IN a continuing effort to expand garbage-recycling efforts in Westchester, the County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, has proposed amending the current law to include junk mail, phone books, magazines, brown bags, aerosol cans and aluminum foil and trays in curbside collection programs.
The proposal, now before the County Board of Legislators, calls for amending intermunicipal agreements with 35 of Westchester's 42 municipalities in Refuse Disposal District 1 to include the new materials.


All Shook Up By Trucks in SoHo
To the Editor:
The article about errant speed-demon truck drivers careening down Broome Street to the detriment of local residents' ear drums and residential tranquility ("When It Comes to Trucks, SoHo Is All Shook Up," July 16), notes the disregard drivers pay to the "No Thru Trucks" signs, but it doesn't suggest a solution.


Is Politics Broken?
When he announced he would not seek a fourth term, Senator Bill Bradley said he was tired of working in a political system that was "broken." Do you agree?
What do you think is wrong?
Strict Limits Are Needed
Senator Bradley is correct when he says that the political system is broken.
It is broken because Government has gone far beyond its legitimate powers as enumerated in the Constitution.
Government has been indifferent to the costs of its policies and oblivious to the diminishing of personal liberties.
A strictly limited Government is the only fix that will work.
JIM TOSONE Washington Township A Killer Sport
Politics has become a killer sport, with corporate interests owning players, media touts setting the odds, backroom wheelers and dealers divvying up the gate and extremists from both sides screaming for blood.
If anyone can restore humanity to politics and bring clear, deliberative thinking to government, Bill Bradley will be the one to do it.
LOIS B. REDISCH Englewood Ready for 3d-Party Vote
The Democratic Party is what's broken.
Bill Bradley wants to run for President, and lots of us want to vote for him.
Americans are not worried about voting for a third-party candidate.
Perot might have won if he weren't so quirky.
Any other conservative Republicans for Bradley out there?
JOHN VAN HEUSDEN Osprey, Fla.
An Incredible Position
It's absolutely incredible that a liberal like Bill Bradley, who voted for 17 years for every partisan Democratic movement and against the Balanced Budget Amendment, has the nerve to suddenly say that both parties are broken and that he just might be the independent we need to be President.
HARRY HURLEY Ventnor Too Much to Endure
I agree the system is broken.
There are several reasons.
First, the expense of campaigning leads to compromises for fund-raising that foster corruption and the abandonment of principle.
Second, candidates and officeholders, as well as their families, have been subjected to vicious smear campaigns.The number of people willing to endure this is a rapidly shrinking pool.
JUDI OWENS Brick The Citizens' Fault
Is politics broken?
You bet it is, and for the same reason a house falls apart or a car breaks down.
The owners are to blame, and that means the average American citizen.
My question is not why Bill Bradley is calling it quits, but why he took so long to throw in the towel, as many other thoughtful, frustrated politicians have.
PETER LANDIS Montclair How to Talk Back
Each week, this column summarizes responses to one question and poses another.
Readers can post in the @times area of America Online; comments will also be accepted by E-mail to jersey@nytimes.com, by fax to (212) 556-7219, and by mail to Chatter, New Jersey, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Published messages become the property of The Times; they may be edited and may be republished in any medium.
Next: New York officials want to raise the tolls at Hudson River crossings and the fare on PATH trains, saying New Jerseyans aren't paying their fair share.
Do you agree?


ALSO INSIDE
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 2 Facelifts and ownership changes await some of the city's highest profile restaurants.
INSIDE QUEENS 3 A changing world catches up with Elks Lodge No. 878 in Queens.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 17 A 20-block block party in Murray Hill; A Caribbean music festival in Brooklyn.
MOVIE CLOCK 16  What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 18 A tour of the East Village; the engaging American fare at Danal; the informality of Habib's Place.
SOAPBOX 19  Speaking up for Pier 84.
And a plea against the subway free-for-all.
And letters.


Meeting District 16 Parents, and a Challenge
Most of the few dozen parents who filed into the auditorium of Public School 308 in Bedford-Stuyvesant last week wanted answers.
Their children are struggling with reading and math, and the board of their district, Community School District 16, had been suspended by Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines because it could not decide on a superintendent.
The Chancellor had made the decision for them, appointing Dr.
Margaret A. Breland-Bradley, the principal of an elementary school in Queens.
At her first school board meeting, last month, she was met by friends who gave her flowers.
At her second meeting, on Wednesday, she was met by a challenge.
Almost every parent who spoke wanted her to appoint Bettie Kollock-Wallace, an acting principal at the Stephen Decatur School on McDonough Street, as its principal.
Some noted that Dr.
Breland-Bradley had not been appointed by an elected school board.


Commercial Property: The Decline of the Prestigious Address; 'Location, Location, Location'? It's 'Cost, Cost, Cost'
ITEM: FCB/Leber Katz, the advertising agency, moves from 767 Fifth Avenue, the ever-so-fancy General Motors building at 59th Street, to the 40-year-old, plain vanilla Mobil Building, at 150 East 42d Street.
"Our marching orders were to reduce their occupancy costs, because they realized that image for image's sake is simply passe," said I. Keith Ellis, a managing director at the Edward S. Gordon real estate firm who found FCB the space.


Amy L. Rieder, Glen Dershowitz
Amy Lynn Rieder, the daughter of Enid and Ronald Rieder of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening in Brooklyn to Glen Marc Dershowitz, a son of Carol and Stanley Dershowitz of Holmdel, N.J.
Rabbi Henry M. Weiner performed the ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.


Made in New Jersey
JUST three years ago, the pocket-sized explosive devices that Ralph Dodd manufactures helped steer Hawk anti-aircraft missiles.
Last Thursday, Mr.
Dodd, the president of Cartridge Actuated Devices in Fairfield, showed the same mechanism to a potential customer looking for a better way to inflate automobile airbags.
Such are the adaptations that New Jersey's small manufacturers are making.
Whether by changing gears, riding a trend or staking out a market so small that there is little competition -- like Miller Berry &amp; Sons of Port Norris, one of only three makers of casket mattresses in the country -- many smaller businesses are hanging on even as bigger factories continue to desert the state in droves.
Not all of them are thriving -- Mr.
Dodd has laid off half his employees in the past five years -- but a great many are surviving.


Looking for Laughs in a Grim Race to Prime Time
Craig Shoemaker is a sitcom star waiting to happen.
Or is he?
The question hangs, like a whiff of expensive cigar smoke, over the crowd that fills the Improvisation, a branch of the nationwide comedy-nightclub chain.
Jerry Seinfeld played the Tempe Improv.
So, too, as attested by their signed photos in the lobby, did his fellow television stars Ellen Degeneres ("Ellen" on ABC), Gary Shandling ("The Larry Sanders Show," HBO) and Paul Reiser ("Mad About You," NBC).
Their black-and-white glossies nestle among those of dozens of other talented professional stand-up comics, most of whom only the most dedicated students of the genre have ever heard of.


Arloa L. Reston, Gregg L. Haythorn
Arloa L. Reston, the daughter of Col. and Mrs.
Russell T. Reston of Fairfax, Va., was married yesterday to Gregg L. Haythorn, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
LeRoy W. Haythorn of Rochester.
The Rev.
David R. Harkness officiated at the Presbyterian Church in Irvington-on-Hudson, N.Y.
The couple graduated from the University of Virginia.
Mrs.
Haythorn, an actress, most recently performed in Moliere's "School for Wives" at the Vineyard Theater in New York.
Mr.
Haythorn is a brand manager at International Marketing Systems in Shelton, Conn.


Julia M. Priest, Thomas J. Siegel
Julia Marie Priest, the daughter of Christine Priest of Norwalk, Conn., and Jerome Priest of North Grosvenordale, Conn., is to be married today to Thomas Jay Siegel, a son of R. Robert Siegel of New York and the late Jean Karpas Siegel.
Rabbi Sally Finestone, the associate director of the Harvard University Hillel Center, is to perform the ceremony in Rye, N.Y., at the home of the bride's aunt and uncle, Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick P. Rose.
Ms.
Priest, who will keep her name, graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree in fine arts from Boston University.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in communication disorders at the Massachusetts General Hospital Institute of Health Professions.
She also is a teacher in Boston of the Alexander Technique, a program of body awareness and proper use of muscles.


Unmarried Pairs: Let the Buyers Beware
THE minute Howard Mimnaugh saw the run-down, century-old, two-family victorian in Hightstown, N.J., he realized it was just the house he was looking for.
The building needed work, Mr.
Mimnaugh said, but he figured that he and his female friend of many years could buy the property as a tax shelter and work as a team to restore it to its former glory.
With each contributing equally to the purchase and renovation, Mr.
Mimnaugh estimated it would take three years of nights and weekends for the couple to complete the project.
About seven months after they bought the house, however, Mr.
Mimnaugh's partner decided to divest herself of both the house and Mr.
Mimnaugh.


J. H. Rhee, C. M. Sclafani
Jeannie Hae Rhee, the daughter of B. H. and Kay S. Rhee of Eden Prairie, Minn., was married yesterday to Christopher Marc Sclafani, a son of Joan and Dr.
Anthony Sclafani of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Dennis P. Murphy performed the ceremony at Heinz Memorial Chapel in Pittsburgh.
Mr. and Mrs.
Sclafani Rhee, both 23, met at Yale University, where they graduated summa cum laude and were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
They are students at Yale Law School.


Streetscapes: Edith Wharton; In 'The Age of Innocence,' Fiction Was Not Truth
EDITH WHARTON's books have become benchmarks for the history of Victorian New York City.
Each year walking tours, lectures, articles, books and even -- in 1993 -- a movie have recapitulated her observations about the 19th-century city.
One passage in particular is used again and again: her account of the decision by her aunt, Mary Mason Jones, to build at Fifth Avenue and 57th Street when the area was undeveloped.
But Wharton was a novelist, not a reporter, and in the case of her aunt, truth is at least as compelling as fiction.
Edith Jones Wharton was born in 1862 to George and Lucretia Jones, a genteel couple of comfortable wealth.
She grew up as a member of New York's privileged elite -- most of the Joneses were listed in the first Social Register in 1887.


Regine Bernstein, James C. Stone
Regine Elicka Bernstein, the daughter of Jill Sachs of Somers, N.Y., and Michael Bernstein of Malibu, Calif., was married last evening to James Charles Stone, a son of Gloria and Arnold Stone of Santa Monica, Calif.
Rabbi David Greenberg performed the ceremony at Temple Shaaray Tefila in Bedford, N.Y.
Mrs.
Stone, 25, graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
She is a public relations associate at Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, the New York investment bank.
Her father retired from the bank as a managing director and the head of the corporate bond trading department.
Her mother is a painter in Somers.


On Sunday; Recapturing The Flavors Of an Era
OH, to be a cookbook author with 75,000 copies in print and your picture right there on the cover in full color.
Even if the photo session -- an all-day ordeal under hot studio lights where the photographer snapped and snapped -- dragged on until the torta di ricotta was warm and the giambotte was cool.
"They put so much makeup on me I said I was going to get pimples," Elodia Rigante recalled.
"And I did. I never had a pimple in my life."
Such is the price of authorship.
It may not be "The Bridges of Madison County," but Miss Rigante's publisher never expected "Elodia Rigante's Italian Immigrant Cooking" to sell so well.
Just last week the publisher, who hatched the idea for the book in the first place, gave the go-ahead for 25,000 copies more, a sign he is confident he will not be swamped by returns from booksellers who discover that they cannot move the $29.95 book.


Start of New Purchase College Season
ALONG with the seasons of the three county-based orchestras -- the Westchester Philharmonic, the Philharmonia Virtuosi and the Westchester Symphony -- we look ahead to the guest visits of such notable ensembles as the New York Pops, St.
Petersburg Orchestra and the Israel Philharmonic.
These and nearly three dozen other musical attractions are on the 1995-96 agenda of the Performing Arts Center at Purchase College.
Among returning favorites are the Tokyo String Quartet, the Greenleaf Chamber Players, Peter Serkin, Alicia de Larrocha and -- speaking of internationally renowned pianists -- Garrick Ohlsson, who concludes his historic traversal of the complete solo works of Chopin with recitals in December, February and March.
The famed soprano Leontyne Price makes one of her increasingly rare recital appearances next May, while earlier seasonal delights include the only New York concerts of the Ysaye Quartet and Trio Fontenay, both from France, the Miami City Ballet, the extraordinary percussionist Evelyn Glennie, and two younger, though already major prize-winning pianists from the former Soviet Union, Ignat Solzhenitsyn and Eldar Nebolsin.
The Purchase season begins Sept. 15 with a concert by Diane Schuur, holder of two Grammy Awards for Best Female Jazz Vocalist, and lighter music continues to flow with the later arrival of Taj Mahal, Michael Feinstein, Cleo Laine and Lou Rawls.
For a brochure listing dates, times and an assortment of subscription plans, call 251-6200.


Amid Much Deterioration, Library's an Exception. . .
To the Editor:
Regarding the Soapbox essay about the Queens Public Library ("Speaking Volumes," July 30): As a lifetime resident of Queens, I have seen a deterioration of many services.
However the library system seems to be continually improving.


Ann L. Spletzer, Edwin F. Brooks
Ann Lisa Spletzer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond J. Spletzer of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday in New Haven to Edwin Featherstone Brooks, a son of Phyllis J. Featherstone of New York and Henry S. Brooks of Alexandria, Va.
The Rev.
John Kjoller performed the Lutheran ceremony in the Battell Chapel at Yale University.
Mrs.
Brooks, 27, is an associate at McGuire, Woods, Battle &amp; Boothe, a Richmond law firm.
She graduated from Yale and received her law degree from the University of Virginia.
Her father is a senior business analyst at Lewco Securities in New York.
Her mother, Leanne Spletzer, is a real estate agent at Coldwell Banker-Lamb in New Canaan.


CLONES: Poles Apart
Americans love cellular phones but not the monopole antennas that make them work.
Now, Arcnet Architects of Holmdel, N.J., is disguising them, in this case as white pines.
The poles are steel but have epoxy-resin "bark" and nonmetallic "foliage." Developed with McCaw Cellular Communications, Valmont Industries (a pole manufacturer) and the Larson Company (a designer of artificial landscapes), the trees cost about $1,000 a foot.
Several "white pines" have already been installed around the country; "royal palms" and "saguaro cactuses" are in the works for seashore and desert locales.


A Lawn Party for a Cause
Raising money in Southampton, L.I., to fight AIDS, Aug. 19.


Fast-Food Rebel Is Standing Fast On Hostile Turf
Jesus Mendez still flips burgers in the rear kitchen, as he has for the last five years, though now his wrists are more often at rest than in motion.
His wife, Minerva, still works the cash register, but now less money changes hands.
They are the lonely workers of Burger Boys of Brooklyn -- the last tenant on the second floor of the Fulton Market Building, a dogged underdog in a fast-food fight being played out in Federal District Court.
Jay Reidel and Arthur Dash, the scrappy Brooklyn natives who own Burger Boys, say they have no plans to leave the now funereal food court, which once bustled with 22 purveyors of everything from ice cream to egg rolls.
But the Seaport Marketplace Inc., which manages the building, has successfully rid the building of every other small retail shop and fast-food kiosk in a bid to transform the 56,000-square-foot building into the home of a superstore.
Or two.


Bangkok Traffic
To the Editor:
Having just returned from Bangkok and having been driven on the new expressway and taken over two hours to get to the Marriott Royal Gardens, I regret to have to tell you that the problem is still horrible despite the report "New Road to Bangkok Speeds Airport Trip" by Philip Shenon (June 18).


The Jets' Position Puzzle Beginning With the Ends
Now for the demons.
The Jets' exhibition season ended Friday night nicely, if unfulfilled, with a 30-24 victory at Cincinnati.
It evened their won-lost record at 2-2.


Letting The Sun Shine In
ABOUT 2,000 years ago a Roman official named Gaius Plinius Caecilius -- also known as Pliny the Younger -- built what is believed to have been the first passive solar house on record.
It was a bungalow in Northern Italy with a many-windowed room lined with thin sheets of mica or selenite.
The theory was simple: the room got hotter faster and stayed hotter longer.
Caecilius, it seems, was one of the first homeowners to trim his home-energy budget intentionally by tapping and trapping the power of the sun.


Better Understanding of Bonds
THE language of bond investing can be daunting.
But one term -- duration -- is worth taking the time to understand.
Individuals typically use "maturity" to judge how a bond reacts to changing interest rates.
But maturity measures only how much time elapses until a bond matures and its principal is returned.
There's more than that to interest rate risk.


MARKET TIMING
Tuesday The Conference Board releases its consumer confidence index for August.
Forecast: the index will rise to 100.2 after rising to 99.9 in July, from 94.6 in June.
The National Association of Realtors reports new home sales for July.
Forecast: Sales are expected to decline 1.1 percent after rising 6.5 percent, which was better than expected, the previous month.
Wednesday The Commerce Department reports preliminary figures for the second-quarter gross domestic product.
Forecast: An increase of 0.4 percent is expected after a previously reported 0.5 percent.
Thursday Figures on personal income and personal spending for July will be released by the Commerce Department.
Forecast: income is expected to rise 0.5 percent after an 0.4 percent increase in June.
Spending is expected to climb 0.4 percent, after a 0.2 percent increase the previous month.
Factory orders for July will be released by the Commerce Department.
Forecast: Orders are expected to rise 0.6 percent.
Friday The Commerce Department will release unemployment figures and changes in nonfarm payrolls for August.
Forecast: Unemployment will remain at 5.7 percent, the same as July;  Nonfarm payrolls are expected to increase 156,000.


Perot's Organization Welcomes New Ideas
To the Editor:
Re "It's Time for a Third Party. But We Won't Get One" (Op-Ed, Aug. 24), by Theodore J. Lowi:


Jammed Schools Sprout Rooms, But Outside
Auditoriums, gymnasiums and lunchrooms have already been carved into classrooms.
Teachers have turned bathrooms into offices.
Now, the unending battle against school overcrowding has moved on to a new front: playgrounds.
With little money available for new school buildings, the Board of Education has begun installing portable classrooms, prefabricated trailer-type structures, on the open lots generally used during recess.
Queens schools, which are the most crowded in New York City, will get more portable classrooms than any other borough.


A Card for Borrowing From Yourself
SICK of paying sky-high interest on credit cards?
What if you paid that interest to yourself?
Sounds great, right?
But what if the money for those card purchases came out of your retirement savings account?
That's what a bank, a mutual fund executive and a prize-winning economist have in mind: a credit card that lets you borrow from your retirement account at work.
They consider it a natural combination, allowing individuals to draw easily on one of their biggest assets.
Some others, though, wonder if people will be swept away by the convenience and tempted to deplete their retirement savings for everyday purchases.


UP AND COMING: Michael McGlone; A Quiet, Literary Type Emerges As the Director Calls, 'Action!'
HIS ELBOW LEANS ON A speakeasy bar in "Bullets Over Broadway." His voice exhorts television viewers to buy the Pontiac Grand Prix and Pizza Hut's "Bigfoot" pizza ("a legendary value").
And now the rest of Michael McGlone can be seen in Ed Burns's "The Brothers McMullen." Janet Maslin, writing in The New York Times, called the film a "big-hearted romantic comedy about three Irish-American brothers who can't get along with the women in their lives" and said that Mr.
McGlone was "humorously intense as the most guilt-stricken of the brothers."
On a cloudless August afternoon, the 23-year-old Mr.
McGlone sits in a New York restaurant struggling gracefully with an exceedingly large prime rib and sipping red wine.
He is in from Los Angeles, where he has lived since February, for a promotional fest: of himself, the movie and a Detroit radio station.
A voice-over job later in the afternoon was to finance the trip to New York.


Keeping Your Eye on the Private Eyes: The Life Under Investigation May Be Your Own
IF you apply for a job or a loan or even, in some cases, a college scholarship, you are more likely than ever before to be checked out by a private investigator.
"Without question, the likelihood is greater than it was in the past," said Robert McCrie, a professor of security at John Jay College of Criminal Justice in Manhattan.
"And the trend will continue in the future."


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-10  NEW ETHNIC CLEANSING PHASE  A process in which Croatian refugees from Serb-held areas of Bosnia are taking over the homes of Serbs who fled as Croatia retook land within its borders marks the end of multi-ethnicity there. 1


Amid Much Deterioration, Library's an Exception. . .
To the Editor:
Regarding the Soapbox essay about the Queens Public Library ("Speaking Volumes," July 30): As a lifetime resident of Queens, I have seen a deterioration of many services.
However the library system seems to be continually improving.


A Fee Grows in Woodside


Mia S. Diamond, Daniel H. Padwa
Mia Stephanie Diamond, the daughter of Phyllis Diamond of Alexandria, Va., and Stephan Diamond of Chicago, is to be married today to Daniel Hugh Padwa, a son of S. Lawrence and Linda Padwa of Stony Brook, L.I.
Rabbi David Weiss-HaLivni is to perform the ceremony at Temple Israel in Long Beach, L.I.
The bride, 24, and the bridegroom, 25, graduated from Harvard University.
She received a master's degree in Jewish studies from the Jewish Theological Seminary and is on leave from the seminary's rabbinical program.
She is a fellow in the scholars' circle program of the Drisha Institute, a yeshiva in New York.
The bridegroom is an analyst in the fixed-income research department at Goldman Sachs &amp; Company, the New York investment bank.


Was a Kennedy the Model For a Shirt-Sleeved Bradley?
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 20 On Politics column says significant contributors to Senator Bill Bradley's 1978 campaign received a portrait of the candidate in his Knicks uniform by the sports illustrator LeRoy Neiman.
In fact, what they received was a Neiman poster of Mr.
Bradley in civilian clothes, rolling up his sleeves, with a silhouette of New Jersey in the background.
This pose, symbolizing getting the job done, was the way I understand Mr.
Neiman originally planned to portray Robert F. Kennedy for his ill-fated Presidential campaign.
RUSSELL J. CATALDO  Kearny


For Many in Troubled Co-Op, Maintenance Rise Is Last Straw
Margaret Mack, 68, a retired secretary, thought she had heard the worst when she and other shareholders of the Big Six Towers learned in March that their cooperative housing complex was $20 million in debt after a decade of mismanagement, bad investments and possible fraud.
But earlier this month, she found a note under her door saying that the co-op board planned to ask the city for a 25 percent increase in the maintenance.
If the proposal is approved by the city, Ms.
Mack, whose current maintenance fee is $327.17 a month for a one-bedroom apartment and a terrace, would be paying more than $400.


Joanne Arenwald, Michael R. Geroe
Joanne Rose Arenwald, a daughter of Helen and Walter Arenwald of Scarborough, N.Y., was married last evening to Michael Robert Geroe, the son of Susan and John Geroe of San Diego.
Rabbi Harold S. White officiated at the ANA Hotel in Washington.
Mrs.
Arenwald Geroe is an environmental protection specialist in the Office of Environment, Safety and Health at the Department of Energy in Washington.
She graduated from Oberlin College and received a master's degree in marine environmental science from the State University at Stony Brook, L.I.
Her father is a lawyer, and her mother is a speech and language pathologist, both in Scarborough.


Brian Wilson: A Talent for Music To Escape By
"He was a happy kid" Audree Wilson says of her son in the opening moments of "Brian Wilson: I Just Wasn't Made For These Times," a documentary film that the Disney Channel is showing free Sunday at 9 P.M.
Indeed, the film's first glimpse of the legendary Beach Boys frontman is of him cruising, top down, through Southern California in search of his childhood home -- and finding the site paved over.
The documentary, which debuted earlier this year at the Sundance Film Festival and is finishing a two-week run at the Film Forum, is no nostalgic surfing safari.
Directed by Don Was in black and white, it depicts the journey of a childlike soul on the hazardous road of celebrity.
Musicians ranging from Linda Ronstadt to John Cale comment on Mr.
Wilson's phenomenal success as a songwriter, and on the influence of albums like "Pet Sounds" on rock music.
But more important, home movies and frank reminiscences from Mr.
Wilson and his family give music fans a picture of an intensely private man who collided with fame but keeps rolling on.
Caitlin Lovinger


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
WINGATE  A Evening of Calypso, And a Health Clinic, Too
Those calypso purveyors of enlightened social commentary, the Mighty Sparrow (below) and the Black Stalin, will entertain at the Caribbean Music Festival tomorrow night in Wingate Field.
That should make the needle a little easier to take at the festival's free health clinic, which will offer pediatric immunizations and H.I.V. testing.
The Mighty Sparrow, born Slinger Francisco and also known as "The Calypso King of the World," has captured the title of Trinidadian Calypsonian Monarch at the Trinidad and Tobago Carnival 11 times in his 40 years of performing -- more often than anyone else.
He met his match in this year's winner, the Black Stalin (born Leroy Calliste).
The free concert, the finale in the Martin Luther King Jr. concert series, begins at 7:30 P.M.
Bring chairs and blankets.
Wingate Field, Winthrop Street between Brooklyn and Kingston Avenues, opposite Kings County Hospital.
Health clinic opens at 6 P.M.; concert begins at 7:30 P.M.; free; (718) 469-1912.
HARLEM  A Contemporary Look At the 'Other Half'
The photojournalist Jacob Riis jolted the nation over a century ago with his searing images of the city's poor in his book "How the Other Half Lives." Now, the Museum of the City of New York is examining urban poverty in the 1990's in "The Other Half . . . Revisited," a one-hour film by the contemporary photographers Margaret Morton, Eli Reed and Jacob Holdt.
The film, which will be shown on Saturday at 2 P.M., coincides with the museum's current exhibition, "A Century Apart: Images of Struggle and Spirit, Jacob Riis and Five Contemporary Photographers." The Riis works on view are from the museum's collection of prints made from original negatives and lantern slides (e.g., left, "Italian Mother and Her Baby in Jersey Street").
1220 Fifth Avenue, at 103d Street.
Wednesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.; closed Monday.
Suggested admission of $5; $3 for children, students and the elderly, and $8 for families; (212) 534-1672.
EAST HOUSTON  An All-Night Party To Benefit Hale House
In 1993, Lisa Ludwig founded Music + Love in memory of her brother, Richard A. Kesten, who died of AIDS.
The group, which aims to raise social consciousness as well as funds to help people with AIDS through music, is holding a benefit for Hale House on Tuesday night at the Mercury Lounge.
Hale House is the Harlem charity that cares for babies born drug addicted or with H.I.V. and their families.
It was founded in 1969 by Clara McBride Hale, who died in 1992, and her daughter, Dr.
Lorraine Hale.
The K-Rock deejay Maria Milito will host the all-night jam with New York bands including the Rake's Progress, the Interesting Guys, Black Flamingo, N.Y.
Loose, Handel, Invaders and Divers.
Mercury Lounge, 217 East Houston Street.
At 8:30 P.M.
Admission: $10; (212) 260-1484.
ALSO AROUND TOWN SOFTBALL The championship of the women's division of the Therapeutic Community of America Softball League is today from 9 A.M. to 1 P.M. in Van Cortlandt Park, West 243d Street and Broadway, Field 5, the Bronx; (212) 979-8800.
WILDLIFE THEATER Until Labor Day, children can learn about the wilderness through interactive skits at the Central Park Wildlife Theater, Fifth Avenue and 64th Street.
Performers from All-Star Improv Jam at the West End Gate use special puppets and props to educate kids about wildlife and conservation; free with regular zoo admission.
Daily, 11 A.M., 1 P.M., 1:30 P.M. and 3 P.M., with a 4:30 P.M. show on weekends.
Admission: $2.50; $1.25 for the elderly; 50 cents for those 3 to 12; under three, free; (212) 861-6030.
KATHRYN SHATTUCK


A WAR IN THE FAMILY
Roger Cohen has put into human terms the complex and confusing political situation that is ravaging Bosnia.
He highlights the frightening reality of what human beings are capable of doing to one another.
Equally frightening is the lack of any real answer to that elusive question: Why?
TIMOTHY P. MCKEOWN Bridgewater, N.J.


Small Park Opens, 'Behemoth' Project Still Faces Delays
When Hunter's Point Community Park opened earlier this month, it was billed as the first step toward completion of the multibillion-dollar Queens West waterfront development plan, a 74 1/2-acre residential and commercial project.
But after 15 years of planning and only the small park at Fifth Street and 48th Avenue to show for it, a target date for the rest of the project is still uncertain.
Construction of Queens West's first apartment building, a 42-story tower planned to go up across the street from the new park, has been delayed while the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development decides whether to grant a request by the building's developer, M.O.
Associates, for $85 million in mortgage insurance..


Once Glamorous, a Grande Dame Had Fallen on Hard Times
The blaze that spouted embers into the sky over Brooklyn Heights yesterday morning was only the latest downturn in the tumultuous history of the 110-year-old St.
George Hotel.
In the eyes of many residents of the quiet neighborhood of brownstones and small stores, the hotel has devolved from a glamorous 2,800-room grande dame where movie stars once swam in the city's largest indoor swimming pool to a crumbling, cavernous eyesore housing a handful of the city's most downtrodden or forgotten residents.


Pork Is a Cool Choice for a Sweltering Day
ROAST pork might not seem the ideal dish to serve guests on a sweltering weekend.
But recently, as the mercury on the thermometer outside my kitchen soared into the 90's, I decided that I could not bear the thought of sweating over a hot stove while I had people over.
"Why not serve a room-temperature meal?" suggested one of my house guests, who I'm sure was thinking longingly of her air-conditioned house in the city.
So I decided to get all the hot work over early in the day.


Lawmakers to Push Bill For Pesticide Registry
DESPITE criticism that the paperwork and expense would be an unfair burden to farmers and businesses, Long Island lawmakers say they will press ahead with legislation to establish a statewide pesticide registry.
The bill has been sought by breast-cancer organizations as a way to investigate possible links between chemical use and cancer.


Extra, Extra! A Quiet Town Solicits A New 'Voice'
Big news is a rarity in this town, where the business district spans half a block and the whir of sprinklers is the dominant sound on a summer afternoon.
So last March, when the local newspaper neglected to cover the fatal shooting of a Glen Ridge man and three others in neighboring Montclair, some residents were angry and bewildered.
"That was the biggest story we had seen in years," said Carolyn Ferguson, who sent a letter of protest to The Glen Ridge Paper shortly after the murders.
"The fact that they didn't even run an obituary for our citizen really bothered me."


Serious Fare Worthy of Its Beach Setting
WHEN the restaurant at the Crescent Beach Club in Bayville opened in 1992 it was immediately recognized as one of the most beautiful on Long Island.
It remains so today.
Its food and service have had a more checkered past.
The talented chef who opened the restaurant, Richard Allen, left after one season, and the quality of the food quickly plummeted.
Service, which was never crisp, continued to be slapdash.


F.Y.I.
A Rat Revealed Q.  Why is there a sculpture of a rat crawling up one of three wires that holds the awning over the Graybar Building entrance to Grand Central Terminal on Lexington Avenue?
A.
Good eye.
That rat (above) is not easy to spot.
The architects of the Graybar building, Sloan &amp; Robertson, included three cast-iron Norway rats in the design for the building.
The sculptures depict sharp conical baffles on the mooring lines of ships, which were intended to discourage rats from climbing aboard.
One of the three rats was stolen, and the other is being used to fashion a replacement, said Patricia Raley of Metro-North Railroad, which manages the terminal.
"Billy's" Bawdy Roots Q.  On the southwest corner of Avenue of the Americas and 24th Street is Billy's Topless Dance Bar.
Above the sign is a cement block in the building that says "The Corner 6th Avenue." On the other side one says "The Corner 24th Street." "The Corner" is also cut into the cornice.
Was this the name of the building?
A.
This small red-brick building is all that remains of one of the most popular entertainment spots in the Gay 90's.
Built in 1879, it was called "The Corner" and was the beer hall annex to Koster &amp; Bial's Vaudeville Theater/Concert Hall, where Victor Herbert conducted his 40-piece orchestra.
Milton Anthony, who runs Billy's Topless Bar, says he still considers the establishment "The Corner" only now, "it's Billy's corner."  Name That Bridge Q.  Q. How did the Bronx-Whitestone Bridge and the Throgs Neck Bridge get their names?
A.
The Bronx-Whitestone Bridge was so named because it connects the Bronx to the northern Queens neighborhood of Whitestone.
More interesting, perhaps, is the origin of Whitestone.
"The Dutch discovered a white glacier boulder at the spot where the East River meets the Long Island sound hence the name," said Al Stern, a researcher at the Queens Historical Society.
The Throgs Neck, which connects Throgs Neck in the Bronx to Beechurst and Bayside in Queens, was named for John Throckmorton, who settled in the Bronx in 1643, said Frank Pascual, of the M.T.A.
Bridges and Tunnels.
"Throgs is a contraction and neck is a small point that juts out into the water," he explained.
MONIQUE P. YAZIGI Questions (and answers) may be sent to F.Y.I., The City, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


A Snoop's Story: The Confessions Of a Private Eye
THE call came about 10:30 on a Sunday night.
"O.K.," a voice said.
"They want you to go find her."
Marie Schembri left off doing the dinner dishes and went up to the "Batcave," the third-floor office of her Boerum Hill brownstone.
Her eyes flicked over a series of wigs, an array of tiny cameras, glasses.
No, she thought.
Not tonight, not for the streets, not for the drug dealers.
The best angle would be a social worker, Red Cross, somebody totally humanitarian.
Harmless.


BEST SELLERS: August 27, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
2
FROM POTTER'S FIELD, by Patricia Cornwell. (Scribner, $24.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta on the trail of a serial killer in Central Park.
2
2
7
BEACH MUSIC, by Pat Conroy. (Talese/Doubleday, $27.50.) An American living in Rome returns to South Carolina and tries to cope with his troubled past.
3
1
5
MEMNOCH THE DEVIL, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The vampire Lestat is snatched from the world by a mysterious adversary who claims to be the Devil.
4
3
5
LIGHTNING, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $24.95.) The happy marriage of a lawyer and her husband is suddenly changed after she gets a routine checkup.
5
6
78
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
6
5
18
THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's multibillion-dollar scam.
7
8
159
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
8
7
9
ROSE MADDER, by Stephen King. (Viking, $25.95.) Fleeing an abusive husband, a woman seeks happiness in a strange city by creating her own myth.
9
1
FOR THE ROSES, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $23.) A late-19th-century woman with a checkered past investigates her identity, resulting in romance.
10
9
5
DANGEROUS TO KNOW, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (HarperCollins, $24.) A journalist investigates the death of her former husband, a philanthropist.
11
12
62
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
12
11
2
BELGARATH THE SORCERER, by David and Leigh Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $25.95.) A fantasy about the start of a 7,000-year-long global conflict.
13
10
9
THE WITNESS, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $21.95.) A public defender who seems happy in her work and her marriage is plunged into a morass of bigotry and hate.
14
13
7
DISNEY'S POCAHONTAS. (Mouse Works, $6.98.) The romance of an American Indian princess and an Englishman, told in words and pictures.
15
14
ONCE UPON A MORE ENLIGHTENED TIME, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $9.95.) Eight more "politically correct bedtime stories."
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
7
TO RENEW AMERICA, by Newt Gingrich. (HarperCollins, $24.) The Speaker of the House describes his solutions to the country's problems. (+)
2
3
10
NEW PASSAGES, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $25.) How changing social conditions and longer life expectancies are affecting our lives.
3
4
77
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
4
2
3
BEYOND ALL REASON, by David Smith with Carol Calef. (Kensington, $18.95.) The former husband of Susan Smith, the woman convicted of killing their two sons, tells of their life together.
5
6
10
A GOOD WALK SPOILED, by John Feinstein. (Little, Brown, $23.95.) The P.G.A.
Tour in 1993 and 1994. (+)
6
5
5
SLEEPERS, by Lorenzo Carcaterra. (Ballantine, $23.) The true story, the narrator claims, of four boys in a reformatory and the revenge they later take.
7
7
13
SPONTANEOUS HEALING, by Andrew Weil. (Knopf, $23.) Ways in which the body heals itself. (+)
8
11
3
MY OLD MAN AND THE SEA, by David Hays and Daniel Hays. (Algonquin, $19.95.) A sailing yarn about a father-and-son voyage from Connecticut around Cape Horn.
9
8
35
SISTERS.
Essays by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters.
10
10
13
DAVE BARRY'S COMPLETE GUIDE TO GUYS, by Dave Barry. (Random House, $21.) A humorist explains the strange ways of a species of males called "guys."
11
9
28
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the lives of all Americans.
12*
16
3
THE LIARS' CLUB, by Mary Karr. (Viking, $22.95.) A poet recalls her childhood as a member of a troubled family in East Texas during the early 1960's.
13
13
5
THE EAGLE AND THE ROSE, by Rosemary Altea. (Warner, $19.95.) An English psychic tells of her struggle to come to terms with who she really is.
14
12
7
WHEN ELEPHANTS WEEP, by Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson and Susan McCarthy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The emotional lives of animals.
15
15
88
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
118
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Relationships. (+)
2
1
MARY KAY: You Can Have It All, by Mary Kay Ash. (Prima, $22.95.) Ways to succeed in business: advice from an entrepreneur. (+)
3
2
23
THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra. (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $14.) How to "generate wealth in all its forms." (+)
4
13
MARS AND VENUS IN THE BEDROOM, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $22.) Maintaining passion. (+)
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 12, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
A dagger (+) indicates that some bookstores report receiving bulk orders for a book.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) BEHIND THE WHEEL AT CHRYSLER: The Iacocca Legacy, by Doron P. Levin. (Harcourt Brace, $25.) A Detroit reporter interprets Chrysler under Lee Iacocca's management as a company far better at making sales and deals than cars.
DARK SUN: The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb, by Richard Rhodes. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $32.50.) Mr.
Rhodes's lucid exposition of technical issues combines fruitfully with his sharp eye for character, anecdote and political context.
GALATEA 2.2, by Richard Powers. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $23.) Ingenious, ambitious and cerebral, this novel concerns a novelist (same name as the author's) who works to perfect a machine intelligence that can learn literature and sustain belief in purpose and meaning.
GARDENS OF REVELATION: Environments by Visionary Artists, by John Beardsley. (Abbeville, $60.) An irresistible excursion by an art historian into the small worlds created by (usually) untutored eccentrics, using junk, found objects, concrete and their own obsessions to render things nobody has ever seen except themselves.
GREEN, by Frances Sherwood. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $23.) A picaresque but sober novel of the Beat era, in which a young California woman keeps banging her head on the internal contradictions of herself and others.
AN ITALIAN EDUCATION: The Further Adventures of an Expatriate in Verona, by Tim Parks. (Grove, $22.) By sending his children to school in Italy and thoughtfully watching them become Italians, Mr.
Parks studies the rules that govern a society other than his native England.
LOST IN PLACE: Growing Up Absurd in Suburbia, by Mark Salzman. (Random House, $22.) A refreshing memoir of a teen-ager's search for happiness through kung fu in the 1970's; the jokes are mostly on the author, who is remarkably free from the customarily licensed resentments.
THE NIGHTINGALE'S SONG, by Robert Timberg. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Mr.
Timberg, a graduate of the United States Naval Academy, examines some of his fellow alumni in Government service (overrepresented in the Iran-contra affair) and finds that their conduct was influenced by fear of a second Vietnam.
THE RICHER, THE POORER: Stories, Sketches and Reminiscences, by Dorothy West. (Doubleday, $22.) Unsentimental, clear, crisp pieces about black middle-class life by a unique writer, at 87 the last survivor of the Harlem Renaissance.
RL'S DREAM, by Walter Mosley. (Norton, $22.) This emphatic modern-day fable of nurturance and dying is a Deep South tale set in New York, inhabited by a black musician, his white lover and the ghost of a mythic blues singer.
VIRTUALLY NORMAL: An Argument About Homosexuality, by Andrew Sullivan. (Knopf, $22.) The author, who is the editor of The New Republic, reflects reasonably on society's dealings with the minority of which he is a member; he thinks society could do a lot better.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
POWER, PASTA AND POLITICS  The World According to  Senator Al D'Amato.
By Alfonse M. D'Amato.
Hyperion, $24.95.
"I paid a price for pursuing Whitewater," Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato writes in "Power, Pasta and Politics." He elaborates: He was insulted by Phil Donahue, sneered at and subjected to "any number of energetic outbursts" by television commentators, and depicted as "an arrogant lout" in "Doonesbury." Hardly the stuff of "Profiles in Courage." Mr.
D'Amato's political biography begins by revealing a lot about what drives him and, perhaps, about his surprising defense of individual rights in allowing homosexuals in the military -- an issue, he warns in a savvy final chapter, that threatens to split the Republican Party.
As a youngster, he writes, he was embarrassed by his first name, terrorized by a bully (a label he also applies to Saddam Hussein and Mario Cuomo) and dumped into a special reading class because of his bad eyesight.
The book lapses into Mr.
Mr.
D'Amato is less revealing when describing patronage abuses in his Nassau County home base or the lingering ethics accusations of which he and his brother, Armand Jr., were largely cleared.
He acknowledges that the Senate Ethics Committee did admonish him, but doesn't quote its conclusion that he "conducted the business of his office in an improper and inappropriate manner." Without accepting blame, he writes, "I personally lament the fact that politics has come to be held in such low regard." If you like Mr.
D'Amato's brazenness, you'll like his book.
SAM ROBERTS


U.S. Officials Say Bosnian Serbs Face NATO Attack if Talks Stall
Administration officials said today that unless there is quick and significant progress on an American peace plan for the Balkans, the Bosnian Serbs could face a new round of NATO air strikes that might be extended to a six-month bombing campaign intended to "level the playing field" while the Bosnian Army receives weapons from abroad.
Appearing on the NBC News program "Meet the Press," Richard C. Holbrooke, the Administration's chief negotiator on the Balkans, said, "If this peace initiative does not get moving -- dramatically moving -- in the next week or two, the consequences will be very adverse to the Serbian goals."


CHRONICLE
Last month's closing of New York Newsday meant that LIZ SMITH, the celebrity columnist, lost much of her audience in New York City.
But starting Sept. 5, her column will appear in Newsday, to which she is under contract until 1998, and in The New York Post.


With Seles, Rivalries Seize the Spotlight
Asked to distill the essence of the United States Open, Pete Sampras, twice a champion here and gunning to erase the dismal performance that cost him his title defense last year, didn't miss a beat.
He correctly described the last Grand Slam of the year, which gets under way with a resounding bang today when Monica Seles returns to the National Tennis Center, as the looniest Grand Slam of the year.
"The place is a madhouse," Sampras said.
So it's obviously the perfect house in which to lock up all 256 of the world's best tennis players for the next two weeks and let them decide, by a grueling seven-round process of elimination, just who really is the No. 1 player of 1995.


Careless Cigarette May Have Started the L.I. Wildfire
The wildfire that burned homes, businesses and 5,500 acres of pine barrens in Westhampton, L.I., and threatened a shore resort community may have been started by a carelessly tossed cigarette on the edge of a college campus where students were registering for classes, investigators said yesterday.
As firefighters subdued the stubborn remnants of one of Long Island's worst ground fires and declared it contained but not under control by late afternoon, investigators traced the origin of the blaze to a piney roadside site on the southern edge of the eastern campus of the Suffolk County Community College.


Wilson to Announce Candidacy, Again
Gov.
Pete Wilson of California plans to announce today, yet again, that he is seeking the Republican nomination for President.


Two Likely Goners: Maumalanga, Rasheed
The Giants made their player cuts yesterday and turned in their list to the league office.
The list was not immediately made public by the Giants, but it appears that running back Keith Elias has made the team while defensive lineman Chris Maumalanga and fullback Kenyon Rasheed have not.
After leading the team in rushing during the preseason with 214 yards on 37 carries, Elias, the former Princeton star in his second year with the Giants, was apparently not among the players the Giants cut.


Philadelphia Shaken by Criminal Police Officers
The congregation at Refuge Evangelical Baptist Church was rocking here last Sunday to glory songs, trumpets and the word of the Lord.
But no one had a reason to shout "Hallelujah" louder than Betty (Mizzy) Patterson, a stout, 54-year-old grandmother in a flowered sun dress.
Mrs.
Patterson, a widow, who cleaned other people's floors and clothes to keep her family together and now delivers newspapers before dawn with her grandson, was framed by corrupt police officers and spent three years in prison in the early 1990's after being falsely convicted of selling crack cocaine.


Budget Cuts Land in the Principal's Office
Last year, Public School 100 in the Bronx had one assistant principal.
On Tuesday, when the principal, Kenneth Wilkoff, picked up another budget for the new school year, he learned that he would receive money for only "0.4" of an assistant principal.
On Wednesday, at a District 8 school board meeting, he received a revised budget showing that none of the district's 28 schools would get any money to hire assistant principals.
"This is impossible," Mr.
Wilkoff whispered, shaking his head as he and Donna Rodriguez, the school's parents association president, reviewed the document in the back of the auditorium.
"I can't run the school if this is the way it ends up. I can't run the school."


Assessing Felix's Damage
The effects of Hurricane Felix on New Jersey's beachfront communities will be discussed at a meeting today of the State Beach Erosion Commission.


The Example of Union City
Facing a takeover by the State Board of Education, Union City, N.J., embarked several years ago on a crash course to improve its schools.
The school board and top administrators gave up some of their central authority and ceded more power to individual schools.
That, along with financial reform, helped the district satisfy and even surpass a number of basic requirements, which in turn allowed the state to remove Union City from its "endangered" schools list.
Union City's experience may hold lessons for other troubled districts in New Jersey and in New York City.
New Jersey has aggressively used its power to take over school districts.
Since 1989, the state has intervened in Jersey City, Paterson and Newark, the largest district.
Union City, suffering from the same pattern of failing students, deteriorating schools and diffident administrators, seemed headed for the same fate.


Whitaker Exalts in His Power After Going Distance
Pernell Whitaker was looking over the shoulder of his opponent Saturday night as he tried to free himself from a constrictive clench.
He peered toward the HBO commentator at ringside, Roy Jones Jr.
Whitaker, the World Boxing Council welterweight champion, was having a difficult time finding his mark against Scotland's Gary Jacobs, the No. 1 contender.
His corner had given him ample instruction, but he wanted more.


An Indian City of the Future With the Lure of the Past
Though India may be a land with a high-technology future, American computer companies are flocking to a city in the south of the country in large part to enjoy the charms of its colonial past.
The Digital Equipment Corporation, the Hewlett-Packard Company, I.B.M., Texas Instruments Inc., the Compaq Computer Corporation and other companies are busily doing deals, hiring workers and buying property in Bangalore, a city of 2.7 million people more than 1,000 miles south of here.


Valenzuela Takes Mets On a Trip To the Past
Fernando Valenzuela lists his age as 34, although most people suspect it is closer to fortysomething.
The truth may never be known.
But, as Dallas Green, manager of the youngest team in the National League, would put it: "He's got a few years on us."


Maurice Rosenberg, Law Professor, 75
Maurice Rosenberg, a professor at Columbia University's School of Law who became a well-known advocate for judicial reforms on the state and Federal levels, died on Friday at his home in White Plains.
He was 75.
The cause was a progressive neurological disease, a son, Dr. Richard Rosenberg, said.


Windows 95
The introduction of Microsoft's new Windows 95 operating system was a truly paradigm-shifting moment.
Software took on the aura of a celebrity.
And like all celebrities, the program and its corporate creator, Microsoft's chairman, Bill Gates, were ready targets for the nation's best cartoonists.
Herewith their take, the final word on the introduction of Windows 95.


House Fire In Brooklyn Leaves Two Dead
Two people died and a man was critically injured with burns over half his body in a fire that roared through the second floor of a Brooklyn row house last night, Fire Department officials said.
As of 1 A.M., the authorities had not released the names of the dead or provided descriptions other than saying that they were adults.
The critically injured man was taken to New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center burn unit.
Six firefighters received medical treatment, three of them for minor burns to the face and hands, said Firefighter George Semidey, a Department spokesman.


In Little Odessa, Onward Christian and Jewish Soldiers
The Jewish side had been itching for scriptural battle since morning, their ammunition -- leaflets, Bible quotations -- at the ready, their bearded volunteers on the lookout among the strolling throngs of Brooklyn's Brighton Beach Fair.
The Christian side showed up about 2:30 P.M. on the hectic corner of Brighton Beach Avenue and Coney Island Avenue and raised their challenge -- a hand-painted sign proclaiming, "The Lord is . . . not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance."


Patents; 21 companies are accused of infringing on a 1985 patent that may cover software sales on line.
A small company that says it holds patent rights for selling software to individuals through the Internet filed an infringement suit last week against 21 software companies.
The suit makes broad claims of ownership for the kinds of electronic distribution rights that barely existed a year ago but that are now a growing part of on-line services.
The case is the latest example of how a farsighted inventor with imagination may come to dominate a multimedia field.
In this case, the inventor may have sewn up rights to an industry he could only have imagined when his patent was issued in 1985 -- that there would some day be computer networks and they would be used to sell digital data.


Why Is a Seal Different From a Lamb?
To the Editor:
Re "World's Last Baby Seal Hunt Is Jobs for Namibians" (Aug. 19):


Children's Videos Top Summer-End Sales
As summer winds down and families are running out of things to do, a handful of releases for children dominate the top 10 video sales list.
"Swan Princess," an animated fairy tale, ranks No. 1 for the third week in a row.
Other animated tales include "The Pebble and the Penguin" and "The Princess and the Goblin." .


Philip Morris Revels in Rare ABC News Apology for Report on Nicotine
Executives at Philip Morris were trying hard not to appear smug last week.
But as three of the company's top public-relations officers relaxed with Marlboros on a sunny Thursday morning, they were clearly reveling in the rare public apology they extracted from ABC News three days earlier for a report it aired on the tobacco industry.
"I don't think vindication is the right word," said Steve Parrish, the senior vice president of corporate affairs at the Philip Morris Companies Inc.
"But I do feel that our message is finally starting to get through."


Catholic Schools Make Below-Average Students Above Average; What Girls Learn
To the Editor:
"A Parochial Yearbook," interviews with New Yorkers asked to recall their experiences in the Roman Catholic school system, which accompanied your Aug. 20 news article on the New York City Board of Education, highlighted something I have only begun to understand.
The experience of boys and girls in Catholic school is very different.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: MONDAY BRE Pptys Inc TUESDAY Bandag Inc DQE Inc Ipalco Enterprises WEDNESDAY Deere &amp; Co Oneida Ltd Stanley Wks THURSDAY Minerals Technologies Times Mirror Co Washington Natl Corp FRIDAY National Re Corp Sysco Corp


Where Good Bridges Make Good Neighbors
It's been a good grass year in this part of Wyoming half a state away from the Presidential penumbra cast by the vacationing Clintons -- a late spring, plenty of water, intermittent thunderstorms, just enough rain to put some extra hurry into haying.
My neighbors, Alan and Gayle Barnett and their two boys, are rushing, as all ranchers do in August, to use the light and heat of these long days in a way that won't bring regret come winter.
Last month, my girlfriend and I walked with Gayle and our dogs, Tavish and Rooster, up a gravel road to visit Alan at the haystacks he was building.
It was nearly 10 P.M., and Alan had been up since 4:30 that morning.
Light hung in the sky as though it was never going to grow dark.
It had been a hot day and the bales still held the warmth of the sun -- "field heat," Alan calls it.


CHRONICLE
If Shakespeare had written about car salesmen, JONATHAN PRYCE would be perfect for the part.
The suave Welsh actor has won a Tony award for his stage performance in "Miss Saigon" and picked up this year's best-actor prize at Cannes for his part in the movie "Carrington," but he's best known in the United States for doing Infiniti car commercials.


Calvin Klein To Withdraw Child Jean Ads
The designer Calvin Klein, bowing to a castigation perhaps unmatched in almost 15 years of testing the limits of using sexuality to sell products, is withdrawing a jeans campaign that critics likened to child pornography.
The campaign, which was introduced this month, is for the line of high-priced jeans bearing Mr.
Klein's name.
It features teen-age models in poses that his critics contended were tasteless and suggestive.


Small Town Tries to Get Over a Shattering Plane Crash
As he moved slowly through the rubble, Fire Chief Gerry Sprague's bright yellow emergency coat was starkly visible today against the blackened walls where a single-engine airplane dropped out of a clear sky the day before, killing five people, including his own mother.
A small crowd had gathered, but they maintained a respectful distance, except for a few who slowly approached to offer words of sorrow or comfort.
Chief Sprague and several firefighters walked the site as Federal aviation inspectors set out equipment and nearby residents tried to return their lives to normal.


For Oseola McCarty
To the Editor:
Oseola McCarty may, or may not, know the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, created 50 years ago to promote peace through education, science and culture.
I was moved by your Aug. 13 news article telling of one of the most admirable initiatives I have come across during my long involvement with education: the Oseola McCarty Scholarship Fund.


Permanent Task of Office Temps: Learning to Use New Software
To William Hamilton, the Microsoft Corporation's new Windows 95 software is more than just another hyped new technology trying to revolutionize the American office.
It's another new technology to master -- fast.
Mr.
Hamilton is an office "temp," one of the hordes of hourly workers on call to fill in for vacationing secretaries, to assist busy bookkeepers or to pitch in on a particularly heavy load of word processing.
For him and millions of others like him, Microsoft's new software program means going back to class for a crash course or risk losing chances at extra work and higher pay.


Kafelnikov Gains Some Confidence At Hamlet
If you cannot outhit Yevgeny Kafelnikov from the baseline and if you cannot match his topspin forehand and ripping two-handed backhand, your options are limited.
Jan Siemerink, knowing a backcourt duel would be futile, kept rushing the net today after his first and second serve and even on Kafelnikov's second serve.
It made no difference.
When Siemerink moved in to volley, he often found the ball at his feet, making his shot difficult.
When Kafelnikov pinned Siemerink in the backcourt, he outpowered and outlasted the 25-year-old Dutch left-hander.
So Kafelnikov, a 21-year-old Russian right-hander, prevailed by 7-6 (7-0), 6-2, in 76 minutes and won the $328,000 Genovese Hamlet Cup for the second straight year.


An Argument, A Shooting, A Fatal Crash Of a Plane
For most of his 70 years, Kenneth Jerolaman did little to call attention to himself, it seems.
He spent the last decade living in a trailer on the grounds of a small airfield in the rural Pennsylvania town of Bridgeton, on the New Jersey border.
He made his living doing maintenance work for a small aviation company, keeping an eye on the planes, keeping things clean.
"It appears he was a loner," Trooper Douglas Tolbert of the Pennsylvania State Police said yesterday.


Complete! Jets Make a Deal for Tampa Bay's Wilson
Finally, the Jets have a wide receiver.
And given their conservative offensive style, the threat that the new man, Charles Wilson, presents could be as important as what he actually does.
The summerlong search ended late Saturday night when Tampa Bay accepted a deal for a 1996 fourth-round draft choice and gave the Jets Wilson, who has impressive per-catch averages, and Marc Spindler, a defensive tackle.


Millions of Mothers Can't Choose Not to Work
To the Editor:
In "Yes, Motherhood Lowers Pay" (Op-Ed, Aug. 22), Danielle Crittenden misses the point in a way that has become frighteningly familiar in an era dominated by right-wing rhetoric.
She seems to think all families are similar in composition to her own and that the choice mothers face is whether to stay home while their husbands support the household financially or to find one of "the best nannies in the world." For far too many women there is no such choice.


Correction
An obituary yesterday about Maurice Rosenberg, a professor at Columbia University's School of Law, misspelled his surname.
A corrected obituary appears on page B9.


Hennessy Pours It On And Wins Hopeful
Fast 2-year-old colts, and especially the champions, most often do not go on and win the Kentucky Derby the following spring.
But since that is all we have to go on, mark down the name of the winner of today's 91st running of the Hopeful Stakes at Saratoga: the very fast and very accomplished Hennessy.
He stalked the leaders for half a mile, then turned on the power as they turned for home and won by 3 1/4 lengths over Louis Quatorze, who had 3 1/4 lengths on Maria's Mon.
It was the fourth straight victory for Hennessy after he lost his debut by a head at Hollywood Park.
And so, an early favorite was born for the Breeders' Cup Juvenile on Oct. 28 and the Derby next May.


Six Area Codes by Year 2000
Bell Atlantic, which provides telephone service to most of New Jersey, said that it issued one million new numbers in 1994, more than twice the volume in 1990.
At that rate, New Jersey is going to have to add three area codes by the end of the decade, the phone company said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Skilled Foreign Workers Gain American Jobs Computer companies fondly predict a future in which millions of Americans desert their offices for laptops on tropical beaches.
And corporate America is already getting a lot of work done on foreign shores, but some of it is not being done by Americans.
Instead, businesses are paying well-educated foreign nationals to do the same tasks for a fraction of the cost.


Senator Helms's Bargaining Chips
Senator Jesse Helms apparently does not yet recognize the distinction between narrow partisan squabbles and higher national interests.
In a disturbing display of pettiness, the chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee threatens to block action on all pending treaties, conventions and ambassadorial nominations unless he gets his way on a pet project to reorganize the State Department bureaucracy.


Busier And Busier Signals
Diane H. Tremblay knows how bad it can get.
When she bought the Covered Bridge Bed and Breakfast Reservation Service in the northwest Connecticut town of Norfolk nine years ago, Ms.
Tremblay experienced a mysterious drop in the number of customer calls.
She finally discovered the problem: The recording that was supposed to direct callers from the service's old telephone number was not being reached by the reservation service's many out-of-state callers.


Bavaria's Royal Enigma Still Fascinates
The hero of the moment in Germany is a dead but irresistibly romantic king who freely crossed the line between reality and fantasy.
Across Bavaria and the rest of Germany, exhibitions and performances are being staged to celebrate the memory of Ludwig II, the still-beloved "Mad King" who was born 150 years ago this week.


Israeli Government Closes 3 Palestinian Offices in Jerusalem
Acting after a growing chorus of complaints by Israeli nationalists that Palestinians are setting up political bases in East Jerusalem, the Israeli Police Minister announced today that he was closing down three Palestinian offices in Jerusalem.
The evictions were certain to stoke one of the most contentious and emotional unresolved issues between Israel and the Palestinians, the status of Jerusalem.


Yet Another Kickoff for Wilson Campaign, Hoping This Time's the Charm
Just in case there is any doubt -- and that is the problem -- Gov.
Pete Wilson will announce on Monday, yet again, that he is running for President and expects to win.
Mr.
Wilson, a 62-year-old Republican moderate, has staged close to half a dozen candidacy announcements and campaign kickoffs, formal and informal, in the last eight months, following up most of them with speechmaking swings from coast to coast and border to border.


Sports of The Times; A Monumental Man on Monument Avenue
UNLIKE in Richmond, where he grew up -- a black in the long shadow of the Confederacy and Jim Crow laws -- and where a controversy had recently raged about the erecting of a statue of him, a different kind of monument to Arthur Ashe, citizen of the world, existed yesterday at the National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows, Queens.
It was the celebrity tennis tournament played in his name, the day before the start of the United States Open.


Rebel With a Visa
From Tiananmen Square to Union Square, Cui Jian embodies China's counterculture.
The rock star's Dylanesque blend of social and political messages and his Springsteen-like gusto have inspired thousands.
After years of struggling to perform in America, he gave a concert in New York City on Saturday as part of a much-heralded four-city tour, his first in the West.
A sold-out audience of 2,000, some from as far away as Hong Kong, turned out for their idol.
Article and review, page B3.


How Long to Recoup Social Security Tax?
To the Editor:
"Misunderstanding Social Security" (Week in Review, Aug. 20) perpetuates the worst half-truth about Social Security, that the average beneficiary retiring today "will get back all the money he or she contributed with an allowance for interest, in 3 1/2 years or so."


Defense Expected to Wrap Up Today in Terror-Bomb Case
In two months of defense testimony, lawyers for 10 men charged with a New York terror-bombing conspiracy have sought to show deceit in the Government's investigation and to humanize defendants pictured as fanatics bent on mass murder.
The defense case, expected to wrap up today, has presented what the lawyers say is evidence that the Federal Bureau of Investigation gave the chief informer so much leeway that he could act as an agent provocateur who entangled the Muslim defendants in a scheme in which they appeared to have plotted to blow up major buildings and transportation links.


Bradley on the Beach, Again
Senator Bill Bradley, who recently announced that he is leaving the United States Senate, did not let that decision get in the way of his traditional New Jersey shoreline trek.
The Senator began his 16th annual beach walk yesterday at Cape May, stopping in the 15 towns along his route to talk to residents and beachgoers.


INSIDE
Calvin Klein Backtracks
After years of testing advertising limits, the designer is withdrawing a jeans campaign that critics likened to child pornography.
Page D1.
A Rare Heresy Charge
Bishop Walter Righter faces as a trial for heresy in the Episcopal Church after ordaining a homosexual as a deacon.
Page A10.
U.S.
OPEN '95
Changes: last year, Andre Agassi was unseeded, and Monica Seles was out of sight.
SportsMonday, C1.


Media; Can children get more educational programming without help from the F.C.C.?
WHEN Disney offered $19 billion for Capital Cities/ABC, a major asset cited was the outlet that ABC could provide for Disney's children's programming.
The Fox Children's Network, a fixture on weekday afternoons and Saturday mornings, pulls in more than $200 million a year in advertising revenue for its cartoons and action-adventure series.


CHRONICLE
The dusty street outside the Court Square luncheonette in Stanardsville, Va., is an unlikely place to spot a famous face.
So the gray-haired woman gripping EMILY COURIC'S hand seemed to relish the moment.
"You're KATIE'S sister, right, hon?" she trilled.
"I watch your sister on TV every morning. You look a whole lot alike."


Spying Toys For Adults Or Supplies For Crimes?
A Spy Factory retail store, like the company's storefront headquarters in a suburban strip shopping center here, mingles the charm of an old-fashioned magic shop with a particularly 1990's technology-flavored paranoia.
Forgotten products from the back of comic books like "invisible" inks, books on "secret" codes and "rear-view" sunglasses are displayed next to stun guns, voice scramblers, electronic eavesdropping devices and car-bomb detectors.


Brooklyn Gunman Kills 4-Year-Old Girl
A 4-year-old girl was killed and three teen-agers and an 8-year-old boy were wounded last night when a gunman fired at them in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, the police said.
The girl, Simone Johnson, was pronounced dead at St.
Mary's Hospital around 8:45 P.M. after having been shot in the neck and waist, said Officer Valerie St.
Rose, a police spokeswoman.


In Alaska, Nature Under Siege
Every state in the union will suffer in one way or another from the Republicans' relentless effort to undermine 25 years of legislation designed to protect the environment.
But Alaska faces a double insult.
If bills now moving through Congress receive final approval, the pristine Arctic National Wildlife Refuge would be opened to oil drilling and the Tongass National Forest -- the country's largest -- would be exposed to ruinous logging.
All this is courtesy of Alaska's Congressional delegation, which consists of three Republicans.
They are Representative Don Young, Senator Ted Stevens and Senator Frank Murkowski, who would also extend his fervor for logging to the old-growth forests of the Pacific Northwest.
Mr.
Murkowski and Mr.
Young are men with legendarily retrograde views on the environment.
By a stroke of ill fortune known as the 1994 mid-term elections, they now preside over the two key natural resources committees in the Senate and House.


Dr. James David Robertson, 72; Researched Nerve Membranes
Dr.
James David Robertson, a retired professor at Duke University's medical school who conducted innovative research on the structure of membranes, died on Aug. 11 at his home in Durham, N.C.
He was 72.
He had leukemia, said Dr. Michael K. Reedy, a professor at the medical school.


Forced Marriage of Medicaid and Managed Care Hits Snags
New York's drive to direct Medicaid recipients into cost-saving managed care plans is grinding to a near halt as New York City and the state both find that their effort to re-create health care for the poor is colliding with a system that appears unable to handle the heavy load of new patients.
After months of buoyantly optimistic oratory, officials in both the Pataki and Giuliani administrations concede that their sweeping efforts to turn over health care for Medicaid recipients to private managed care companies had been moving too quickly with too little government oversight.


For Neighbors of the St. George Hotel, a Few Feet Can Mean a Lot
A day after a blaze devoured an unused part of the St.
George Hotel complex in Brooklyn Heights, residents of the block returned home yesterday to find that in many cases, a few feet made the difference between a largely untouched apartment and a heat-blasted, water-soaked cave.
"My apartment is O.K., but the apartment across the hall from mine is devastated," said Bill Tomashewski, 30, a banker who got out of his fifth-floor apartment in the St.
George Tower at 111 Hicks Street with nothing but a gym bag when the fire began early Saturday morning.
"It's got fire, smoke, water damage, the windows popped out."


Technology
THE revolution will be televised.
And if some of the deepest thinkers in cyberspace are to be believed, the revolution will also be E-mailed, faxed, uploaded to a World Wide Web site, catalogued in computer data bases, passed from cell to cell, routed on phone lines, encoded on a CD-ROM disk and tattooed on billions of digital identification cards.


No Monotony, and Even an Asian Hoedown
The concert on Friday night at the Paramount had been advertised as "One World, One Music," but most of it didn't live by that inauspicious slogan; "one world, all kinds of music" would have been better.
Produced by the Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan Institute of Indian Culture and dedicated to the 50th anniversary of the United Nations, the four-hour concert was an unlikely hodgepodge of performers, from an Indian classical slide guitarist to an African-style drum group, from an avant-garde koto player to a Latin pop singer.
The finale, L. Subramanian's "Global Fusion," used singers (including Mike Love of the Beach Boys), string orchestra, the jazz guitarist Larry Coryell, the pop-jazz keyboardist Stu Goldberg and percussionists from Africa and India.
The 20-minute piece turned a traditional-sounding Indian melody into an orchestral theme, repeated with increasing pomp.
If Ernest Gold, the composer of "Exodus," had decided to create a sequel to Ravel's "Bolero" using an Indian tune, the result might have sounded like "Global Fusion."


Cairo Journal; When Arab Weekly Scolds, the Strong Tremble
Soon after the Egyptian weekly Rose el-Youssef hits newsstands every Saturday night, faxed copies of articles are flying to Arab capitals with items bound to ruin officials' weekends.
It is said that the Saudi Information Minister, Ali al-Shaer, an unsmiling man known to Arab journalists as Bad News Ali, nervously waits by his desk for cables from the Cairo Embassy to see what the magazine says about Saudi Arabia, the country it loves to hate.


In a Dispute Over Militants, Jericho Is Sealed Off


Squabbling Mexican Left Sees Influence Wane
The economy is suffering through its worst crisis in a decade.
Millions of Mexicans are out of work.
The crime rate is soaring, tales of official corruption fill the newspapers, and rumors of a high-level hand in political assassinations hang over the Government like a stubborn, dark cloud.
Here at the national congress of Mexico's main leftist political party, however, the big, bitter debate has been over whether to press for "national salvation" or a "negotiated transition."


Millions of Mothers Can't Choose Not to Work; A Father's Issue Too
To the Editor:
Danielle Crittenden, in "Yes, Motherhood Lowers Pay" (Op-Ed, Aug. 22), notes that mothers are right to think caring for a baby is important enough to make accommodations at work.
Unfortunately, she misses the boat by assuming this is and should be an issue just for women.


RESULTS PLUS
ROWING  Gold for U.S. Women
The United States women's heavyweight eight, in its most significant victory, won its first gold at the rowing world championships yesterday in Tampere, Finland.


Media Moguls, United
In its current fury of television takeovers and deregulation, is the United States following the Italian model of media ownership?
During Silvio Berlusconi's eight months as Italy's Prime Minister, when he controlled the state television system along with his own three private stations, the "Berlu-sconi phenomenon" seemed like something that could happen only in Italy.
The United States, by comparison, seemed the model of fairness and sanity.


Catholic Schools Make Below-Average Students Above Average
To the Editor:
"Parochial School Models" (editorial, Aug. 18) distorts the effect of parochial schools on academic achievement.


Millions of Mothers Can't Choose Not to Work; Narrowing the Pay Gap
To the Editor:
Yes, motherhood lowers pay (Op- Ed, Aug. 22), but this is not an immutable fact of nature.


Tales of Sparks, Spills and '12 Angry Men'
They roar.
They spew.
They cloak neighborhoods "in perpetual twilight," as one writer put it.
And, yet, the city's elevated trains, celebrated in history, lore and even movie scripts, still hold a fascination.
Those who lack nostalgia usually don't live nearby.


Attacks on U.S. Muslims Surge Even as Their Faith Takes Hold
The city's mosque had burned, gasoline-fueled flames melting the vinyl siding, charring the prayer hall, and scorching the rooftop crescent.
But Asmir Markinson decided to pray in the empty parking lot, behind the yellow police tape.
"I finished praying, looked up, and saw three teen-age girls standing at the gate," recalled the 30-year-old mother, who stands out in this small Midwestern city because she wears a hijab, the head scarf of a devout Muslim.


Police in a War of Wits With Casino Crooks
Jerry Criner was an Atlantic City mechanic, a quick hand with a jimmy who could steal the last dollar from a slot machine and walk away before anyone knew the difference.
He cruised into town from Oklahoma in the summer of 1993, planning to hook up with a crew from Arkansas and work the casinos on the Boardwalk.
Mr.
Criner was slick and his plan was solid, but when he walked onto the buzzing floor of the Taj Mahal casino, Jim Pflaumer and Richard Lindsay were watching his every move.


Chamber Ensemble Names New Manager
Adam Pinsker has been appointed manager of the New York Chamber Symphony, succeeding Seymour Rosen.
Mr.
Pinsker has served as manager of the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra and the Buffalo Philharmonic, and has also been general manager of the Pennsylvania Ballet.
Mr.
Rosen, who resigned for medical reasons, will remain as consultant.


Oh, to Be Young and Pakistani


Newlywed Is Charged In Attacks
A Staten Island newlywed was facing several criminal charges yesterday after his van smashed into a police officer's vehicle and one of his passengers then abducted a witness by making off with her pickup truck, the police said.
The abducted woman, Vita La Rosa, and her husband, Kenneth, were traveling home from Atlantic City at 7:30 A.M. yesterday when they saw the white van collide with a car driven by Officer Clifford Allen on the Gowanus Expressway near 39th Street in Sunset Park, Brooklyn, said Doram Tamari, a police spokesman.


New York City Water Mains
Anyone who has had to wade through knee-deep water or stew in traffic after a water main break may not believe it, but that sort of thing happens here less often than in other cities.
There were about eight main breaks for every 100 miles of pipe in the New York City system in fiscal 1995, fewer than in Philadelphia, Chicago and Denver.


The Unknown Power of German TV
For global broadcasters, the slow deregulation of European television and telecommunications means it is just a matter of time before a vast, lucrative market opens to all comers.
Germany in particular, with an audience of 80 million, with ad revenues of almost $4 billion (among the highest growth rates of any media market in Europe), with a relatively high percentage of cable subscribers and a tradition of poor local programming, is the ultimate prize.
No wonder Capital Cities/ABC and the NBC network of General Electric -- which announced yesterday it would begin a European version of its CNBC business channel early next year -- are interested in investing here.


Equity Offerings For This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week: Computational Systems Inc., Knoxville, Tenn., an initial public offering of 1.75 million shares.
J.
C.
Bradford &amp; Co.
Enrich International Inc., Orem, Utah, an initial public offering of 1.2 million units, each representing one share and one warrant.
Royce Investment Group Inc.
Traithalon Broadcasting Co., San Diego, Calif., an initial public offering of 2 million class A shares.
Americorp Securities Inc.
Source: MCM CorporateWatch.


Tough Life For Music On 54th St.
Summergarden's series in the Sculpture Garden of the Museum of Modern Art offers the right setting (irreproachable beauty), the right music (20th-century classics wisely chosen by Joel Sachs) and the right price (admission is free).
The place (54th Street near Fifth Avenue) is impossible.
It would be nice to write here only about music, but the site keeps getting in the way.
On Friday night, amplification once again raised musical sound above the weekend traffic din and into the ears of this large and friendly audience.
But it was a Pyrrhic victory, the price of audibility being coarseness and distortion.
People seem to love these events, so long may they prosper.
But after many trips, I have yet to hear much music at Summergarden.


Flying Feet, Chairs and Other Objects
Joe Chvala and the Flying Foot Forum is a relatively young company.
Based in Minneapolis, it has a distinctively laid-back, slightly goofy quality.
But the Feet need to decide who they really are, to judge by an ambitiously varied program the company presented on Friday night at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival.
The highlight was the nutty "All Creatures Now Are Merry-Minded." Described in a news release as a spoof of Renaissance court dancing, the piece seems most of all a chance for six exuberant, shameless clowns to romp less and less retrievably into inspired mayhem, with help from some chairs, a tossed head, light-filled goblets and brilliantly colored silken coats and hats.


Just a Sprinkle in a Long Dry Season


Green Deserves Shot To See Mets Through
Hang around the Mets for a minute and invariably two intriguing topics of conversation come up: the tantalizing young prospects and the fate of Dallas Green.
The young Mets, 24-19 since the All-Star Game break, deserve the plaudits.
Green, the manager who inherited an unsightly mess that was the Mets only to re-introduce the team to sound baseball, does not deserve the uncertainty hanging over him.


Bridge
The right play of a suit combination often depends on circumstances: the number of tricks required, the possibilities in other suits, the type of scoring and even the caliber of the opposition.
All these factors came into play on the diagramed deal in a duplicate game at the Cavendish Town Club in Manhattan.
Morton Kaplan of Cedarhurst, L.I., who sat North, had occasion to admire the play of his partner, Dorothy Silverman of Manhattan.


Water May Be Big Red's Secret
For the sixth time in nine years, a Long Branch woman has won the annual Tomato Championship.
The record-breaking tomato entered by Minnie Zaccaria on Saturday weighed 4.59 pounds and earned her $1,000 in prize money.
This year's contest had 30 entries.
Joe Heimbold, organizer of the contest, which began in 1978 as a promotional event for Bloody Marys, said extensive watering may be the key to Mrs.
Zaccaria's success.
"One time she told me she puts a gallon of water in every plant every day," he said.
But when it comes to tomatoes, is bigger necessarily better?
"It depends on the tomato," he said, diplomatically.
TERRY PRISTIN


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  Major League Baseball  TAMPA BAY DEVIL RAYS -- Signed a working agreement with the Butte, Mont.
Copper Kings of the Pioneer League for one year.
American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Recalled Joe Borowski, pitcher, from Rochester of the International League.


Big Changes Seen For Bell Atlantic
The Bell Atlantic Corporation is expected to announce, perhaps as soon as today, that it will end a review on its account, with billings estimated at $50 million, by revamping its agency roster, adding Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS in New York and eliminating J. Walter Thompson New York.
Until the review began in late May, the Bell Atlantic account, for duties like corporate advertising, media buying and directory services, had been divided between Thompson New York, a unit of the WPP Group, and Tierney &amp; Partners in Philadelphia, part of True North Communications.
They are finalists in the review with Lowe, owned by the Interpublic Group of Companies, and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide in New York, a unit of Cordiant P.L.C.


Illegal Aliens, Dirty Jobs
I am in residency to become a plastic surgeon.
Part of the training for that branch of medicine is in hand surgery.
I once had a professor who said that you can tell a lot about a person by the type of hand injury they suffer.
My work at a Los Angeles County hospital has given me a fresh perspective on California's Proposition 187, the measure that, if it survives in court, would limit non-emergency medical treatment to illegal aliens, among other things.


In America; If City Hall Has Nothing to Hide . . .
Back in July auditors from Comptroller Alan Hevesi's office made a visit to New York City's upstate watershed.
The auditors wanted to inspect the security system, which is designed to prevent deliberate pollution and to keep the city's drinking water free of infestation that can cause disease.
To the astonishment of the auditors, the inspection was blocked by officials of the city's Department of Environmental Protection, which operates the watershed.
Comptroller Hevesi, equally astonished, complained quietly to the Mayor's office.
He was assured that it was all a misunderstanding.
The auditors subsequently were allowed to do their job.


Arrest in 3 Casino Holdups
An Atlantic City man has been arrested after surrendering to the police and confessing to staging three robberies on casino floors in a week, the A.P. reported.


U.S. and China Plan Meeting Of Their Leaders in October
After two days of talks that left "fundamental differences" in Chinese-American relations unresolved, a senior State Department official said today that China nonetheless wanted to proceed with preparations for a summit meeting between President Clinton and President Jiang Zemin in October.
The positive tone from the official, Under Secretary of State Peter Tarnoff, suggested that both Washington and Beijing were determined to build on the momentum created last week with the release of the Chinese-American human rights activist Harry Wu and the subsequent White House decision that Hillary Rodham Clinton would attend the United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing in September.


Court Fight Over Timber Starts Immediately After Law Is Changed
Only a month after President Clinton signed a new law requiring the Administration to sell more timber from public lands, the legal wrangling has begun over carrying out the law in the old-growth forests of the Northwest.
At stake are Federal sales of perhaps half a billion board feet of timber in Oregon and Washington, mostly from forests that provide nesting sites for the Pacific marbled murrelet, an elusive sea-going bird threatened with extinction.


Lost Amid Change? Take a Number
It's usually the business people who get upset when a longstanding area code is suddenly changed: all the stationery and business cards that need to be reprinted, all the computerized phone equipment that needs adjustment.
It costs money.
For an ordinary person with a phone, the irritation is subtler but more unsettling.
It's like an eviction from one's psychic address, no small disruption in a world that seems ever more bent on isolating its inhabitants.


And Now, Direct From Tiananmen Square, a New Star
By five o'clock Saturday afternoon, the line outside the Palladium at Union Square already stretched around the block.
In T-shirts emblazoned with his name, tapes of his music tucked under their arms, a sold-out audience of 2,000 fans, mostly Chinese students and young professionals, had come from as far away as Hong Kong and Toronto to hear Cui Jian in his first New York concert.
"I never thought I'd ever see him perform, much less in America," said Steven Zhang, a marketing consultant who grew up in Beijing during the Cultural Revolution and fought in the student uprising in Tiananmen Square in 1989.
Mr.
Zhang, now working in Hong Kong, timed his vacation for this event.
"This is a historical moment for us. His songs gave us the will to fight in Tiananmen, and they continue to speak our mind. He is the voice of our generation."


4 Injured in Jamaica Bay Boat Explosion


Whole Lotta Shakin'; Life by the Elevated Isn't for Everybody
There is no air-conditioning in Denis Higgins's apartment, only the blast of an unnatural breeze that sets his curtains dancing each time a train roars by -- every two to three minutes.
Mr.
Higgins, 58, lives above Peggy Gordon's Pub on Roosevelt Avenue in Jackson Heights, Queens.
His window is all of eight feet from the No. 7 line to Flushing.


Chinese Rock Legend Sings of a Different Malaise
The rock singer at the Palladium on Saturday evening was dressed in grunge wear: a plaid shirt with its sleeves ripped away and a pair of cutoff denim shorts.
In a gruff, desperate voice, he sang, "I have nothing," and the fans who filled the club shouted along, their arms in the air.
In some ways, it was a typical 1990's rock scene.
But the singer, Cui Jian (pronounced Tswee Jen), is China's most important rock songwriter, as both symbol and musician.
Unlike Western grunge rockers, he sings about a malaise that is not self-induced.
He performed for student protesters at Tiananmen Square in 1989, and his concerts have often been banned or restricted by Chinese authorities.
"Wild in the Snow," an Asian hit, is about his escape from a hospital where he had been confined.
He is now making his first United States tour, and the Palladium was packed with fans who sang along ardently.
One waved a Chinese flag.


Music From the Depths of New York
UNDERGROUND HARMONIES usic and Politics in the Subways of New York  By Susie J. Tanenbaum  Illustrated. 270 pages.
Cornell University Press.
Paperback, $14.95; cloth, $37.50.


Catholic Schools Make Below-Average Students Above Average; Zero School Board
To the Editor:
Frank J. Macchiarola's "Giuliani Is Half Right on Schools" (Op-Ed, Aug. 17) laments the existence of the New York City Board of Education and the bureaucratic bloat.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday None Tuesday New-Home Sales July Consumer Confidence Aug.
Wednesday G.D.P. 2d Qtr.
Thursday Factory Orders July Personal Income July Farm Prices July Weekly Jobless Claims Friday Employment August Leading Indicators July Construction Spending July


Bishop Now Faces the Heretic's Brand
When the next history of the Episcopal Church is written, Bishop Walter C. Righter's name will almost surely appear in the text, but not in a context he would have chosen.
The 71-year-old retired bishop, a white-haired grandfather who lives with his wife in a hillside cottage in this New Hampshire village, has been formally accused of heresy -- that is, teaching doctrine contrary to that of his church -- for ordaining a homosexual as a deacon.
He now faces trial in a church court.


Officers Arrest 18 and Seize Cars in Drag Racing Sting Operation in Queens
A three-month police sting operation against drag racers in Queens resulted yesterday morning in the arrest of 18 men and the seizure of 14 cars and motorcycles that the police said had been illegally modified for high-speed performance.
The Queens District Attorney, Richard A. Brown, announced the arrests at a news conference yesterday afternoon in the parking lot of the 107th Precinct station house in Fresh Meadows, where the impounded vehicles -- including five Ford Mustangs and two Chevrolet Camaros -- were on display.


N.F.L. TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Dallas Cowboys
The Cowboys' owner, Jerry Jones, said that the third-year outside linebacker Darrin Smith had reached an impasse in his contract negotiations and won't play in the opener against the Giants next Monday.


Millions of Mothers Can't Choose Not to Work; Baby Doll Syndrome
To the Editor:
The assertion by Danielle Crittenden (Op-Ed, Aug. 22) that women "biologically" or "genetically" prefer to stay home with children rather than go to work, which justifies continued income inequity, is absurd.
From the minute a little boy is handed a fireman's hat and a little girl her first baby doll, males are aggressively socialized to be breadwinners and females to be child-rearers.


March on Chicago Points to Jail as Symbol of Failed Urban Policy
A sprawling warehouse of the criminal and the dispossessed on the city's West Side, the Cook County Jail has been getting bigger and bigger for decades.
Designed for 8,200 inmates, it now holds 9,000, more than 1,000 of whom have to sleep on mattresses spread across the floor.


Jacob D. Fuchsberg, 82, Dies; Lawyer and Appellate Judge
Jacob D. Fuchsberg, a prominent trial lawyer and judge who served on the Court of Appeals, the state's highest court, from 1975 to 1983, died yesterday at United Hospital in Port Chester, N.Y.
He was 82 and lived in Harrison, N.Y.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said his son-in-law Richard Kaufman.
Mr.
Kaufman said Mr.
Fuchsberg felt weak and dizzy at his home and was taken by ambulance to the hospital.


No Headline
"This is impossible. I can't run the school if this is the way it ends up. I can't run the school." -- KENNETH WILKOFF principal of P.S. 100 as he reviewed his budget.  [ A1:3. ]


METRO DIGEST
BUDGET CUTS LAND IN PRINCIPAL'S OFFICE
Last year, Public School 100 in the Bronx had one assistant principal.
On Tuesday, when the principal, Kenneth Wilkoff, picked up another budget for the new school year, he learned that he would receive money for only "0.4" of an assistant principal.
On Wednesday, at a District 8 school board meeting, he received a revised budget showing that none of the district's 28 schools would get any money to hire assistant principals.
"This is impossible," Mr.
Wilkoff whispered, shaking his head as he and Donna Rodriguez, the school's parents association president, reviewed the document in the auditorium.
"I can't run the school if this is the way it ends up. I can't run the school."  [ Page A1. ] NEW YORK CITY NEWLYWED FACES CARJACKING CHARGES
A newlywed from Staten Island found himself facing several criminal charges after his van smashed into a police officer's vehicle and one of his passengers then abducted a witness by making off with her pickup truck, the police said.  [ B3. ] IN FIRE, MERE FEET MADE A BIG DIFFERENCE
A day after a blaze devoured an unused part of the St.
George Hotel complex in Brooklyn Heights, residents of the block returned home to find that in many cases, a few feet made the difference between a largely untouched apartment and a heat-blasted, water-soaked cave.
"My apartment is O.K., but the apartment across the hall from mine is devastated," said Bill Tomashewski, 30, a banker who got out of his fifth-floor apartment with nothing but a gym bag.  [ B3. ] IN BRIGHTON BEACH, FIGHTING FOR SOULS
In what can only be described as a spiritual rumble, a pitched fight is being carried out over the souls of the immigrant Russian Jews of Brighton Beach.
The scene is becoming familiar in the seaside neighborhood known as Little Odessa, as Orthodox Jewish groups try to combat what they see as efforts by evangelical Christians to convert susceptible new arrivals.
No blows are exchanged, but the verbal sallies, delivered nose to nose at full volume with locked eyes, come fast and furious.  [ B4. ] DEFENSE TO WRAP UP IN TERRORISM TRIAL
In two months of defense testimony, lawyers for 10 men charged with a New York terror-bombing conspiracy have sought to show deceit in the Government's investigation and to humanize defendants.
The defense case, expected to wrap up today, has presented what the lawyers say is evidence that the Federal Bureau of Investigation gave the chief informer so much leeway that he could act as an agent provocateur who entangled the Muslim defendants in a scheme in which they appeared to have plotted to blow up major buildings.  [ B4. ] STING SHUTS DOWN DRAG RACERS IN QUEENS
A three-month police sting operation against drag racers in Queens resulted in the arrest of 18 men and the seizure of 14 cars and motorcycles that the police said had been illegally modified for high-speed performance.
The Queens District Attorney, Richard A. Brown, announced the arrests at a news conference in the parking lot of the 107th Precinct station house in Fresh Meadows, where the impounded vehicles -- including five Ford Mustangs and two Chevrolet Camaros -- were on display.  [ B6. ] REGION A WAR OF WITS IN THE CASINOS
Jerry Criner was an Atlantic City mechanic, a quick hand with a jimmy who could steal the last dollar from a slot machine and walk away before anyone knew the difference.
But when Mr.
Criner walked onto the buzzing floor of the Taj Mahal casino, Jim Pflaumer and Richard Lindsay were watching his every move.
They are New Jersey's slot cops, state police detectives who fight a constant battle of wits with the crooks who try everything to divert the flood of cash that flows through Atlantic City's gambling machines.  [ B4. ] ARGUMENT LEADS TO A FATAL PLANE CRASH
For most of his 70 years, Kenneth Jerolaman did little to call attention to himself, it seems.
He spent the last decade living in a trailer on the grounds of a small airfield in the rural Pennsylvania town of Bridgeton, on the New Jersey border.
"We'd never heard of him," Alan Rubenstein, the District Attorney of Bucks County, Pa., said.
"There is nothing in his background which indicates any history of violence or crime." All that changed Saturday evening.  [ B4. ] Chronicle B8


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  IN CHINA TALKS, BOTH SIDES TRYING
Talks between Chinese and American officials in Beijing left major differences unresolved, but officials seemed determined to build on the momentum created by China's release of an activist.
A1  A RUSSIAN STUDY IN EXTREMES
Russia's Pacific gateway, Vladivostok, holds enormous promise for the future and prospects for prosperity, but it also has huge problems, run with an iron fist by a leader who has scorn for democracy.
A1  TOUGH U.S.
TALK ON BALKANS
American officials said that the Bosnian Serbs could face NATO air strikes if there is no progress on peace for the Balkans, and they acknowledged they meant to increase pressure on the Serbs.
A1  IN MEXICO, WEAK OPPOSITION
The internal divisions demonstrated at the national congress of Mexico's main leftist opposition party explain why it has not been able to present much of a challenge to the troubled governing party.
A3  RECALLING BAVARIAN GREATNESS
Across Bavaria and all of Germany, people are celebrating the 150th anniversary of the birth of Ludwig II, the still-beloved "mad king," using the time to recall a glorious epoch in Bavarian history.
A8  ISRAEL CLOSES PALESTINIAN SITES
Israel closed several Palestinian offices in East Jerusalem, pressed by nationalists who fear that Palestinians are setting up political bases there, but stoking a touchy issue between the two sides.
A3  TOUGH TALK IN THE MIDEAST
Cairo journal: An Egyptian magazine, despite Government ownership, has managed to keep a measure of freedom and when it speaks out, officials listen both at home and across the region.
A4  National A10-13, B7-8, B10  NEW LEVEL OF POLICE CORRUPTION
Although Philadelphia has been rocked by one police scandal after another in recent years, new charges have revealed a group of officers so corrupt that the the city has been shaken to its roots.
A1  CRIMES AGAINST MUSLIMS RISE
During the past year, five mosques around the country have been burned down or seriously vandalized, as hate crimes against Muslims increase.
A1  TECHNOLOGY JOBS EMIGRATE
More American companies are hiring skilled workers in foreign countries at a fraction of American salaries.
A1  BISHOP FACES HERESY TRIAL
For the second time in the 206-year history of the Episcopal Church, a bishop faces a charge of heresy.
Bishop Walter Righter was accused after ordaining a homosexual as a deacon.
A10  CRACKDOWN ON SPY STORES
A Spy Factory store in Texas carries products that could be harmless items of James Bond fantasies, but the Federal Government, which has indicted the company, thinks otherwise.
A10  MARCH AGAINST JAIL SYSTEM
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson led more than 2,500 people on a march in Chicago to protest what he called the "jail-industrial complex." A12  FIGHT OVER TIMBER LAW
A month after the start of a law requiring the Federal Government to sell more timber from public lands, the legal wrangling has begun over carrying out the law.
A13  CRASH AFTERMATH
The crash of a small plane in Rhode Island took the life of the mother of the town's fire chief.
B7  A WILSON KICKOFF
Gov.
Pete Wilson of California will announce, yet again, that he is seeking the Presidency.
B8  A computer game teaching about slavery prompted a lawsuit.
A10  Jury selection is going slowly in the Polly Klaas trial.
B10  Metro Digest B1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  Broadway stars vs.
Broadway spectacles.
C11  The Globe Theater reborn.
C11  Music: From India and elsewhere.
C11  Dance: Joe Chvala and the Flying Foot Forum.
C16  Books: "Underground Harmonies." C16  Television: C15  Sports C1-10  Baseball: Yankees salvage final game of dismal road trip.
C1  Mets taught by Fernando Valenzuela to respect their elders.
C7  Columns: Berkow on Arthur Ashe C2  Smith on Dallas Green's future C7  Golf: Woods wins second consecutive United States Amateur.
C1  Tennis: Rivalries to be reborn at the United State Open.
C1  Obituaries B9  Dr.
James David Robertson, 72; Researched Nerve Membranes  Maurice Rosenberg, 75; Law Professor.
Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15  Editorials  In Alaska, nature under siege.
Mr.
Helms's bargaining chips.
The example of Union City.
Letters Bob Herbert: If City Hall has nothing to hide . . .
Lloyd M. Krieger: Illegal aliens, dirty jobs.
Alexander Stille: Media moguls, united.
Verlyn Klinkenborg: Where good bridges make good neighbors.
Chronicle B8  Bridge C12  Crossword C16


Old-Time Boss Rules Russia's Showcase Port
Spread regally across the rolling hills above Golden Horn Bay, Vladivostok has in just a few years become the garish showcase for all that ails modern Russia, and most of what could save it.
No other city holds more promise for the future or greater potential for prosperity.
Its mighty port, sprawling forests and vast mineral wealth have made trading partners from Seoul to Seattle drool.
There are yachts in the harbor and $60,000 Range Rovers on the pitted streets.


Third Highest Parole Rate
Only Texas and Pennsylvania rank ahead of New Jersey in the proportion of people on parole, the United States Justice Department said in a report released yesterday.


Ohio State Roars and Leaves Boston College Reeling
There is a chance you take when the Kickoff Classic calls, with money and exposure and the opportunity to become the only game of the day.
You can become Ohio State, confidently looking toward the future after a surprisingly easy 38-6 victory today over Boston College at Giants Stadium.
Or you may have to confront your shortcomings as the Eagles did, when an impressive start was lost in a numbing series of errors that added up to a potential crisis.
Before Labor Day and before the start of classes, the Eagles must now work to pick up the pieces.


Yankees Get a Victory, But It May Be Too Late
All that might remain for the vanishing Yankees is the official obituary.
Some place on the West Coast, where the Yankees had a disastrous road trip, would probably be cited as the place of death.
The always positive Buck Showalter conceded that this is the worst stretch he has endured as manager, because his team's chances for post-season play appear to be disappearing.
Showalter does not know where to stare on the out-of-town scoreboard, because four teams have passed the Yankees in the American League wild-card waltz in 12 days.
Only a miraculous spurt, something more monumental than today's 5-2 victory over the Seattle Mariners, can prevent this season from being remembered for forgettable reasons.


Looking for Inflated Enrollments
State officials have been auditing 25 school districts to determine whether they inflated enrollment figures to get a larger share of state aid.
Among them are Trenton, Camden, Newark, Bayonne, Asbury Park, Elizabeth and Atlantic City.


Is Someone Hoarding Those '800' Numbers?
Psst! Got any "800" numbers?
The telephone industry isn't just running low on local phone numbers.
Supplies of toll-free "800" numbers are also dwindling, creating the kind of demand more often associated with hard-to-get tickets -- say, for the World Series or a big rock concert.


Rubin Takes Charge and Picks Up a Title
She may have been slighted by the United States Open seeding committee now that Monica Seles has returned and bumped her down to 17th in the world.
But Chanda Rubin proved that she is still within the realm of the Top 10 by ousting the No. 7-ranked Magdalena Maleeva, 6-7 (6-8), 6-0, 6-3, in the final of the Pathmark Classic, an exhibition tuneup for the Open.
Rubin and Maleeva traded both powerful ground strokes and service breaks in the first set before Maleeva won the tie breaker on two unforced forehand errors by Rubin.


SKILLED WORKERS WATCH THEIR JOBS MIGRATE OVERSEAS
Texas Instruments is designing some of its more sophisticated computer chips in India.
Motorola Inc. recently set up computer-programming and equipment-design centers in China, India, Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan and Australia, and it is looking for a site in South America.
And while big American banks already process some account statements overseas, large accounting firms and insurance companies are looking at ways to prepare American tax returns and handle American insurance claims in East Asia.


The Globe, Chin Up, Rehearses for Its Future
A trumpet sounded, an actress almost fainted, an actor read the highly apposite prologue from "Henry V" ("O, for a muse of fire that would ascend the brightest heaven of invention. . . .") and, with a roll of applause, Shakespeare's Globe Theater on the south bank of the Thames was back in business after an interval of some 350 years.
In truth, reconstruction of the round theater that burned down in 1642 is not yet complete, and full-scale performances of Shakespeare's plays will not begin until next June.
But this summer, with the new Globe feeling its way with a series of workshops, Shakespeare's words are already echoing across the "wooden O." Designed to test the space, the workshops -- which run until Sept. 10 -- are allowing directors, actors and the public to learn the peculiarities of the building, with its protruding stage, its three seated galleries and its open-to-the-skies "bear pit" for standing spectators.


Apple to Announce More Powerbooks
Apple Computer plans to announce a new generation of its Powerbook portable computers Monday, lowering prices and for the first time offering models that include its faster Power PC microprocessor.
The new line, ranging in price from $1,679 to $6,799, will place Apple back in the lead in portable computer performance, analysts said.


A Broadway Battle: Stars vs. Spectacle
In the slow, sullen days of late August, nearly two months after the transition, the debate continues to buzz like a horsefly.
Check out the Broadway message boards on the Internet or drop in at the sort of piano bar where the patrons know every lyric from "Flora, the Red Menace," and you'll get some feeling for it.
It's the theater world's answer to the burning movieland issue of "Julia versus Sandra," an argument that has consumed a lot of printers' ink in journalism's silly season.
Who, finally, has the greater right to play Norma Desmond in Andrew Lloyd Webber's "Sunset Boulevard," the most mouth-watering musical role to come along in years: Glenn Close, who created the role in New York, or Betty Buckley, who succeeded her?


Taking In the Sites; For Designers, Space to Do It Their Way
In the old neighborhoods south of Times Square, an eclectic community of innovators and artists has grown up around the business of computer graphic designing.
Their work is spread across the World Wide Web as they contract themselves out to companies newly hungry for an Internet presence.
But the sites they create for corporations for pay are often diluted by the corporate culture.
The sites they create to promote their friends and neighbors in the jazz clubs, art galleries and on the streets of New York, however, can be far more engaging.
Clicking from one to the next, one can almost sense the designers' sheer pleasure in pushing the potential of the medium and in bringing lower Manhattan to the Internet.


Shelling Kills Dozens in Sarajevo; U.S. Urges NATO to Strike Serbs
Two shells slammed into the central Sarajevo market area today, killing at least 37 people and wounding 80 in the most devastating single attack on the Bosnian capital since a similar one 18 months ago led NATO to vow that the city would be protected.
Limbs and flesh were splattered on storefronts, and bodies fell to pieces as they were lifted into cars.
After 40 months of Serbian siege and bombardment, the scene was familiar, but the horrified frenzy among an exhausted population was still intense.


Catching Speeders Laser-Quick
Fuzzbusters may soon be obsolete.
The state police said they had begun using new laser technology that can zero in on a single car in a pack of speeders and record how fast the driver is going in just three-quarters of a second.


Mets Air The News: Best Is Yet To Come
On the day the Mets signed a two-year extension to have their games broadcast on WFAN radio, the club's general manager, Joe McIlvaine, walked up to one of the station's executives and said: "I guarantee you, your ratings are going to go up. I guarantee it."
Pardon McIlvaine for feeling giddy these days. He is enjoying having the last laugh.


L.I. Bomb Threat Closes La Guardia, J.F.K. and Newark
A bomb threat that forced the evacuation of a critical air traffic control center on Long Island shut down the New York metropolitan area's three major airports for more than an hour yesterday, delaying hundreds of arrivals and departures and affecting hundreds of other plane movements in a ripple effect across the nation.
Besides delaying tens of thousands of travelers, the incident appeared to expose an Achilles' heel in the air traffic control system: how the placement of a single malicious telephone call could halt all aircraft movements in and out of the metropolitan region and disrupt air travel across the country.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a convention of Mexico's chief leftist opposition party misstated the party affiliation of an assassination victim in some copies.
Luis Donaldo Colosio was a presidential candidate for the Institutional Revolutionary Party, not the Democratic Revolutionary Party, when he was killed in March 1994.


Rose for Any Other Team Is Still a Strong Voice
How long must Howie Rose, the new voice of the Islanders on SportsChannel, suffer the taint of having called Rangers games for six seasons on WFAN?
"The guilt by association thing will take a little time," he said.


Tough Stance Toward China Pays Off for Taiwan Leader
Mention President Lee Teng-hui to Jimmy Lin, a bicycle shop owner, and he will begin gesturing with a wrench, or whatever is in his hand, saying: "He has been President too long, already eight years. Now he wants four more years -- we can't call this a democracy."
But mention mainland China's anger over Mr.
Lee's visit to the United States in June and the military muscle-flexing that has followed, and Mr.
Lin will switch gears to defend President Lee's policy of seeking greater international recognition for Taiwan -- even if Beijing mistakes this for a strategy to declare the island's independence.


Treasury Prices Are Mixed As a Two-Day Rally Ends
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday, as a two-day rally halted.
After opening higher on follow-through buying, the market slid back but maintained its positive tone.
Analysts attributed last week's surge to the price of the September long bond futures contract's piercing a key technical level.
In addition, traders noted, last week's minutes of July's Federal Open Market Committee meeting, which were not released until after the market closed on Friday, showed a bias toward easing, and that helped sustain the market's positive tone yesterday.


Rainless Days Turn Forests Into Tinderboxes


Hovnanian Enterprises Inc.(HOV,A) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


Ex-Officer Is Sentenced In Extortion
A former police officer who told a judge that alcoholism had led him to extort payoffs from drug dealers was sentenced to a year in prison yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
Chief Judge Thomas P. Griesa listened patiently as David Benitez, 32, a former patrolman in the corruption-plagued 30th Precinct, asked not to be sent to jail.
The 11-year police veteran said his addiction had caused him to lose his job and his house and to become estranged from his wife and daughter.
He said he was now sober and was seeing a psychotherapist to stay that way.


Young Recruits Used in Spray-Paint Sting
Using undercover agents as young as 9, Nassau County authorities staged another attack over the weekend in their war against graffiti.
They recruited eight young volunteers to go into stores to buy spray paint and broad-tip markers.
Under a 1993 law, it is illegal to sell those items to anyone under the age of 18 in Nassau.


Diana Corp.(DNA,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 22


Stephen Goldfeld, 55, Professor; Was Chief Economic Forecaster
Stephen M. Goldfeld, a Princeton University professor and former provost who served on the Council of Economic Advisers during the Carter Administration, died on Friday at his home in Princeton Township, N.J.
Dr.
Goldfeld was 55.
The cause of death was cancer, said Jacquelyn Savani, a spokeswoman for the university.


Fashion Hitches a Ride With Hollywood's Shining Stars
There is one thing that an actress making $8 million a movie, an agent-turned-studio-head negotiating his multimillion dollar salary and a model who will not get out of bed for more than $10,000 a day have in common: When they are photographed wearing identifiable designer clothes, they are promoting a product. .
With celebrities now the easiest way for the media to lure the largest audience, designers are working harder than ever to get themselves into the picture -- literally.


Patterns
70's Fever: Reviving a Bag
With the whiff of 1970's nostalgia in the air and the smell of nylon in every store's handbag department, there could be no better time to reintroduce that icon of 70's style, the original Lesportsac handbag.


Of Digital History
COMPUTERS were going to eliminate paper, and probably books, too.
Yet anyone who works in an office knows that a job is not complete until it has been printed out several times, and anyone who walks into a bookstore knows that books remain healthy, especially computer books.


An Insult to Miss Liberty
Pete Wilson is entitled to announce that he is running for President as many times as he likes.
But it takes real brazenness to exploit a symbol like the Statue of Liberty to try to restart a sputtering campaign that has enshrined anti-immigration sentiment in its platform.
The Statue of Liberty belongs to the nation, not simply New York City, of course.
But New Yorkers take particular pride that it is their city that served as the entry point for the great waves of immigration that, in their day, were as reviled as the new immigrants of today.
Mr.
Wilson's message of fear while announcing his candidacy once again in lower Manhattan yesterday was so tone-deaf that it seemed almost calculated, as if he were saying he had no chance to win the votes of New Yorkers so it didn't matter if he cynically abused one of their most beloved icons.


Health Plans That Can Put Cash Into Workers' Pockets Are Finding Favor
Melissa Holloway, a City Council member in Jersey City, may get a $700 windfall from a health plan that rewards people who use few or no medical services.
The city earmarked $1,400 for individuals and $1,800 for families in special medical savings accounts this year.
She has used hers only once so far, for a battery of tests that found no problems.
At the end of the year, she can keep the balance remaining in her account.
The health plan, which Jersey City offered to 174 nonunion employees in a one-year trial, also provides a Blue Cross of New Jersey health plan that pays all costs after a high deductible is met.
Individuals in the new program pay the deductible, the first $1,500 in medical bills, with money from the accounts and their own pockets; for an employee with family coverage, the deductible is $2,000.
Other employees have conventional Blue Cross coverage, with deductibles of $200 for an individual and $400 for family coverage, or managed-care plans that limit their choices of doctors.


Seles Comes Back To Open in Glory
When the sun went down in a pastel haze last night at the United States Open, it was replaced by the silvery sliver of a crescent moon.
It was the sort of moon that illuminates good dreams and happy endings, and just the right sort of moon to stand guard over the triumphant Grand Slam return of Monica Seles.
To the familiar sound of applause and the familiar sight of a standing ovation, the 21-year-old Seles strode into the twilight on the Stadium Court and accomplished a familiar feat.


Caribbean Kickoff


Reporter's Notebook; Night Under the Stars for the Clintons
With rubber mats for padding and sleeping bags for beds, Eagle and Evergreen slept under the stars in the land of evergreens and eagles on Sunday night, and if Secret Service radios crackled with Bill and Hillary Clinton's code names, only the mountains had ears.
"It was a tad nippy," the President said this morning of his family's overnight stay in 50-year-old tents on the grounds of Laurance Rockefeller's JY Ranch in the wilds of the Grand Teton National Park here.
"We sang some old songs together. It was just wonderful."


A Sleeping Arts Giant Reawakens
Dancers twisted and looped like parts of a giant machine on a stage set up in a courtyard that was once the parking lot of the Sprague Electric Company, until the early 1980's the major industry in this sturdy but economically depressed old mill town in the Northern Berkshires.
A dancer, also a part of the performance, pushed fabric back and forth through an old sewing machine on a stage covered with a sea of billowing white material not far from the abandoned factory buildings where more than a century ago mill workers printed cotton.
Another dancer quietly sang a familiar old union song, coaxing an audience of about 400 artists, former factory workers and families to join in.


Of Faithful Friends And Alcott Experts
"A faithful friend is a strong defense," Madeleine Stern wrote in the dedication of her 1950 biography of Louisa May Alcott, "and he that hath found him hath found a treasure." The dedication was to Ms.
Stern's friend Leona Rostenberg.
Madeleine Stern is 83 now, Leona Rostenberg 86.
They have been friends for 60 years, shared a home for nearly 40 and are business partners in Rostenberg &amp; Stern, rare book dealers.
Sometimes they call each other "Watson and Holmes," wear deerstalkers and study with a magnifying glass, just as Sherlock Holmes and his sidekick Dr.
Watson searched for clues.
In 1942 they unlocked a great secret of Louisa May Alcott's life: before the proper spinster wrote her charming novels of New England domesticity, she also wrote "blood and thunder stories," on subjects like transvestitism, hashish smoking and feminism, publishing them anonymously, or under a pseudonym, to help pay the family bills.


Ad Store Opening Office in Atlanta
The Ad Store, a creative boutique, is opening the first office outside its New York home, in Atlanta.
Robert Farinella, 33, president of Blue Sky Design, an Atlanta design company whose clients include Turner Broadcasting System, will manage the Ad Store Atlanta while continuing as president of Blue Sky.
Paul Cappelli, president of the Ad Store in New York, said last week that the Ad Store Atlanta was talking with Turner Broadcasting about projects for units like the TNT cable television network.
Although the Ad Store in New York works for the Coca-Cola Company, which is based in Atlanta, the opening of the Atlanta office is "unrelated at this point" to Coca-Cola, he said.


Cascade Corp.(CASC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


4 Held on Prostitution Charges
Police responding to complaints from neighbors raided a house on the east side yesterday and arrested four people on prostitution charges, including one Newark teen-ager they described as a customer.


All Eyes on the Openers


Umhlanga Rocks Journal; New! A Shark Shield, to Keep Those Jaws at Bay
Most of the great beach authorities of the world handle the threat of shark attack by pooh-poohing it.
"More people die each year of bee stings . . . .' That sort of thing.
The Natal coast used to take that line too.
Until 1957, when five swimmers were killed in 100 days.


Off-Duty Transit Officer Shoots Man to Death
A New York City transit police officer shot and killed a Jackson Heights, Queens, man early yesterday after the man shot into a crowd outside a Long Island City nightclub, the police said.
The officer, Alexander Torres, 37, of Ridgewood, Queens, was assigned to modified duty after investigators discovered that he was supposed to be home on sick leave.


Prior Merger Experience Might Help
No merger is a cakewalk.
The success rate for takeover deals, depending on which management expert is doing the calculating, is 50 percent or less.
And combining two big, established institutions like Chemical Banking and Chase Manhattan into one huge corporation will undoubtably be a long and painful process.
But many experts in banking were giving the deal, announced yesterday, better-than-even odds of working out in the long term, largely because Chemical has already been through the process when it merged with the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation in 1991.


Circus Circus Enterprises Inc.(CIR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


Why Not Unions to Combat Sweatshops?
To the Editor:
Re "How an American Industry Gets Away With Slave Labor" (Week in Review, Aug. 20):
It is disturbing that a published interview with Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich on exploitation of workers makes no mention of the most effective remedy for mistreatment: strong unions.
Empirical evidence confirms that nonunion workers are more likely to endure sweatshop conditions than are union members.
In 1994, for example, union members' earnings were 37 percent higher than for unrepresented workers.


G.I.'s in Korea Need Some Cultural Awareness; Socialists Still Jailed
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 20 front-page article on the release of Kim Sun Myung after 44 years of political imprisonment claims that the South Korea he entered upon release is "a prosperous democracy." There is reason for questioning this judgment.


Man Sought in Fatal Shooting
A warrant has been issued for the arrest of a Jersey City man who is accused of fatally shooting his estranged girlfriend in the head as she knelt at her bedside, authorities said.
Carmen Messano, Hudson County Prosecutor, said Luz Portocarrero was on her knees with her face and upper body slumped onto the bed when her body was found Sunday night, but he could not be certain she was praying.


CHRONICLE
ALINE KOMINSKY-CRUMB, an artist and the wife of the cartoonist R. CRUMB, has been having her 15 minutes of fame since the April release of "Crumb," TERRY ZWIGOFF'S documentary on her husband.
And she says neither she nor her husband is happy about it.
"When we saw the film, our urge was to hide in a cave," Ms.
Kominsky-Crumb said yesterday from her home in the south of France.
"I'm not unhappy by the film; I'm terrified of the exposure. None of us had any idea that anybody would want to see a film on a has-been cartoonist by an unknown director."


Page Smith, 77, Historian, Dies; Praised as an Appealing Writer
Page Smith, an iconoclastic historian and prolific author of books on subjects as diverse as John Adams, Thomas Jefferson, famous women and the importance of chickens, died early Monday morning at his daughter's home in Santa Cruz, Calif.
He was 77.
The cause of death was leukemia, said his daughter Anne Easley.


By Design; Turtlenecks for All Seasons
A surprise hit of the summer season was the short-sleeved mock turtleneck in stretch nylon that became a uniform for many young fashion editors.
In fact, it's an editor's top pick in Allure magazine's October issue; Julia Roberts wears it in the September Harper's Bazaar.
The turtleneck is a top seller in the Express stores, where it sells for $29 in black, cream, white, chocolate-brown and camel, and for $34 in a leopard print or stripes of black, brown, burgundy, blue or purple with white.
The stores will add long-sleeved versions in October.


David Warrilow, 60, an Actor Who Interpreted Beckett, Dies
David Warrilow, an actor who was a consummate interpreter of the works of Samuel Beckett, died in Paris on Aug. 17.
He was 60.
The cause was AIDS, said Jed Wheeler, a New York theatrical manager and friend, who announced Mr.
Warrilow's death yesterday.


G.I.'s in Korea Need Some Cultural Awareness
To the Editor:
"Subway Brawl Inflames Issue of G.I.'s in Korea" (news article, Aug. 24) reports an incident in which a Korean woman was subjected to inappropriate sexual behavior in public by an American G.I.
Instead of focusing on streamlining conduct more applicable to a society in which they are foreigners, the Americans have highlighted that the victim and the alleged molester were wife and husband.
Regardless of their marital status, the real issue is the disregard for Korean customs, in which such public displays are decidedly frowned upon.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
5.71
4.78
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.34
5.33
4.61
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.34
5.34
4.93
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.33
6.34
7.23
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.70
6.70
7.49
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.60
7.60
8.34
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.16
6.21
6.37
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


States Improve in Warning Consumers About Polluted Fish
The number of warnings issued by state health authorities against eating fish caught in polluted waters increased 20 percent in the Government's fiscal year that ended on Sept. 30, 1994, according to a survey published today by the Environmental Protection Agency.
While the increase has continued to rise, agency officials said it did not necessarily suggest that water quality was worsening, but rather that state agencies were doing a better job of detecting problems and informing the public.


Some Mutual Funds Found a Winner in Big Banking Merger
The proposed merger of the Chase Manhattan and Chemical Banking corporations will make a big winner of Michael F. Price and his Mutual Series family of funds, whose 11 million Chase shares are worth $273 million more -- or 70 percent -- than when they were bought less than six months ago.
Plenty of other mutual-fund managers have also been buying shares of both banks in recent months.
And while Mr.
Price certainly hit a home run for investors in the funds he manages, it was James P. Barrow, manager of the Vanguard Windsor II fund, who truly knocked the cover off the ball.


Sargsian's Odyssey Includes Open Victory
As he thrust his arms purposefully into the air in celebration, Sargis Sargsian could look over at the overflowing stands on Court 20 and see his past and present converging.
There, jumping up and down as if Sargsian had won a final instead of a first-round, five-set match, was Hroutioun Khatchatran, the coach who began teaching him tennis at the age of 7 in Armenia when it was part of the Soviet Union.
There was Lou Belkin, the coach who took a chance and gave Sargsian a tennis scholarship to Arizona State.


CHASE AND CHEMICAL AGREE TO MERGE IN $10 BILLION DEAL CREATING LARGEST U.S. BANK
Creating the biggest bank in the country, the Chemical Banking Corporation said yesterday that it would merge with the Chase Manhattan Corporation in a deal valued at nearly $10 billion.
The combined bank would take the better-known Chase name, though Chemical is much bigger than Chase and is the dominant partner in the merger.
Walter V. Shipley, the chairman and chief executive of Chemical, will keep those titles at the new company.
The combined bank would have $297 billion in assets, overtaking Citicorp as the nation's biggest.


No Headline
It's great to be an American and a Democrat and live in Wyoming! -- GAYLE KRATER, after meeting a vacationing President Clinton.  [ A14:2. ]


Advertising; Will Calvin Klein's Retreat Redraw the Lines of Taste?
The designer Calvin Klein's abrupt about-face in withdrawing advertising that angry critics likened to child pornography -- the first time he acceded to demands that he halt a campaign before its scheduled end -- is generating a fierce debate over whether there are limits in advertising and, if so, whether Mr.
Klein, always adept at testing the boundaries of acceptability, had crossed a line.
Calvin Klein Inc. announced yesterday that the campaign, for the designer jeans bearing Mr.
Klein's name, would cease "as soon as possible" because it had been "misunderstood by some." Since the campaign was introduced this month, the company had been engulfed by complaints contending that the television commercials, print advertisements and outdoor signs were salacious and exploitative because young models had been posed suggestively and tastelessly.


Executive Changes
HARTMARX CORP., Chicago, appointed Glenn R. Morgan executive vice president and chief financial officer.
SIX FLAGS THEME PARKS INC., Parsippany, N.J., jointly owned by Time Warner Inc. and an investor group led by Boston Ventures Management Inc., appointed Larry D. Bouts chairman and chief executive.
He succeeds Robert W. Pittman, who is leaving Six Flags to become managing partner and chief executive of Century 21 Real Estate Corp., a company recently bought by Hospitality Franchise Systems Inc.
U.S.
OFFICE PRODUCTS, Capitol Heights, Md., named Donald Platt chief financial officer.
VF CORP., Wyomissing, Pa., appointed Mackey J. McDonald, its president and chief operating officer, to the additional position of chief executive, succeeding Lawrence R. Pugh, who will continue as chairman of the board and of the company's executive committee.


After a Series of Setbacks, Foster Let Go by Panthers
Three months ago, when the Carolina Panthers mortgaged two draft choices to get Barry Foster from the Pittsburgh Steelers, they thought they had found a running back to make their expansion team respectable.
Yesterday, the Panthers waived him.
In 1992, Foster led the American Football Conference in rushing with 1,690 yards.
But the battering runner became battered, and the Steelers let him go because they had a younger, healthier and lower-paid replacement in Johnny (Bam) Morris.


Chief Likely to Return Soon
A member of the Town Council said yesterday that Chief Robert Spina of the West Orange police was likely to return to work before the Council decides how to handle a judge's findings that he had abused his wife.
Last month, Mr.
Spina, who was appointed to his post by his father, the town's Mayor, took a leave of absence until Sept. 5, and the Town Council asked the State Attorney General and the Essex County Prosecutor to look into the matter.


Albertson's Inc.(ABS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 3


BUSINESS DIGEST
Chemical and Chase In $10 Billion Merger  Creating the biggest bank in the country, the Chemical Banking Corporation said it would merge with Chase Manhattan in a deal valued at nearly $10 billion.
It would form an institution with $297 billion in assets, overtaking Citicorp.
The combined bank would take the Chase name, although Chemical is the larger bank and is the dominant partner in the merger.
The proposal surprised some analysts.  [ D4. ] Stratus to Cut Work Force  Stratus Computer said that it would dismiss 500 employees, or 18 percent of its work force, to reduce costs and that it would take a $20 million charge for the third quarter.  [ D4. ] Judge Reverses Verdict on Patents  A Federal judge has reversed a jury verdict that ordered three semiconductor companies to pay Texas Instruments $51.8 million in damages for patent infringement on a computer-chip-packaging technology.
The plans, which involve medical-savings accounts for employees, are finding friends on Capitol Hill, and supporters say that such coverage can slow spending on health care.  [ A15. ] Japan to Close Cosmo Credit  Japanese authorities announced details of a $2.7 billion plan to close Cosmo Credit, a Tokyo credit union, and repay its depositors.
The plan is to include loans from the nation's central bank, the Tokyo city government and Japan's deposit-insurance agency.  [ D2. ]


No Contracts at 134 Schools
Teachers and support personnel in 134 of New Jersey's 600 school districts still have no contracts, but most of the state's 1.1 million students are nevertheless expected to start school as scheduled on Sept. 6, the New Jersey Education Association said yesterday.


Fans Too Can Protest Ticketmaster Prices
To the Editor:
Ticket scalping is a sleazy business, and Ticketmaster is the biggest scalper of all.
Through exclusive contracts with concert and sports venues, Ticketmaster sold 65 million tickets last year (news article, Aug. 23).
The only difference between Ticketmaster and the scalpers who hawk tickets in front of arenas is that Ticketmaster has a deal with the arenas allowing it to jack up prices.


G.I.'s in Korea Need Some Cultural Awareness; Mutual Friendship
To the Editor:
Korean university students spend a significant amount of time angry at the United States for blocking reunification with North Korea and for the United States Army's presence as an occupying force.


Bernard Rifkin, 84, Union Leader and Educator
Bernard Rifkin, a union leader and an educator who helped create the country's first fully accredited labor college, died on Friday at his home in lower Manhattan.
He was 84.
Mr.
Rifkin retired in 1976 as a director of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, Council 37, A.F.L.-C.I.O.
District 37, a nationwide organization based in New York.


Quiet Captain Weathers An Industry's Storms
In an era when many a bank executive's career has been cut short by lending mistakes or the misfortune of being involved in a merger, Walter V. Shipley appears to have lived a charmed life.
Mr.
Shipley, who has been at the top of the Chemical Banking Corporation for nearly 14 years, has survived the lending mistakes of the late 1970's and 1980's.
When those mistakes caused Chemical to seek a merger with the hard-pressed Manufacturers Hanover Corporation in 1991, Mr.
Shipley was willing to take a back seat briefly before reclaiming the chief executive position early last year.


RESULTS PLUS
WORLD UNIVERSITY GAMES U.S. Swimmers Add Three Gold Medals
United States swimmers won three races and broke two records yesterday at the World University Games in Fukuoka, Japan.
Their efforts lifted the United States into a tie with Japan for the lead in gold medals at 15.


Saratoga Meet Finishes With a Winning Team
On the day after they won the Hopeful Stakes for colts with Hennessy, the team of D. Wayne Lukas and William T. Young won the Spinaway Stakes for fillies today with Golden Attraction.
And they headed from their Saratoga sweep of juvenile honors toward the Breeders' Cup at Belmont Park and next year's classics with yet another solid hand of winning horses.
The trainer from California and the owner and breeder from Kentucky provided the final smashing performance of the 34-day season, which ended with mixed business reviews alongside the rave artistic reviews.
Attendance at the track dropped 4.1 percent and betting handle dropped by 7.2 percent, extending the declines of recent years, although new business was found away from the track through simulcast television.


Utility's Stand Produces Heat
Proposals by the Jersey Central Power and Light Company to eliminate or modify programs that give customers financial incentives for reducing energy consumption were attacked yesterday by a public-interest group.
Rebecca Stanfield, energy advocate for New Jersey Public Interest Research Group Citizen Lobby, said the proposals, which need approval from the Board of Public Utilities, "demonstrate corporate irresponsibility at its worst."


A Show of Support for Mexican Rebels


Accounts
*
Philips Electronics N.V., Eindhoven, the Netherlands, to D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York, to handle advertising in the United States for the Regina line of floor care products, which Philips bought this year.
D'Arcy Masius handles advertising for Philips's Norelco Consumer Products division.
The billings were not disclosed.


Western Waste Industries(WW,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Insurer Picks McCann-Erickson
Blue Shield of California in San Francisco has selected McCann-Erickson San Francisco, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies, to handle its account, which had been at Mandelbaum Mooney Ashley in San Francisco since June 1993.
The billings were estimated at $10 million to $15 million.
McCann San Francisco was awarded the account last week after a monthlong review that was narrowed to that agency and a second finalist, the J. Walter Thompson San Francisco unit of the WPP Group, after Mandelbaum Mooney declined to participate.


Simpson Prosecutor Tries to Counter an Expert's Testimony
A prosecutor in the O. J. Simpson case tried to chip away today at the testimony of Henry C. Lee, the renowned forensic scientist whose conclusions, while not confirming defense conspiracy theories, have lent them some heft.
But the cross-examination was long on tedium and generalities and short on true concessions.
Deputy District Attorney Hank Goldberg completed his interrogation of Dr.
Lee, whose understated but meticulous testimony last week fortified two prongs of Mr.
Simpson's defense: that a second perpetrator was at the crime scene and that blood samples collected there may have been tampered with.


In a Choral Requiem, a Climax and Last Hurrah
The Tanglewood classical season, which was largely devoted to celebrating the achievements of the Tanglewood Festival Chorus on its 25th anniversary, ended on a note both grand and pensive this afternoon, with the Verdi Requiem.
The work is, among many other things, a showpiece for chorus, and the Tanglewood chorus, which John Oliver has directed since its founding in 1970, gave a brilliant last hurrah.
Typically, it sang with voice ranges thoroughly intermixed and without music, and typically, the superbly balanced performance prepared by Mr.
Oliver clarified the score in interesting ways.


Governor of Arkansas Pleads Not Guilty to Fraud Charges
Gov.
Jim Guy Tucker of Arkansas today told a Federal magistrate that he was not guilty of fraud, conspiracy and making false statements in obtaining millions of dollars of federally backed loans in the 1980's.
Mr.
Tucker, a Democrat, was indicted two weeks ago by a Federal grand jury in connection with loans from a savings and loan institution that failed and is now at the center of the Whitewater investigation.
Two other co-conspirators in that indictment, James B. McDougal and his former wife, Susan, have said they will also plead not guilty at their arraignments this week.


Rockies Able to Win Without Power Surge
Rockies 6, Pirates 3
In only the ninth time this season that Colorado has won a game without hitting a home run, the Rockies rebounded from a weekend sweep to beat the slumping Pittsburgh Pirates, 6-3, last night at Three Rivers Stadium.


Trump Buying a Chateau For Use in Golf Complex
Donald J. Trump is buying another mansion: the 14-bedroom, 28,322-square-foot Mount Kisco chateau known as Seven Springs.
He plans to turn it and its surrounding 200 acres into a golf course with an astronomical entrance fee.
Mr. Trump signed the contract to buy the estate last week.


Long Ball Becomes Yankees' Downfall
The last time the Yankees came off a devastating West Coast trip, they followed with almost as bad a homestand.
If they do that again, they can kiss a wild-card berth goodbye.
"That was last time," Buck Showalter said yesterday, before his team opened a 13-game homestand with a single game against the Kansas City Royals that was made necessary by the strike-revised schedule.


Wild-Card Hopes Springing Eternal
Late in the Brewers' game with Minnesota in Milwaukee on Sunday, the unusually large (for the Brewers) crowd suddenly erupted in a long, loud ovation.
"I didn't realize what was going on," said Phil Garner, the Milwaukee manager.
"Nothing was going on in the game. Then one of the players said look at the board."


Company Briefs
BEMIS CO., Minneapolis, , has a memorandum of understanding to acquire Banner Packaging Inc., Oshkosh, Wis.
Both companies are manufacturers of flexible packaging products.
MITCHELL ENERGY AND DEVELOPMENT CORP., Woodlands, Tex., an oil and gas concern, signed a contract to sell more then 22,000 acres of timberland in Montgomery, Grimes and Waller counties in Texas to B&amp;K Lumber Co.
Financial terms were not disclosed.


Lock Them Up or Give Them Up
An ordinance that would have banned all cigarette vending machines from public places as of Friday was partly blocked yesterday by a Bergen County Superior Court judge.
The judge, Patrick X. J. Fitzpatrick, issued a temporary restraining order to prevent the measure from taking effect, but he said the order applied only to machines with locking devices enabling bartenders and cashiers to prevent minors from buying cigarettes.


Death Toll Rises in Carolina Flooding


Flagstar Picks Lowe For Hardee's Work
The Flagstar Companies in Spartanburg, S.C., said yesterday that it had awarded a new assignment to Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS in New York, which is owned by the Interpublic Group of Companies, as the first agency to develop marketing strategies for the more than 600 franchised Hardee's restaurants owned by Flagstar.
The billings were estimated at $20 million.
Lowe was awarded the account without a review, only days after withdrawing from a review for the Dunkin' Donuts account.
BBDO South in Atlanta, a unit of the Omnicom Group, will continue to handle portions of the Flagstar account, such as media services.
Tatham Euro RSCG in Chicago, a unit of Euro RSCG, is the national agency for Hardee's, which is owned by the Imasco Corporation; Flagstar said it had sought a separate agency to counter slumping sales at the restaurants it owns.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Traded Jose DeLeon, pitcher, to the Montreal Expos for Jeff Shaw, pitcher.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Named Tim Wilken director of U.S. scouting.
National League  CHICAGO CUBS -- Placed Joe Kmak, catcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Mike Hubbard, catcher, from Iowa of the American Association.
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Purchased the contract of Marc Valdes, pitcher.
Designated Rich Scheid, pitcher, for assignment.
Placed Randy Veres, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Placed Tommy Greene, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Mike Grace, pitcher, from Scranton-Wilkes-Barre of the International League.
Football  National Football League  ATLANTA FALCONS -- Acquired Gene Williams, offensive lineman, from the Cleveland Browns, for an undisclosed 1996 draft pick.
CAROLINA PANTHERS -- Waived Barry Foster, running back.
Signed Derrick Moore, running back.
Acquired Travis Hill, linebacker, from Cleveland for past considerations.
Claimed Jeff Zgonina, defensive lineman, off waivers from Pittsburgh; Michael Bates, wide receiver, off waivers from Seattle.
Reached an injury settlement with James Williams, cornerback.
Signed Jeff Fields, defensive lineman, to the practice squad.
MINNESOTA VIKINGS -- Signed Keith Washington, tackle; Earl Mackey, linebacker; Shelly Hammonds, safety; Moses Ware, wide receiver; and Greg Delong, tight end; to the practice squad.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Waived Kenyon Rasheed and Gary Downs, running backs; Chris Maumalanga, defensive tackle; Roderick Mullen, cornerback; Chuck Bradley and Keith Wagner, offensive linemen; and Brian Saxton, tight end.
OAKLAND RAIDERS -- Traded Willie Broughton, defensive tackle, to the New Orleans Saints for an undisclosed draft choice.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed Ed West, tight end.
SAN DIEGO CHARGERS -- Signed David Brandon, linebacker.
Released Nate Dingle, linebacker.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Cut Rich Baldinger, offensive tackle, and David Brandon, linebacker.
Signed Keith Bryant, defensive end, James McKeehan, tight end, and Dexter Seigler, cornerback, to the practice squad.
Hockey  National Hockey League  DETROIT RED WINGS -- Signed Mike Ramsey, defenseman, to a one-year contract.
TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS -- Agreed to terms with Mike Hudson, center.
International Hockey League  IHL -- Named Mark Dimond director of marketing services.
SAN FRANCISCO SPIDERS -- Signed Rod Langway, defenseman, and Dale Craigwell, center.
Horse racing
FREEHOLD (N.J.) RACEWAY -- Announced the resignation of president, Dennis Dowd, president, to become president of Rosecroft Raceway and Delmarva Downs in Maryland.
College
BLOOMSBURG -- Named Scott Leightman sports information director.
COLGATE -- Named Molly Elliot women's part-time assistant basketball coach.
FLORIDA -- Named Larry Ray softball coach.
IOWA -- Named Linda Myers, Bonnie Henrickson and Rose Peeples women's assistant basketball coaches.
ITHACA -- Named Blaise Faggiano, John Goodson, Jonathon Heykes, and Robert Jones assistant football coaches.
LONG ISLAND U. -- Named Jim Martin athletic director, effective September 1.
MONMOUTH, N.J. -- Named Brian Ierardi assistant athletic director for sports information.
RUTGERS-NEWARK -- Named Howard Pachasa assistant athletic director.
SAN DIEGO -- Named Mike Daniels assistant sports information director.
SUNY-CORTLAND -- Named Tom Spanbauer men's basketball coach.
SUNY-PLATTSBURGH -- Named George Stackpole women's tennis coach.
WESTERN MARYLAND -- Named Ed Ashwell defensive line coach.Named Paul McCord receivers and kickers coach.
Named Butch Shaffer assistant coach.


Forest Officials Ask Hikers to Use Care
The region's woodlands, already tinderboxes, are becoming more brittle-dry as each rainless day passes.
More wildfires are flaring than in summers past.
And jittery foresters are appealing to campers and hikers to use care with matches, cigarettes and anything else that burns.
Since the start of the 5,500-acre wildfire in the scrub oaks and pines on eastern Long Island late last week, New Jersey has banned all campfires in both state and private campgrounds, Connecticut has appealed to people to stay out of its forests until a big rainstorm arrives, and New York State is considering shutting its hiking trails and marshland observatories on Long Island.


Job Losses to Fall Hard in New York City
In a city where finding work remains tough, thousands of New Yorkers face losing their jobs in the wake of the merger of Chemical Bank and Chase Manhattan Bank.
The two banks, which together employ about 75,000 people across the country and overseas, said yesterday that they expected to cut about 12,000 positions in the next three years, about a third of them in New York City.


Cesare Gianturco, 90, Radiologist and Inventor
Cesare Gianturco, a pioneering radiologist and prolific inventor of medical devices, died on Friday at Carle Hospital in Urbana, Ill.
He was 90 and lived in Savoy, Ill.
As a radiologist, Dr.
Gianturco was regarded as an originator of the specialty of the use of radiology for the treatment of illness, or interventional radiology, in contrast to its use for diagnosis.
In 1994, he was awarded the Gold Medal of the American College of Radiology.


U.N. Women's Forum Is a Test for Pope's Advocate
Mary Ann Glendon, the Harvard law professor who is the Vatican's surprising choice to head its delegation to the United Nations Conference on Women that starts next week in Beijing, does not fit easily into stereotypes.
A pioneer in her profession who had to battle discrimination, she rejects what she calls "radical feminism." A social conservative, she worked in the civil rights movement in Mississippi and champions radical economic measures to benefit the third world.


Brothers Fought Nazis
To the Editor:
Re "Alexander Z. Bielski, a Guerrilla Fighter Who Harried Nazis and Saved Jews, Is Dead" (obituary, Aug. 23):
Whereas Mr.
Bielski's wartime contribution in fighting Germans and saving lives in Byelorussia is undisputed, it was Tuvia Bielski, the eldest brother, who was the founder and commander of the group.


Questions Abound as Menendezes' Retrial Nears
Will they cry again at their retrial, or will their tears be presented to a new jury only on videotape?
Will they win the hearts of jurors once again with their descriptions of sexual abuse, or will the Menendez brothers, Lyle and Erik, turn against each other after six years in jail in a last effort to go free?


Greetings Done, Jets Must Now Get Ready
After months of frenetic activity trades, a college draft, free-agent signings and 50 practice sessions -- the Jets' first-team offense came together today for the first time.
Now, it must hurry to get acquainted for the opener in Miami on Sunday.


Service for Robinson
A funeral service for Cleveland Robinson, a labor official and veteran of the civil-rights movement, will be held at 10 A.M.
Thursday at the Cathedral Church of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street.
Andrew Young, former United States representative to the United Nations, will deliver the eulogy, and Coretta Scott King of the Martin Luther King Jr.
Center in Atlanta is among the scheduled speakers.
Mr.
Robinson died last Wednesday at 80.


Jokes in Wigs and Funny Glasses
You could watch tonight's "HBO Comedy Hour" with the sound off and think the star was a new Whoopi Goldberg or Lily Tomlin.
You would be wrong.
Hazelle Goodman, billed simply as Hazelle (pronounced hay-ZELL), arrives on the shoulders of two muscular men in male-stripper outfits showing off gleaming chests.
She wears a Madonna-style corset with a cone-shaped bra, above-the-elbow gloves and a blond wig fit for a Las Vegas showgirl.
It is Vavushka, one of nine characters Ms.
Goodman embodies in a series of 12 skits over the next hour.
Her opening jokes are about a recent sex-change operation and a mannequin's head.


Mr. Clinton Acts on Yellowstone
President Clinton is vacationing this year in western Wyoming, playing golf and reveling in the wonders of Grand Teton and Yellowstone national parks.
Last Friday, too late for the evening news shows, he took a crucial first step toward protecting Yellowstone and much of the adjacent wilderness from an environmental catastrophe.
This disaster-in-waiting is the proposed New World mine, which a Canadian conglomerate, Noranda, wants to build on land it controls in the upper reaches of Montana's Henderson Mountain, less than three miles from Yellowstone and in the watershed of the irreplaceable Clark's Fork of the Yellowstone River.
Conservationists reasonably fear that the 5.5 million tons of waste the company wants to bury in an active earthquake area will ruin this sensitive watershed in America's first and most important conservation zone.


Dollar Rent-A-Car Starting a Review
Dollar Rent-A-Car Systems in Tulsa, Okla., a unit of the Chrysler Corporation, said yesterday that it would begin a review on its account, with billings estimated at $10 million.
The account has been at GSD &amp; M in Austin, Tex., a unit of Gold Greenlees Trott P.L.C., for 11 months.
Dollar and GSD &amp; M, in confirming a report of the review this week in Adweek, said that they had agreed to part company after Dollar determined it wanted an agency that was based in Tulsa or had an office there, and GSD &amp; M decided against opening a Tulsa office.


New View of Family: Unstable but Wealth Helps
WHAT do a cul-de-sac, Jean-Paul Sartre and the average family have in common? No Exit.
To sentimentalists, the family is a haven in a heartless world.
To the disillusioned, that haven is a cage bolted with the Club.
People spend their adolescence trying to get away from the clutches of their parents, and their adulthood brooding over how they were ignored.
Families are blamed for all the ills of the world; families are expected to save the world from itself.
William Shakespeare, Jane Austen, John Cheever, sociologists, anthropologists, psychologists, Ann Landers, Dan Quayle -- all have made the family their central focus, transmuting the commonest human living arrangement into wry art, low pap or a doctoral dissertation.


Q&amp;A
Sunny San Francisco
Q.
My husband, a San Francisco native, maintains that San Francisco has just as many sunny days a year as New York City.
Can this be true?


Fire and Fortitude on Long Island
Senator Alfonse D'Amato was on the scene.
So was Gov.
George Pataki, and so, at least in spirit, was the President of the United States.
But what is so often true elsewhere in the country was also true in Westhampton, L.I., last week.
When floods or fires, twisters or hurricanes hit a community, it is almost always the members of that community who perform the most prodigious tasks and to whom are owed the profoundest thanks.
On Long Island the pine barrens, starved of rain and possibly ignited by a carelessly tossed cigarette, erupted into a fire so ferocious it devoured thousands of acres of woods, leaped highways and stopped traffic and trains.
But the fire took no lives, caused few injuries and inflicted little property damage -- mostly because of the 2,000 volunteer firefighters from all over Long Island who had battled it for three exhausting days.


Spikes's Wife Details A Pattern of Violence
Stacey Spikes remembers the day all too well even though it was four years ago.
She was seven months pregnant with her first child and had gotten into an argument with her future husband, Irving Spikes, now a Miami Dolphins fullback.
"It was the Fourth of July," Stacey Spikes said.
"He said something that made me mad, and my first reflex was to hit him. He hit me back. He hit me hard, bloodied my nose. I thought nothing of it at the time because I said to myself, 'I shouldn't have hit him.'


The Face of an Electronic Age


Neanderthals and Modern Humans Coexisted Longer Than Thought
AS familiar as Neanderthals may seem, with their robust bodies, stooped shoulders and beetle brows, the very image of the extinct cave dwellers of popular lore, their place in human evolution and their fate remain deep mysteries.
Like modern humans, Neanderthals were presumably descendants of archaic Homo sapiens, but evolved into a distinct branch of the human family over several hundred thousand years, living in relative isolation in Europe and parts of the Middle East.
Their brains were as large as those of modern humans, if not a little larger.
But they appeared to be deficient in tool technology, art and other innovative turns of the mind.


Behind the Veil of Thought: Advances in Brain Research; In Brain's Early Growth,Timetable May Be Crucial
FOR the first 28 months of her life, Simona Young languished in a Romanian orphanage.
She lay in a crib alone for up to 20 hours a day, sucking nourishment from cold bottles propped over her tiny body.
Unable to sit up by herself, she would push her torso up on thin arms and rock back and forth for hours, trying to soothe the aching void that had replaced her mother.
Now 6, she runs, talks and sings like other children her age.
Since she was adopted by a Canadian family in 1991, she has been making steady progress, says her new mother, Jennifer Young.
Yet problems remain.
Simona still suffers temper tantrums and has trouble following spoken directions.
She has difficulty sharing and taking turns with other children, and she will happily wander off with strangers who say kind words to her.


Thomaston Mills Inc.(TMSTA,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 1


Rose's Stores reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Fatal Brooklyn Fire Is Seen as Suspicious
Fire marshals are investigating a blaze that erupted in a cloud of dense black smoke in a Brooklyn apartment on Sunday night, killing a husband and wife and seriously injuring one of their sons.
The victims, Anthony Ciarcia, 74, and his wife, Delores, 66, were found inside their second-story apartment at 210 Bay 23d Street in the Bath Beach neighborhood just north of the Belt Parkway, the authorities said.
Their son Michael, 41, was in stable condition yesterday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center with first- and second-degree burns over half of his body.


Roller Skater, 4, Is Killed Outside Housing Project
Four-year-old Shamone Johnson was roller-skating under the watchful eyes of a family friend in front of a Brooklyn public-housing high-rise when gunshots broke through the playful chatter of children.
A moment later, in a din of screams and shouts, neighbors were cradling Shamone's head in their hands and her playmates were pleading with her to say she was all right.
Shamone never answered.


Struggling With Insect Research?Ask a Seventh Grader for Help
IN 1988, as a postdoctoral fellow at the Smithsonian Institution, Dr.
Marty A. Condon was asked to tell seventh graders visiting the National Museum of Natural History in Washington about her research in tropical ecology.
Her task, she explained, was to stare at the wings of fruit flies all day, looking for wing patterns that would help distinguish between species.
It was an insanely difficult job, one that she would call "cruel and unusual punishment" if it were assigned to graduate students.


CPI Corp.(CPY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 22


PATAKI ANNOUNCES ALIENS' EXPULSION
Federal and state officials announced today that 86 illegal immigrants from Colombia would be placed on an airplane late tonight and flown home under a new state law that allows for speeded-up deportation of aliens convicted of low-level, nonviolent crimes.
The action marked the largest single deportation from New York of what officials call "criminal aliens," who make up roughly 5 percent of the 68,650 inmates in the state's costly and overcrowded prison system.


INSIDE
Wide Net in Bomb Case Although investigators believe that the Oklahoma bombing was largely the work of two men, they are now focusing on the suspects' friends and acquaintances.
Page A12.
Second Menendez Trial
Lyle and Erik Menendez's retrial for shooting their parents to death has begun, with money for lawyers running out and a judge trying to keep things brisk.
Page A12.
Plea by Clinton Ally
Gov.
Jim Guy Tucker of Arkansas said he was not guilty of fraud, conspiracy and making false statements in obtaining loans.
Page A14.
First Family Goes Camping
The President and his family, shadowed by Secret Service agents, slept under the stars while on vacation in Wyoming.
Page A14.


Observer; The Electric Cannibal
My new computer has eaten the Bach.
Nerds have been telling me for years something bad would happen, but I hadn't expected the eating of Bach.
I'd expected the bad something to be like an old Moscow show trial.
I would have to tell the world I was obsolete, over the hill, out of touch with the new slang, the new clothes, the new totality of the total newness, kaput.
And why?
Because I had sneered at the cyberfuture instead of accepting it with joy.


Giant Cornerbacks Won't Back Down
Giants cornerback Thomas Randolph remembers how last season as a rookie, when he played against Dallas receiver Michael Irvin, he broke up a pass on an "out" route intended for Irvin.
Irvin looked at him, and Randolph recalls Irvin saying: "Don't think because you made one play, rookie, you can beat me. Do you know who I am?"
"It was funny," Randolph remembered.
"He tried to intimidate me last season, but I'm confident in what I can do, and he's confident in what he can do."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10 ATTACK ON SARAJEVO  An attack on the central market in Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, killed at least 37 people, and the United States blamed the Bosnian Serbs and said that it was urging a military response.
A1  In Sarajevo, a scene of carnage and despair.
A10  CIRCLING WAGONS IN TAIWAN  Although the President of Taiwan has had waning support at home, the campaign of military intimidation by mainland China has caused millions of people in Taiwan to come to his defense.
A1  China's Ambassador will return to Washington, a sign of a thaw.
A8  THE VATICAN'S ENVOY  The Harvard law professor who was the Vatican's choice to lead its delegation to the world conference on women in Beijing is a social conservative who backs some radical economic measures.
A3  JAPAN LEADERSHIP STRUGGLE  Japan's Trade Minister appeared to win the battle to lead the largest party in Japan's governing coalition when the Foreign Minister dropped out, but that is likely to make the coalition even more fragile.
A6  A BETTER SHARK TRAP  Umhlanga Rocks Journal: Although South African swimmers take the threat of sharks seriously, a love-hate relationship has been developing with sharks there, causing officials to seek a better way to repel them.
A4  Contact was made with an American hostage held in Kashmir.
A8 NATIONAL A12-16 WIDENING NET IN BOMB CASE  Although investigators believe that the Oklahoma City bombing was largely the work of two men, they are now focusing on the friends and acquaintances of the suspects to see if any can be charged with knowing about the attack beforehand.
A12  SECOND MENENDEZ TRIAL  The second trial of Lyle and Erik Menendez is imminent, and observers say a crucial question is whether the passion is still there.
A12  WILSON MAKES IT OFFICIAL  On a visit to Manhattan, Gov.
Pete Wilson of California again announced that he was running for President.
A12  SCIENTIST CROSS-EXAMINED  A prosecutor in the O. J. Simpson case tried chipping away at Henry Lee, the forensic scientist.
A13  CLINTONS GO CAMPING  The President and his wife and daughter slept under the stars while vacationing in Wyoming.
A14  GOVERNOR PLEADS NOT GUILTY  Gov.
Jim Guy Tucker of Arkansas said he was not guilty of fraud, conspiracy and making false statements in obtaining millions of dollars of loans.
A14  RIFT ON MEDICAL INSURANCE  Republicans are interested in expanding the idea of medical savings accounts, an increasingly popular type of insurance.
But critics say the accounts let insurance companies make money by covering only the healthiest Americans.
A15  MORE FISH CALLED SUSPECT  The number of warnings issued by state health authorities against eating fish caught in polluted waters increased 20 percent in the last fiscal year.
A16  NEW QUESTIONS IN UNABOM CASE  F.B.I. agents investigating the Unabom case have interviewed more than three dozen teachers in the Chicago area.
A16 Metro Digest B1 BANK GIANTS TO MERGE  Chemical and Chase Manhattan agreed to merge in a $10 billion deal that would create the nation's biggest bank.
A1  NEW YORKERS EXPECT CUTS  For New York City, the Chemical and Chase merger illustrates the increasing trend toward fewer banks with fewer branches and fewer employees.
A1  COLOMBIAN PRISONERS DEPORTED  Eighty-six illegal immigrants from Colombia are to be flown home tonight under a new state law that allows for speeded-up deportation of aliens convicted of low-level crimes, officials said.
A1  BOMB THREAT CLOSES AIRPORTS  A bomb threat that forced the evacuation of a critical air traffic control center on Long Island shut down the New York area's three major airports for more than an hour, delaying hundreds of arrivals and departures and affecting hundreds of other plane movements in a ripple effect across the nation.
A1  Business Digest D1  Science Times C1-11  Exploring the plasticity of the very young child's brain.
C1  Budget cuts seen as major risk for research and development.
C1  The structure of the family analayzed across species lines.
C1  Major research yields to the talents of minors: school children.
C4  Peripherals C6  Q&amp;AC7  Personal Computers C8  Arts/Entertainment C13-16  The Holmes and Watson of Alcott studies.
C13  Music: Verdi's Requiem, as Tanglewood classical finale.
C13  The third Charlie Parker Jazz Festival.
C14  Dance: An arts complex revives as shows begin.
C13  Books: "Hitchcock on Hitchcock." C16  Television: "HBO Comedy Hour: Hazelle." C16  Fashion Page B8  Fashion hitches a ride with Hollywood's shining stars.
Patterns  By Design  Sports B9-14  Baseball: Yanks find no comfort at home in losing to Royals.
B9  Column: Araton on Steffi Graf.
B9  Chass on baseball.
B11  TV Sports.
B13  Football: Giants get taste of Reeves's anger.
B9  Jets prepare for Dolphins.
B12  Horse Racing: Lukas connections close Saratoga with a winner.
B9  Tennis: Seles makes quick work of first-round Open opponent.
B9  Obituaries B6-7  David Warrilow, actor.
B6  Page Smith, historian, and Eloise Pickard Smith.
B7  Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials  Mr.
Clinton acts on Yellowstone.
Restarting Bosnia's peace talks.
Fire and fortitude on Long Island.
An insult to Miss Liberty.
Letters  Russell Baker: The electric cannibal.
George P. Fletcher: The Simpson-and-Fuhrman trial.
Everett C. Ladd: Medicare -- which of the above?
Steven Rattner: Leaky boats on the rising tide.
Chronicle B2 Chess C7 Crossword C16


A Marsh to Call Their Own, at Last; Ink Dries on a 1973 Wetlands Deal for Queens Homeowners
Hilda Dreuer was clipping wet clothes to the wash line, the marsh wind riffling her flowered terry cloth jump suit, when a dark-tanned man made his way over the creaking planks of the three-foot wide boardwalk that passes for East 12th Road.
The man, Daniel F. Mundy, was a week late with the news, but he knew it would not matter.
The Dreuers and the others who occupy the wooden houses that spike up on stilts in the marshes of Jamaica Bay were unlikely to have heard already.


Tagliabue Huddles About Canceled Game
National Football League Commissioner PAUL TAGLIABUE met with Houston Oilers executives yesterday regarding the cancellation of an exhibition game Aug. 19 against San Diego.
More than 25,000 fans were in the Astrodome when officials decided the game would not be played because of complaints from both teams of dangerous soft spots in the artificial turf.


METRO DIGEST
BOMB THREAT IMMOBILIZES AIR TRAFFIC
A bomb threat that forced the evacuation of a critical air traffic control center on Long Island shut down the New York metropolitan area's three major airports for more than an hour, delaying hundreds of arrivals and departures and affecting hundreds of other planes in a ripple effect across the nation.  [ Page A1. ]
CHASE AND CHEMICAL AGREE TO MERGE
Creating the biggest bank in the country, the Chemical Banking Corporation said it would merge with the Chase Manhattan Corporation in a deal valued at nearly $10 billion.
The combined bank would take the Chase name, although Chemical is twice the size and is the dominant partner in the merger.
The combined bank would have $296 billion in assets, overtaking Citicorp, the previous leader.  [ A1. ]
Critics fear a faster decline in service in poor areas of New York City.  [ A1. ]
In a city where finding work remains tough, thousands of New Yorkers face losing their jobs in the wake of the merger of Chemical Bank and Chase Manhattan Bank.  [ D7. ]
PATAKI ANNOUNCES EXPULSION OF ALIENS
Federal and New York State officials announced that 86 illegal immigrants from Colombia would be placed on an airplane and flown home under a new state law that allows for speeded-up deportation of aliens convicted of low-level, nonviolent crimes.  [ A1. ] NEW YORK CITY GIRL KILLED IN BROOKLYN CROSSFIRE
Four-year-old Shamone Johnson was roller-skating under the watchful eyes of a family friend in front of a Brooklyn public-housing project when gunshots broke out.
A moment later, neighbors were cradling Shamone's head in their hands and her playmates were pleading with her to say she was all right.  [ B3. ]
MARSHALS INVESTIGATE DEADLY FIRE
Fire marshals are investigating a blaze that erupted in a cloud of dense smoke in a Brooklyn apartment, killing a husband and wife and seriously injuring one of their sons.  [ B3. ]
PSYCHOLOGIST TESTIFIES IN BOMB CASE
A psychologist who examined the last defendant to present his case in the trial of 10 men charged with a terror-bombing conspiracy in New York testified that the defendant was a "borderline retarded" cocaine abuser.  [ B3. ]
TRANSIT OFFICER SHOOTS QUEENS GUNMAN
A New York City transit police officer shot and killed a Jackson Heights, Queens, man after the man shot into a crowd outside a Long Island City nightclub, the police said.  [ B3. ]
POLICE OFFICER SENTENCED IN EXTORTION
A former police officer who told a judge that alcoholism had led him to extort payoffs from drug dealers was sentenced to a year in prison in Federal District Court in Manhattan.  [ B2. ] REGION REMADE BEACH MAY NEED SAND
After a month of unsettled weather, fresh sand may have to be pumped onto the newly replenished beach at Monmouth Beach, N.J., before the winter storms, the Army Corps of Engineers said.  [ B4. ]
NASSAU RECRUITS YOUTHS IN GRAFFITI WAR
Using undercover agents as young as 9, Nassau County authorities staged another attack in their war against graffiti.  [ B4. ]
Chronicle B2


Is It a Walk or Is It a Run?


Nebraska Awaits Ruling on Phillips
University of Nebraska officials are frustrated that the National Collegiate Athletic Association still has not decided whether the star running back LAWRENCE PHILLIPS can play against Oklahoma State in the Cornhuskers' opener Thursday night.
The N.C.A.A. has been reviewing Phillips's relationship with a California sports agent, STEVE FELDMAN.
Nebraska, the defending national champion, is preparing as if Phillips will start.


Matsuoka Crumples in Pain and Defaults
Frenetic and unsympathetic as ever, the United States Open got under way yesterday in typically dramatic fashion: Shuzo Matsuoka of Japan wound up screaming in agony after cramping and collapsing on the hot, hard Grandstand Court.
Comfort has never been an Open staple, but only Matsuoka, whose breakdown mandated his being defaulted from his match with Petr Korda, was targeted for unduly harsh treatment.


Trump's Golf Club
Donald J. Trump is buying another mansion: a 14-bedroom, 28,322-square-foot Mount Kisco chateau, Seven Springs.
He plans to turn it and its surrounding 200 acres into a golf course with an astronomical entrance fee.
Mr.
Trump signed the contract to buy the estate last week.
Article, page B4.


The Master's Opinions, Mostly on the Master
HITCHCOCK ON HITCHCOCK Selected Writings and Interviews Edited by Sidney Gottlieb.
Illustrated. 339 pages.
University of California Press. $29.95.


Gas-Guzzlers Still Cruise Offices
COMPUTER programs for basic jobs like typing and counting are beginning to resemble cars of the early 60's.
Icons, buttons and toolbars have become the chrome, tailfins and fuzzy dice of our time.
They are bolted onto vehicles that guzzle memory, hog hard disk parking space and come with more promotion than acceleration.
Microsoft Office 95 is the first major office software suite adapted for a certain new operating system you may have heard of.
What Office 95 reveals is that Windows 95 is no panacea.
Current users are likely to be mildly disappointed when they discover how little the program and its performance have changed.
Others may wonder why the Microsoft Corporation continues to graft features onto existing programs rather than coming up with truly new ones.
Of course, the last time the company came up with something new, it turned out to be called Bob.


Reeves's Reading of Riot Act Marks Preseason's End
Two days after the Giants embarrassed themselves in their final preseason game, Coach Dan Reeves wanted to make sure the team knew exactly how far it had to go to be even near the level of the Dallas Cowboys.
So today he chewed out the offense during a two-and-one-half-hour meeting.
Several Giants players said tonight they had rarely seen Reeves so angry.
He did not scream at them -- he rarely does -- but Reeves chided the offense for what he perceived to be sloppiness and a lack of effort in their ugly 6-3 loss to the Carolina Panthers.
He made it clear to the team he would not tolerate unprofessionalism or any player not working hard.


Afternoon Celebration Of Charlie Parker's Jazz
Charlie Parker's music, be-bop, was a radical break with previous jazz: a music of speed and fragmentation, of startling harmonies and strange leaps.
It was also full of joyful bravado, and now that its initial shocks have worn off, the playfulness remains.
The third annual Charlie Parker Jazz Festival, a free concert that drew a capacity crowd to Tompkins Square Park on Sunday afternoon, celebrated the technical mastery that be-bop takes for granted.
A quintuple bill assembled musicians who were in on be-bop's creation and musicians who have grown up with be-bop as jazz's common language.
It was an afternoon of fleet fingers and witty phrases, with only an occasional glimmer of introspection, and every set featured tunes that Parker wrote or recorded.


Restarting the Bosnian Peace Talks
Assistant Secretary of State Richard Holbrooke is back in Europe, renewing the American drive for a negotiated peace in Bosnia.
The effort was halted nine days ago when three American diplomats were killed in a road accident.
Now the negotiations have been complicated by the murderous artillery shelling of Sarajevo yesterday, the worst in over a year.
That has led the Bosnian Government to threaten to withdraw from the talks unless NATO warplanes respond with air strikes against Bosnian Serb installations.
Yet the underlying conditions for a diplomatic breakthrough are almost as favorable as they were three weeks ago when the American peace initiative began.
The Croatian rout of Serbian militias and civilians in the Krajina region of southern Croatia, and the earlier Serbian sack of two isolated government-held cities in eastern Bosnia, inflicted terrible suffering.
But they also transformed the military balance and demographic map.


Obscure Law Is Lever in Bombing Case
Although investigators believe that the bombing of the Federal Building here was largely the work of two men, rather than a broad conspiracy, they are now focusing on the friends and acquaintances of the suspects to see if any can be charged with knowing about the attack beforehand and failing to warn the authorities, people close to the inquiry say.
The charge under consideration is misprision of felony, which has its roots in old English law and is rarely used today, legal experts say.
But the April 19 attack on the Federal Building here took 168 lives and was the nation's worst terrorist bombing, so prosecutors may use it, people close to the inquiry say.


Wilson Opens Election Bid, Using Liberty As His Theme
With the Statue of Liberty for a symbolic backdrop, Gov.
Pete Wilson of California officially kicked off his Presidential campaign today in New York City, saying that if he was elected, he would make good on "Lady Liberty's promise" of freedom and opportunity for all.
"American optimism is being undermined by a Federal Government that is out of step, out of touch and out of control," declared Mr.
Wilson, 62, a Republican who has had a history of taking moderate positions.


Virco Manufacturing (VIR,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


Sports of The Times; Steffi Needs This More Than Monica
WHILE Monica Seles took center stage at the National Tennis Center last night, Steffi Graf rushed through an early morning practice and fled before a single spectator arrived.
Not since Dan Ackroyd and Eddie Murphy has there been such a case of role reversal, of trading places.
Back on Stadium Court for the first time since 1992, Seles resumed hitting two-fisted rockets, rifled a few 100-plus-mile-an-hour serves and cruised by Ruxandra Dragomir, 6-3, 6-1.
Near-tragic circumstances notwithstanding, Seles has achieved something here that Graf never will.
She has joined New York's tennis beloved.


William S. Johnson, 82, Chemist Who Devised Synthesis Methods
William Summer Johnson, an organic chemist at Stanford University who developed more efficient techniques for making complex chemical compounds for medical use, died on Aug. 19 at his home in Portola Valley, Calif., near Stanford.
He was 82.
He had been ill with circulatory and heart problems, a Stanford spokesman said.
He reached emeritus status in 1978 but kept working in his laboratory until about four months ago.


A Cleveland Bank Is Buying in Pittsburgh
In a deal that will create a banking company with $50 billion in assets and bring an outside institution into the Pittsburgh area for the first time, the National City Corporation of Cleveland said yesterday that it had agreed to buy the Integra Financial Corporation for $2.1 billion in stock.
Under the terms of the agreement, Integra shareholders will receive, in a tax-free exchange, two shares of National City common stock for each share of Integra stock.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
CIT Group Holdings Inc., New York, a subsidiary of Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank, is selling $100 million of notes due in 1998 through Salomon Brothers Inc.
The notes are priced at 99.878 to yield 6.17 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated Aa3 by Moody's Investors Service, A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and AA- by Duff &amp; Phelps. *
Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, is selling $100 million of medium-term notes due in 2000 through Morgan Stanley.
Callable in two years, the issue is priced at par to yield 6.67 percent. *
Mellon Financial Co., Pittsburgh, a unit of Mellon Bank Corp., filed a shelf registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell up to $1.5 billion of debt securities.
Common  *
Human Genome Sciences Inc., Rockville, Md., filed to sell 2.5 million shares.
Lehman Brothers will be the lead underwriter. *
Verity Inc., Mountain View, Calif., filed to sell 3.3 million shares in an initial public offering.
Hambrecht &amp; Quist will be the lead underwriter.


New York City Faces Hurdles in Disposing of Recyclables
To the Editor:
Re your Aug. 12 news article on New York City's paying to get rid of recyclables while others sell them: In evaluating the price paid by and to the city for its metal, glass and plastic recyclables, you fail to address the following points.
*
Deposit bottle laws: Recycling programs in states with a deposit bottle law collect approximately 4 percent less aluminum than states without bottle bills.
Aluminum is the highest-value commodity within the metal-glass-plastic stream.


More on the Merger
EMPLOYMENT: Thousands of jobs will be lost in New York as a result of the merger, at a time of flat job growth in the city.
Page D7.
THE MARKET: Investors are betting that more banking companies will be acquired, driving up stocks.
Floyd Norris: Market Place, page D1.
MUTUAL FUNDS: They stand to reap big gains.
Funds took the lead of Michael H. Price, a fund manager who took a big stake in Chase.
Page D1.


Japan's Hard-Line Trade Minister Wins Party Leadership
Japan's outspoken Trade Minister, who stared down the United States in the recent automobile negotiations, essentially won the battle today to lead the largest party in the governing coalition, enhancing his chances of becoming the next Prime Minister.
Ryutaro Hashimoto became the near certain choice to lead the Liberal Democratic Party today when his opponent for the job, Foreign Minister Yohei Kono, suddenly dropped out of the race as it became obvious he would lose by a wide margin.
While it is possible that another candidate will enter the race before the Sept. 22 party vote, it is considered highly unlikely that anyone could beat Mr.
Hashimoto.


Mother Dies Saving Girl From Tractor-Trailer
About three years ago, Rosa Babakhanov left Uzbekistan with her husband, David, and their daughter, Diana.
They settled, like hundreds of fellow Russian Jewish emigres, in Forest Hills, Queens, in a seven-story building where Russian could be heard more often than English.
Although she had graduated from college in Russia, she stayed home with Diana, 6, who had just started school, while her husband worked in a barber shop in Queens.


Questions Persist on Delay Of Tanker Planes for L.I. Fire
The Federal Department of Agriculture has begun an investigation into why it took a day and a half longer than promised for several tanker planes to arrive in Westhampton, L.I., and join the battle against a wildfire that scorched 12 square miles of pine barrens and also burned homes, businesses and a railroad station.
The planes, which were expected Friday morning, did not arrive until Saturday afternoon, long after officials said the worst was over.


Bell Atlantic Names Agencies
The Bell Atlantic Corporation ended a three-month review yesterday by dividing the bulk of its account between Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide in New York, which will be the lead agency, and Tierney &amp; Partners in Philadelphia.
The billings were estimated at $50 million.
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi assumes duties like corporate advertising that had been handled by J. Walter Thompson New York, a unit of the WPP Group, since 1987.
Tierney, which has handled Yellow Pages advertising for Bell Atlantic for the last 21 years, continues in that role.
Thompson New York will continue as broadcast media agency of record.


CHRONICLE
LISA FOSTER, the widow of Vincent W. Foster Jr., the late deputy White House counsel, plans to marry JIM MOODY of Little Rock, Ark., a judge-designate of Federal District Court.
Mr.
Moody, a widower, said on Monday that the couple were keeping the date of their wedding confidential, although it would be "close to Christmas." A small ceremony with mostly family members present is planned, he said.
Lisa Foster confirmed her wedding plans but would not comment further.
Since returning to Little Rock following Mr.
Foster's suicide in July 1993, she has resumed her career as a private-school mathematics teacher.
Mr.
Moody was nominated by President Clinton to the Federal bench in Arkansas and has been confirmed by the Senate.
He said on Monday that he expected to take the oath of office in September.
Mr.
Moody, 55, said he had known Lisa Foster "for as long as I've been in Little Rock." In 1966, he joined the influential Wright, Lindsay &amp; Jennings law firm of Little Rock, with which President Clinton was associated in the early 1980's.
ELAINE LOUIE


European Team Adds Faldo and Olazabal
NICK FALDO and JOSE MARIA OLAZABAL were added to the European Ryder Cup team yesterday as wild-card members.
The two join the team's 10 automatic qualifiers for next month's competition against the defending champion United States team in Rochester.
The 38-year-old Faldo, once No. 1 in the world ranking, will be making his 10th consecutive Ryder Cup appearance, tying the record held by CHRISTY O'CONNOR Jr. for most Ryder Cups.


Husker Player, Out on Bail, Is Practicing
RILEY WASHINGTON, a Nebraska player facing a charge of attempted murder, has returned to practice.
"By university standards, Riley Washington is eligible to go to class and he has rejoined the team on the practice field," Coach TOM OSBORNE said in a statement released after practice yesterday.


Court Reverses Patent Ruling on Texas Instruments Chip
A Federal district judge here reversed a jury verdict today that had ordered three United States semiconductor companies to pay Texas Instruments Inc. $51.8 million in damages for patent infringement on a computer-chip packaging technology.
The judge, Barefoot Sanders, ruled that there was insufficient evidence that the three companies, the Cypress Semiconductor Corporation and VLSI Technology Inc., both of San Jose, Calif., and the LSI Logic Corporation of Milpitas, Calif., had infringed two Texas Instruments patents for packaging integrated circuits.


Dr. Peter Gergely, 59, Professor Of Civil Engineering at Cornell
Dr.
Peter Gergely, who pioneered advances in structural engineering and fought in the Hungarian Revolution of 1956, died on Friday at his home in Ithaca, N.Y.
He was 59 years old.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Kinga.


Riley's Legal Team Responds
Legal representatives for Pat Riley have called a newspaper report on the Knicks' tampering charge against the Miami Heat "incomplete and materially misleading."
The report, published in The New York Times last Friday, detailed a memorandum sent by Riley to the Heat owner Micky Arison, outlining Riley's contract demands for becoming Miami's next head coach.
The report said the memo came 10 days before Riley stepped down as head coach of the Knicks on June 15.


Critics Say the Impact of Consolidation Will Hurt Poorer Areas
The corner of Columbus Avenue and 86th Street is one of many places where the merger of Chase Manhattan and Chemical Banking will play out for New Yorkers.
Directly across Columbus Avenue from the Chase branch on the Upper West Side sits another branch operated by Chemical.
The planned merger instantly put one of them on the list of severely endangered New York City businesses.
The only question, it seemed to George Morris, who was standing in line at the Chase A.T.M. yesterday, was which would be closed.


Medical Role Of Firefighters Is Contested
When Emergency Medical Service paramedics entered the Brooklyn apartment on Aug. 12, there were already five firefighters standing in the living room, along with a 72-year-old woman seated on the toilet of the bathroom, an oxygen mask on her face.
The picture of apparent calm, however, was misleading.
The woman, it turned out, wasn't breathing and didn't have a pulse.
Despite frantic attempts to save her -- an effort the E.M.S. workers have said the firefighters refused to help once E.M.S. arrived -- the woman, Rachel Rosen, died later at Coney Island Hospital.


Market Place; As More Banks Vanish, Wall St. Cheers
Wall Street, which five years ago feared that a lot of big banks would vanish, is now hoping they will do so.
And a lot of new money is riding on that hope.
Most investors believe that the industry is sure to consolidate, and they have been betting that many banks will disappear after being acquired at a premium.
Those banks that remain are expected to become more efficient -- largely by dismissing people and closing branches -- and thus keep profits high.
There is little of the old concern about loan losses or the adequacy of reserves against losses.


Crews Battle Flare-Ups of L.I. Brush Fire
Sudden flare-ups consumed more trees and brush along Sunrise Highway today, just as firefighters were winding down their efforts to control a stubborn blaze that has blackened 12 square miles of pine barrens and destroyed or damaged a dozen homes.
Two surprise flare-ups occurred shortly after noon just south of the highway, about a mile from Suffolk County Community College, where the blaze began Thursday afternoon.


Players on Contract Fence Face New Recruiting War
Armon Gilliam waded through his mail yesterday as if he were in high school again and the recruiters were after him.
Last night he planned to watch an informational videocassette, explaining the collective bargaining agreement, sent to him from the players union.
"It's a full-court press, man," the Nets' veteran forward said.
"They just keep coming at you with information."


U.S. Says Beach Restoration Will Need a Lot More Sand
After months of erosion caused by unsettled weather, at least 500,000 cubic yards of fresh sand may have to be pumped onto the newly replenished beach at this seaside community before the arrival of winter storms, the Army Corps of Engineers said today.
Under normal circumstances, the Corps does not return to patch up newly restored beaches for years; the average span is six years.
Critics of the Monmouth Beach restoration, which was completed last fall, have long argued that sand would wash away at a pace far faster and at a greater cost than the Corps had anticipated.


Chess
Who was it who said, "It's not over till the fat lady sings"?
Whoever it was knew a thing or two.
With 2 1/2 points in 3 games at the start of the Biel International Tournament in Switzerland in late July, the American grandmaster Nick DeFirmian looked terrific, but later his performance fell off and one player after another passed him.
His first victories, in Rounds 1 and 2, featured smashing combinations.
Normally when players hit the mark early, they're inspired to go the distance.
But not always, as DeFirmian's experience proved.
After drawing in Round 3, losing in Rounds 4, 5 and 6, and drawing in Rounds 7, 8 and 9, he was running in a tie for eighth place, 2 1/2 points behind the leader, Aleksei Dreyev of Russia.
Dreyev went on to take first place, while DeFirmian came in tied for seventh in the 14-player event.


London Taxis Put New York's to Shame
To the Editor:
"Taxi!" (editorial, Aug. 23) is most poignant.
A ride in a London taxi emphasizes most vividly the sad state of a New York City taxi.
The London cabs are well designed, commodious with ample legroom, and newer models even accommodate wheelchairs!


Specialty Retailers Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Defendant In Bomb Case Is Described As Retarded
A psychologist who examined the last defendant to present his case in the trial of 10 men charged with a terror-bombing conspiracy in New York testified yesterday that the defendant was a "borderline retarded" cocaine abuser who was overly trusting of people he sought out as friends.
The defendant, Victor Alvarez, 29, an American-born Muslim who converted to that faith in his early 20's, is charged with being one of a group of Muslim men, mostly immigrants from the Middle East, who plotted to bomb major buildings and transportation links to intimidate the United States into changing its Middle East policies.
The prosecution says that the intended targets of the aborted plots included the United Nations headquarters and the Lincoln and Holland Tunnels.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about Federal guidelines for prayer in public schools described their development incorrectly.
The guidelines drew heavily on a paper drafted by a coalition of liberal and conservative groups, including Americans United for the Separation of Church and State, the American Jewish Congress, the Baptist Joint Committee and the National Association of Evangelicals.
The paper was not the work of the Americans United group alone.


Varlen Corp.(VRLN,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Leaky Boats on the Rising Tide
It's time to move on from the debate about whether income distribution in America is becoming more unequal.
Countless studies have confirmed the greatest imbalance of earnings in decades.
What we need is a partnership between Government and businesses that can attack the problem not by bringing down the rich but by lifting the rest of Americans.
Since 1973, annual earnings of the bottom 10 percent of workers have dropped by 24 percent (after adjustment for inflation), while those of the top 20 percent have increased by 10 percent.
As a result, the United States -- the great egalitarian society -- has the widest income disparity of any modern democratic nation.


Budget Cuts Seen By Science Group As Very Harmful For U.S. Research
FEDERAL financing of nonmilitary scientific research in the United States will decline by one-third within seven years, the American Association for the Advancement of Science says in a report to be released today.
It warns that "the long-term effects of dismantling a coherent scientific enterprise could be very harmful."
The study projects financing trends through the year 2002, based on the budget resolution passed by Congress on June 29 and on subsequent actions by the House and Senate in drafting appropriations bills for the fiscal year 1996.
Deep projected reductions in the support of research and development, in some cases 100 percent, represent "the most significant across-the-board funding cuts to the research-and-development enterprise in the post-World War II era," the authors of the report wrote.


Mother Scolded by Judge For Speaking in Spanish
It was a routine hearing in a child-custody case in the Texas Panhandle, and State District Judge Samuel C. Kiser had few words for Martha Laureano, the mother of a 5-year-old girl to whom she speaks only Spanish.
"If she starts first grade with the other children and cannot even speak the language that the teachers and the other children speak and she's a full-blood American citizen," Judge Kiser told Ms.
Laureano, "you're abusing that child and you're relegating her to the position of housemaid.


At the Nation's Table: Stephentown, N.Y.; English Marmalade Made in New York
For David J. Jacobs, a retired newspaper editor living in the Berkshires, a case of sour oranges has led to the marmalade business.
He and his wife, Rita, had moved from Manhattan to Stephentown, N.Y., in 1971.
For his annual hobby of making English-style marmalade, he needed the sour, or Seville, oranges that are grown in small quantities in Florida, Arizona and California.
Eventually, he began buying them from Balducci's in Manhattan.


At the Nation's Table: Clarksburg, W.Va.; Julios, Down By the Junkyards
Joe Iaquinta takes a kind of perverse pride in luring diners to Julios Cafe, which is situated across the street from junkyards, the railroad station and several abandoned hotels in the old Italian ghetto of Clarksburg, W.Va.
"I love this place," said Mr.
Iaquinta (pronounced eye-ah-KWIN-ta), an intense man who still lives in the neighborhood.
"People think it's a tough neighborhood, but it was a great place to grow up."


Take Mr. Packwood's Gavel
Senator Bob Packwood has changed his mind.
He now wants public hearings on the sexual and official misconduct allegations against him.
Mitch McConnell, the Republican who runs the Senate Ethics Committee and has fought hard to prevent public hearings, should quickly accede to Mr.
Packwood's surprise request.
He should also set a date certain for the proceedings to begin.
This latest twist in the Packwood saga comes less than a month after the Oregon Republican voted with other G.O.P. senators to block a resolution requiring the committee to follow its established practice of open hearings in serious ethics matters instead of resolving them behind closed doors.


A Forum on Women Is Vexed By Chinese Security Officials
Just after dawn today, a senior staff member of an international women's forum assembling here left her hotel room for stroll around Huairou reservoir, where the mist-shrouded Fragrant Hills loomed to the west and the morning light caught delicate pagodas in silhouette.
A Chinese policeman stepped into her path and ordered her back to her room.


Kean Likely to Decide Soon About Seeking Senate Seat
What took months of agonizing self-examination for Bill Bradley, former Gov.
Thomas H. Kean is trying to do much faster: decide whether to run for the United States Senate.
When Mr.
Bradley said on Aug. 16 that he would not be a candidate for a fourth term next year, Mr.
Kean, a Republican, quickly said he might be interested in running for the open seat.
So did another former Governor, Jim Florio, who is a Democrat.


Collins &amp; Aikman Corp.(CKC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Bilked Russian Investors Search for Redemption
Outside the brick and stained-glass Investprombank building, a bank designed to look like a church, dozens of Russians gather every day, seeking salvation.
"We all got burned, and there is nowhere to go, nobody to help us," said Anatoly A. Belov, a 70-year-old retired army colonel, referring to the 4 million rubles -- about $1,000 -- he deposited and lost with Russky Dom Selenga, a company that had promised an annual 800 percent return.


L'Oreal to Pay $1.4 Million in Boycott
L'Oreal S.A., the world's largest beauty and fragrance company, agreed today to pay $1.4 million to settle a long-running investigation into charges that it violated American laws against cooperating with the Arab economic boycott of Israel.
The settlement is the second largest in the 17-year history of the American anti-boycott law, said John Despres, Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Export Enforcement.
"The size of this, the magnitude of the violations, is reflected by the size of the payments being made," Mr.
Despres said at a news conference.


Former Clinton Partner Enters Not-Guilty Plea in Whitewater
President Clinton's business partner in the Whitewater land venture today entered a not guilty plea to 19 counts of conspiracy, fraud, making false statements and other charges involving millions of dollars of federally backed loans that went sour.
At his arraignment before a Federal magistrate in Little Rock, Ark., the former partner, James B. McDougal was given a trial date of Oct. 10.


Shevardnadze Is Wounded By Car Bomb In Georgia
The Georgian leader, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, was slightly wounded today when a large car bomb exploded near his motorcade as he left the Parliament building in the Georgian capital, Tbilisi.
Mr.
Shevardnadze was on his way to sign a new Constitution, adopted last Thursday by Parliament, for the chaotic nation of Georgia.
The Constitution will restore the office of the Presidency with strong powers, and Mr.
Shevardnadze, the well-known former Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union, had made it clear he would run for the job.
Elections are scheduled for Nov. 5.


International Briefs; Bank Seeks a Partner
The head of Banque Bruxelles Lambert S.A., Belgium's second-largest bank, fanned takeover speculation yesterday by saying he was looking for a partner for the bank.
"I would like to quit the bank at the end of 1996 after having put on the rails an alliance with a major player in the banking world," Daniel Cardon, the company's chief executive, told the financial daily newspaper L'Echo. (Reuters)


New Study Dims Hopes for a Quick Fat Cure
A NATURAL substance that made headlines last month for slimming down overweight mice may not do the same for highly obese people, new research suggests.
Scientists found evidence that very fat people already have high levels of the substance in their bodies, perhaps 20 to 30 times the amount found in slender people.
So injecting more might not help at all, said a researcher, Bradford S. Hamilton, who was an author of one of two new studies on the substance, called leptin.


Travel Warning on Russian City Has U.S. Tourists Confused
The confusion began last Friday when the United States Consulate in St.
Petersburg issued an announcement warning of a threat of a "violent attack" against American residents or tourists, who immediately began to cancel trips to Russia.
Three days later a travel agency in New York received a cable, supposedly issued by the State Department, asserting that the threat was all an "elaborate hoax concocted by a career criminal." The travel agency immediately began to inform clients who had canceled their trips that it was, after all, safe to travel to Russia.


International Briefs; Sandoz Has 10% Rise In First-Half Profit
The Swiss chemicals and drugs company Sandoz A.G. posted a 10 percent rise in profit yesterday for the first half of the year, primarily because of higher sales.
Sandoz said its profit rose to 1.11 billion Swiss francs, or $921.9 million, from 1.01 billion francs in the corresponding period last year.
Sales were up 6 percent in the first half, to 8.68 billion francs.


CUC Int'l.(CU,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


Eckerd Corp.(ECK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Council Panel Backs Testing Of Disposals
New York City took a major step toward the widespread legalization of garbage disposals yesterday when a City Council committee approved a pilot program aimed at lifting the current disposal ban.
Although the plan would involve a small number of homes on a test basis, it has the support of the Giuliani administration and would likely end New York's status as the only major American city in which such devices are basically illegal.


Donaldson, Lufkin Files A Plan to Offer Stock to Public
Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Inc. said yesterday that it would sell at least 9.2 million of its own shares, or 18.4 percent of its equity, in an initial public offering that is expected to raise at least $240 million.
The offering follows unsuccessful attempts by Donaldson's parent, the Equitable Companies, to sell Donaldson to an American or foreign bank for as much as $2 billion.
The high price and potential problems with regulators -- who might be troubled by banks owning Donaldson merchant-banking investments that include nonfinancial businesses -- put off prospective buyers, those involved in the sales discussions said.


Market Place; No Drought for Wall Street As Investors' Cash Floods In
In a remarkable demonstration of faith that stock prices have nowhere to go but up, investors poured more money into mutual funds that invest in American stocks last month than ever before.
And the trend in August appears to be as good or better, executives at several of the largest mutual fund companies said.
The Investment Company Institute, a mutual fund trade group, reported yesterday that investors put a net $12.4 billion in July into equity funds that invest primarily in American stocks.
That was up a sharp 57 percent from the $7.9 billion net gain recorded in June and smashed the old monthly record of $10.2 billion, set in March 1993.


Mattingly Tries to Avoid Controversy
The Yankees have had a season full of distractions.
Don Mattingly said yesterday that he doesn't want to be another one.
But listening to the way Mattingly was talking before last night's game, you got the feeling that he thinks his days in pinstripes are numbered.


Mets Keep Winning Ways Out West
The Mets' 8-4 homestand was fine and dandy.
But how well would these youngsters hold up during a nine-game West Coast trip that started tonight against the National League West-leading Dodgers?
"Hopefully, we'll be able to maintain some of that heat and keep it going to the point where we can compete out here," Manager Dallas Green said before the game.
"West Coast trips are always difficult for some reason."


Pause in Life-Expectancy Gains Apparently Tied to Impact of AIDS
THE rise in AIDS-related deaths has effectively stalled the nation's century-long increase in life expectancy, wiping out the longevity benefits from a continuing decline in infant mortality, according to an analysis of newly published data by statisticians at the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company.
After reaching a peak of 75.8 years in 1992, life expectancy at birth fell slightly to 75.5 years in 1993 and did not budge from there in 1994, preliminary data from the National Center for Health Statistics show.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the possibility of Gary Hart's running for the United States Senate in Colorado referred incorrectly to Senator Hank Brown of Colorado.
Mr.
Brown, a Republican who said he would not seek re-election, is in his first term, not his second.


Corrections
A photograph on Monday with a review of the concert "One World, One Music," on Friday at the Paramount, was credited incorrectly.
The picture, of the drummer Babatunde Olatunji and a member of his troupe, was by Jack Vartoogian, not Steve J. Sherman.


Punishing Illegal Immigrants Isn't the Solution
To the Editor:
Many will no doubt be quick to criticize Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's courageous statements that politicians who blame illegal immigrants for our country's problems are engaging in the worst kind of scapegoating and that the current anti-immigrant fervor is based on an "undifferentiated fear of foreigners" (front page, Aug. 23).


Cleaning Up Golden Gate Park


Senior Ready for Starring Role
It was the end of the first day of practice. Time for the gantlet drill.
Each one of a dozen or so backs from Hackensack High School took hold of a padded blocking dummy, formed two parallel lines and prepared to pummel a ballcarrier who would try to streak through.


LOCKHEED MARTIN SETS EMPLOYEE STOCK GUIDE
The Lockheed Martin Corporation said yesterday that it had set stock ownership guidelines for key employees to encourage superior results for the company and its shareholders.
The aerospace giant said it would ask 1,400 employees to establish or increase their equity holdings in the company at a level two to five times their annual base salaries.
The company said the chief executive would hold stock equal to five times base pay; the president four times base pay; five division presidents three times base pay, and others would hold stock equivalent to twice their salary.


Foreign Affairs; Australia Goes Pacific
Sometimes a government has to totally misread the mood of its own people to fully appreciate where the soul of the nation is on an issue.
That was certainly the case here when, after the French announced plans for seven nuclear tests in the South Pacific, the Australian Foreign Minister said the decision was "unfortunate" but could have been worse.
The Australian public didn't think so, and it went on a spontaneous rampage against all things French.
The Asian Wall Street Journal even reported that Australian prostitutes were charging their French customers double (Sacre bleu!).
Since then, the Australian Government has been scrambling to get ahead of the public bandwagon.
What's funny is that it was the Australian Government that had built the bandwagon.


After Infinite Practice At Grief, a Mother Acts
YOU just won't understand until you've been there.
There are neighborhoods in this city that resemble dusty wartime villages, where women walk down streets littered with the memories of their murdered children and lovers.
Women whose hearts stop at the sound of gunshots and sirens.
Women trapped in a battle between rage and regret.


Surprising Rise In Immigration Stirs Up Debate
The Census Bureau's report this week that the percentage of the country's population that is foreign born is at its highest level since World War II and is accelerating at a record pace has taken demographers aback and is fueling an already intense debate over immigration in American life.
The surprising figures result in part from a declining birth rate among native-born Americans, but more from increased immigration.
The proportion of Americans who were born elsewhere rose to 8.7 percent last year, or 22.6 million people, according to the Census Bureau.
The bureau estimated that about four million of the immigrants were in the United States illegally.


Malcolm's Lost Notes And a Child at Play
An 11-year-old lawsuit pitting a psychoanalyst against a journalist who wrote an unflattering profile of him may have taken a new turn because a little girl got tired of banging on a piano and sat down near a bookcase to play.
Janet Malcolm, the journalist whose profile of the psychoanalyst, Jeffrey Masson, led to a libel suit that went to the United States Supreme Court and was the subject of two trials in Federal District Court, has asserted that a missing collection of notes of her conversations with Mr.
Masson has been found at long last.
It is not clear what effect, if any, the new material will have on the case, in part because the fresh notes -- assuming they are genuine -- do not directly address the points on which Ms.
Malcolm seemed most vulnerable.
But her lawyer said yesterday that the material would be helpful if there was yet another trial.
In November, a jury in San Francisco essentially ruled in favor of Ms.
Malcolm.
It found that while two of five disputed quotations she attributed to Mr.
Masson in a 1983 article in The New Yorker were false and one was defamatory, none were written with the recklessness that constitutes libel.
In a telephone interview yesterday from his home in Berkeley, Calif., Mr.
Masson scoffed at the notion that missing notes had been uncovered.
The psychoanalyst, who is appealing the verdict, called them "a fabrication, an adult version of 'the dog ate my homework.' "
But Ms.
Malcolm has declared in an affidavit under penalty of perjury that the notes are genuine, and that her account of their discovery, first reported by Anthony Lewis, a New York Times columnist, on the Op-Ed Page of The Times on Friday, is true.
The notes were found, Ms.
Malcolm said in the affidavit, by her 2-year-old granddaughter, Sophy Tuck, on the night of Aug. 11 in Ms.
Malcolm's home in Sheffield, Mass.
In Ms.
Malcolm's telling, the child had been banging on the piano, then began exploring a nearby bookcase, where she plucked out a thin book with a red cover.
"I leafed through the book and saw it was a notebook filled with my own handwriting," Ms.
Malcolm said.
"I began to read, and immediately saw that I had found the handwritten notes from which I derived the typewritten pages that are part of the trial record. . . ."
At issue in the marathon case, which has fanned a dispute over how much license -- if any -- a journalist should take with quotations, was Ms.
Malcolm's portrayal of Mr.
Masson in 1983.
He had recently been dismissed as projects director of the Sigmund Freud Archives in London for criticizing Freud's theories of sexual abuse in childhood.
A central question was whether quotations she attributed to Mr.
Masson had been fabricated, as he contended, or simply rearranged and compressed.
In three of the five disputed quotations in the two-part, 45,500-word article, Ms.
Malcolm wrote that Mr.
Masson had said he hoped to turn Freud's home into "a place of sex, women, fun"; that two prominent psychiatrists considered him "an intellectual gigolo," and that he himself would one day be considered the "greatest analyst who ever lived."
A fourth disputed quotation concerned a paper in which Mr.
Masson faulted psychoanalysis for its sterility.
"I don't know why I put it in," Mr.
Masson is supposed to have said, conceding to Ms.
Malcolm that his fault-finding was gratuitous.
The fifth disputed quotation concerned Mr.
Masson's dismissal from the Freud Archives.
Ms.
Malcolm wrote that Mr.
Masson had told her how an archives official asked him to keep quiet about losing his job, and that he had refused.
"Well, he had the wrong man," Mr.
Masson is supposed to have told Ms.
Malcolm.
The jury in the trial that ended in November found the fourth quotation false and the fifth not only false but also defamatory -- though not libelously so.
The notes that Ms.
Malcolm said her granddaughter had turned up are of recollections about the first three disputed quotations and do not address the fourth and fifth.
Recalling the moment of discovery, Ms.
Malcolm said: "I went into the kitchen, where my husband was finishing the dishes, and said, 'Gardner, I have found the notes.' They are in this little red book. . . .I theorized that Sophy had pulled the notebook out of the bookcase, where it had been sitting all these years, perhaps attracted by its bright red color."
Ms.
Malcolm had tape recordings to back up much of her quoted material, although she was criticized by some journalists for depicting a long-running luncheon conversation instead of the several interviews that actually took place.
Ms.
Malcolm said she had no notes to support the fourth quotation and had relied on memory.
As for the fifth quotation, the issue was her editing of Mr.
Masson's tape-recorded comments.
Until the apparent discovery of the new notes, she had only typewritten summaries to back up the three other disputed quotations.
Mr.
Masson insisted that the new notes were fake: "She did not take notes. I still maintain that."
Ms.
Malcom's lawyers originally moved to have the suit dismissed before trial, but the Supreme Court refused, holding that there were grounds for a trial.
In the first, in 1993, a jury concluded that Ms.
Malcolm had fabricated the five disputed quotations, but it deadlocked on damages.
Some jurors thought Mr.
Masson should get $1 million, while others thought that he had damaged himself by his own boasting.
Ms.
Malcolm's lawyer, Gary L. Bostwick of Santa Monica, Calif., said yesterday that the new notes would buttress Ms.
Malcolm's case further in the event of a third trial, and that he had felt all along that they would be found: "That's the way the world works when you mislay something."


Giuliani's Office Attacks Board for Hiring Teachers
A week before the start of the new school year, the administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani attacked the New York City Board of Education yesterday, criticizing school officials for hiring new teachers even as they threatened to lay off others to cope with budget cuts.
The board, in response, acknowledged that it had hired 3,000 new teachers in recent weeks while preparing to lay off perhaps 1,000 others.
But board officials said that they were only following state and civil service laws.
These require the board to hire applicants with teaching licenses -- which all 3,000 new teachers have -- even if it means forcing out unlicensed teachers who worked in the system last year as temporary employees, said John H. Beckman, a board spokesman.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  NATO JETS ATTACK SERBS
NATO warplanes carried out early-morning bombing attacks on Bosnian Serb military positions near Sarajevo in retaliation for the shelling of the city on Monday.
A1  PROMISE TO BILKED RUSSIANS
Millions of Russians have invested their savings in hundreds of dubious investment schemes and now they're mad.
Someone has surfaced to act as their savior.
A3  GEORGIAN LEADER WOUNDED
The Georgian leader, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, was wounded when a car bomb exploded n the Georgian capital, Tbilisi.
A7  POLITICS IN HAITI
With opposition parties threatening to boycott a final round of parliamentary elections, President Jean-Bertrand Aristide has turned to old-fashioned dealmaking.
A5  GRUFF ENCOUNTER IN BEIJING
As the forum of nongovernmental organizations on women's issues opens, Beijing is awash in recriminations over China's management of the meeting.
A10  Confusion surrounds warning to Americans in Russia.
A9  Sao Paulo Journal: For bigotry in Brazil, watch the elevator.
A4  National A12-15  TIME WARNER SEEKS TURNER
Time Warner is offering $8.5 billion to acquire Turner Broadcasting System, executives said.
Ted Turner, the chairman of Turner Broadcasting, is said to be "enthusiastic" about folding his company into Time Warner.
A1  CASH FLOODS WALL STREET
Investors last month poured more money into mutual funds that invest in American stocks than ever before.
Market Place.
A1  BATTLE OF THE SPEAKERS
Speaker Newt Gingrich would seem have bigger fish to fry than Tom Murphy, the Democratic Speaker of the Georgia House.
But the two have spent much of the August congressional recess in a battle over redistricting.
A1  FUEL FOR IMMIGRANT DEBATE
The Census Bureau's report that the percentage of the country's population that is foreign born is at its highest level since World War II is fueling the already intense debate over immigration.
A1  MOTHER TOLD TO SPEAK ENGLISH
A Texas woman is speaking some English to her 5-year-old daughter at home now because a judge told her that speaking only Spanish amounted to child abuse.
A12  AMERICORPS COSTS CRITICIZED
A Senate critic of Federal spending released an accounting report that he said proved that Americorps, one of President Clinton's trademark projects, burdens taxpayers with "excessive costs." A13  HEARING FOR KEVORKIAN
Lawyers for Dr.
Jack Kevorkian will argue today that murder charges stemming from two 1991 suicides that he assisted should be dismissed.
A12  FUHRMAN TAPES PLAYED
Without the jurors in the Simpson trial present, the courtroom reverberated with the expletives and slurs from Mark Fuhrman, a police witness around whom prosecutors have built much of their case against O. J. Simpson.
A14  ANOTHER WHITEWATER PLEA
The President business partner in the Whitewater case pleaded not guilty to 19 counts of conspiracy, fraud, making false statements and other charges.
A15  Cape Hattaras Journal: Scientists try to save an iron ship.
A12  Education B6  A company's teachers to replace unionized ones in a public school.
Metro Digest B1  HEAD OF HOSPITALS RESIGNS
The president of New York City's public hospitals resigned, just two weeks after a panel appointed by Mayor Giuliani recommended dismantling the system that provides care for hundreds of thousands of poor patients.
A1  DECLINE IN NEEDLE SHARING
Offering fresh hope in the battle to control AIDS, new studies have found that needle sharing among drug users fell 40 percent after Connecticut passed a 1992 law permitting pharmacies to sell syringes without a prescription.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C9-14  Janet Malcolm, journalist in libel suit, says she has found a missing collection of notes.
C9  Film: On the Warsaw ghetto.
C9  "Magic in the Water." C10  Music: Steve Earle.
C9  Books: "Journey to Ithaca." C14  Book Notes C12  The Living Section C1-7  It's corn time again.
C1  Health Page C8  Personal Health: Hormone replacement therapy for men.
Sports B7-12  Baseball: Mattingly tries to defuse controversy.
B7  Revived Mets head West.
B11  Basketball: N.B.A. players vote on union today.
B11  Columns: Vescey on the U.S.
Open.
B7  Football: Jets' Glenn remembers Dolphins.
B7  Giants' Brown jokes about concussion.
B9  Sports People.
B8  Tennis: Graf struggles to win; Agassi and Sampras coast.
B7  Obituaries D17  Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  Editorials  The nation's biggest bank.
A China agenda for Mrs.
Clinton.
Take Mr.
Packwood's gavel.
Letters  Thomas L. Friedman: Australia goes Pacific.
Peter J. Sepp: Are Republicans serious about cutting fat?
John Cronin: Water, power and the drought of 1995.
Barbara O'Brien: Scary new "isms" at the speed of light.
Chronicle B2  Crossword C12


METRO DIGEST
CITY HOSPITALS CHIEF ABRUPTLY RESIGNS The president of New York City's public hospitals, Dr.
Bruce Siegel, has abruptly resigned, just two weeks after a panel appointed by Mayor Giuliani recommended dismantling the public hospital system.  [ Page A1. ] LEGAL SYRINGES TIED TO LOWER AIDS RISK Offering fresh hope in the battle to control AIDS, new studies show that needle sharing among drug users fell 40 percent after Connecticut passed a 1992 law allowing the sale of syringes without a prescription.
PARKS All 38 state forest preserves on Long Island were closed to the public because of the danger of fires.
The closings came as firefighters continued their battle to bring two major brush fires under control in Suffolk County.  [ B4. ] BIG NAMES PONDER A RUN IN NEW JERSEY What took months of agonizing self-examination for Bill Bradley, former Gov.
Thomas H. Kean is trying to do much faster: decide whether to run for the United States Senate.
When Mr.
Bradley said that he would not be a candidate for a fourth term next year, Mr.
Kean quickly said he might be interested in running for the open seat.
So did another former Governor, Jim Florio.  [ B4. ] Chronicle B5  About New York by David Gonzalez B3


Doctor Seeks to Quash Case Of Murder in Suicide Deaths
In a case that may clarify -- or further confuse -- the legal status of assisted suicide in Michigan, lawyers for Dr.
Jack Kevorkian will argue on Wednesday that murder charges stemming from two 1991 suicides that he assisted should be dismissed.
The hearing is the result of a 5-to-2 ruling last December by the Michigan Supreme Court, which said that in the absence of a state law specifically outlawing the practice, assisted suicide could be prosecuted as a "common-law felony."


Punishing Illegal Immigrants Isn't the Solution; Words to Heal
To the Editor:
Many of us agree with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's statement that immigration restrictions by Congress would indeed have "catastrophic social effects" in New York and in every other city (front page, Aug. 23).
Mr.
Giuliani's voice in an angry America is proof that one can transcend one's own party and that words can bring about healing.


38 Forest Sites Are Closed By Fire Peril
All 38 state forest preserves on Long Island were closed to the public today because of the danger of fires.
The closings, announced by Michael D. Zagata, the Commissioner of the State Department of Environmental Conservation, came as firefighters continued their battle to bring two major brush fires under control in Suffolk County.
The state preserves contain hiking and biking trails, wildlife refuge and nature centers and some wetland areas, where fishing and canoeing will not be permitted until further notice.


Informer Seeks to Change Plea
A United States Army reservist who admitted that he had sex with a 22-year-old female enlisted officer while she was too intoxicated to resist has asked a Federal judge to dismiss his guilty plea.
Mark Gagliardi had testified against his two co-defendants, but they were acquitted of sexual assault and conspiracy charges on Aug. 17.


Duty Free Int'l(DFI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 30


Nowadays, Yanks Can't Relax in a Rout
Five first-inning runs and David Cone on the mound translates into sure victory most days.
But not for the Yankees these days.
New York had to sweat out a 12-4 victory over the California Angels last night at the Stadium, a victory that was a lot closer than one might imagine.


Racial Epithets by Detective Fill Simpson Courtroom
Judge Lance A. Ito's courtroom reverberated today with the voice of the former police detective Mark Fuhrman, the witness who swore under oath that he had not said "nigger" for the last 10 years, uttering the epithet more than three dozen times.
In tape-recorded remarks to an aspiring screenwriter that both riveted and revolted those who heard them, Mr.
Fuhrman, around whom prosecutors have built much of their case against O. J. Simpson, emerges not just as a racist and perjurer, but also as a rogue police officer who boasts of arresting people without probable cause, tearing up exculpatory evidence, concocting incriminating evidence, ignoring legal precedent, beating confessions from people and tailoring testimony.


16 Colombians Slain By Guerrilla Faction
Sixteen workers at a banana plantation in northwestern Colombia were killed today by armed men and women dressed in police fatigues, military authorities said.
Military and civilian spokesmen in the region, Uraba, said that the perpetrators were members of the left-wing guerrilla group Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia.
The victims were riding to work on a bus when the armed contingent forced them out, took them to a nearby soccer field, bound them and shot them in the head.


International Briefs; A Top Official Quits Alusuisse-Lonza
The Alusuisse-Lonza Group, which is in the chemicals, aluminum and packaging businesses, said yesterday that Dominique Damon, a top official in line to become chief executive, would leave the Swiss company today "by mutual consent." Hans Jucker, the company chairman, said that Ms.
Damon, who was named Alusuisse's chief operating officer last fall, was leaving because of "differences of opinion in strategic questions." Ms.
Damon, 48, was being groomed to succeed Alusuisse's chief executive, Theodor Tschopp.


DAKA Int'l.(DKAI,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 1


International Briefs; Midsize Car From Fiat
Fiat, the Italian auto maker, introduced a midsize car yesterday that it hopes will break the European dominance of Volkswagen, General Motors and Ford Motor.
The introduction of the new car line, which is being marketed under the names Bravo and Brava, is being marked by 10 days of events in Turin, Italy, Fiat's home.
Bravo is a two-door sporty sedan aimed at young professionals, while the five-door Brava hatchback is being marketed to the family travel segment.
The company hopes to sell 350,000 of the two models a year, split equally between Italy and abroad. (AP)


With Angels and Devils, Guess Who Prevails
"I didn't write a song for four years," Steve Earle told the audience at the Bottom Line on Monday night.
"And this was the first one I wrote." He sang "Goodbye," an apology to an ex-lover: "Was I off somewhere or just too high?/But I can't remember if we ever said goodbye."
Mr.
Earle sang in a gruff, offhanded voice, but the lyrics were telling.
A decade ago, he was part of a country-rock renaissance, a songwriter who brought broad-shouldered rock and tough-minded storytelling to Nashville.
By the early 1990's, plenty of new country music sounded like what Mr.
Earle had been doing all along, and other people were performing his songs.
But Mr.
Earle had a drug problem, and last September, at the bottom of a self-destructive spiral, he was imprisoned for possession of heroin.


Prosecutors Still Seek to Try '91 Crown Hts. Suspect as Adult
Prosecutors urged a Federal appeals panel yesterday to overturn a lower court's ruling and allow the young man accused of killing a Jewish scholar during the 1991 racial violence in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, to be tried as an adult.
In a courtroom crowded with Hasidic leaders, the three-judge panel from the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit peppered prosecutors and defense lawyers with tough questions about a District Court judge's ruling on April 13 that suspect, Lemrick Nelson Jr., cannot be tried as an adult.


Is It Really, Truly Magic, Or Is It Just the Oreos?
The makers of "Magic in the Water" named this family-oriented fantasy with a lot more optimism than accuracy.
There is little magic in what is meant to be a tale of wonder set in a contemporary alienated family.
Mark Harmon plays a radio psychiatrist and divorced dad named Jack Black, a workaholic who has three phones in his car.
He absent-mindedly takes his children -- 10-year-old Ashley and her teen-age brother, Josh -- on vacation to Glenorky in the Pacific Northwest.
Glenorky is a town fast becoming a theme park, for it is the home of the legendary Orky, a creature who resembles the Loch Ness monster.
No one has been able to prove that Orky is more than a myth, but the town has a therapy group full of grown men who are convinced that they have been inhabited by Orky's spirit.
The film is so sloppily written that the precise qualities of Orky's good-natured spirit are never clear.


Port in a Storm: Planners Question the City's Maritime Future
Government agencies have spent hundreds of millions of dollars in recent years to subsidize the depressed maritime industry in New York City, once one of the premier ports in the world.
But now the city's own planning experts are asking for the first time whether the city would be better off if it let some or all of its commercial shipping business just die.
The marine terminals of New York have been eclipsed since the 1960's by those on the New Jersey side of the harbor, which are better equipped for modern shipping because they have more land and easier access to railways and highways.
Government-owned terminals in Manhattan, Brooklyn and Staten Island have been unable to keep up, losing $40 million annually in the last two years, with little prospect of breaking even in the near future.


Leaving Summer Behind


AT LUNCH WITH: Edna O'Brien; Casting a Cold Eye
At 2 P.M., the clique of paparazzi who hunger for celebrities outside the Princess of Wales's favorite restaurant, San Lorenzo, disperse in temporary defeat, with neither the princess nor other glitterati in sight.
They miss, five minutes later, the queen of Irish writers, Edna O'Brien, walking briskly into view: tall, hatless, her wavy dark red hair her shining crown, her long diaphanous skirt swirling slightly in the dead heat-wave air.
She could be one of her own characters, a striking woman coming to lunch with a charming but feckless lover, trying to hold things together.
She has not come to be seen, not this time.
She smiles broadly, thin lips very red, and in her lilting County Clare accent, negotiates with the manager.
We get a table on a small balcony in the restaurant, which was designed by her son Sasha Gebler, an architect, above the din of those who have come to ogle, to nibble lightly sauced pasta and fish, to gossip about people like Ms.
O'Brien.


A Tranquil Region of Northern Serbia Begins to Feel the Tensions of War
For centuries the fertile plains of northern Serbia have been home to a rich mosaic of ethnic groups, untouched by the rivalries and hatreds that have traditionally sundered the Balkans.
Even as conflict has ravaged much else in the former Yugoslavia in the last four years, the Vojvodina region of Serbia has remained tranquil, its families intact and its structures unscathed by shelling.


PGA Puts Out Welcome Mat
The PGA Tour got a little more Euro-friendly yesterday when the Tournament Policy Board voted to expand the number of tournaments available to nonmembers to seven from the current limit of five.
Because the Players Championship, the NEC World Series of Golf and the three United States majors do not count against the limit, the change will, in effect, allow international players who are members of another circuit access to a total of 12 tour events.
The change will have an impact on those who play at least 11 events on their home circuit and who wish to play more -- but not the required 15 tournaments for PGA Tour membership -- in the United States.


Cinram Ltd. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CHRONICLE
In 1993 DOLPH LUNDGREN starred in the film "Pentathlon," in which he fenced, swam, ran, rode horses and fired an air pistol.
On Monday he was named leader of the United States modern pentathlon team for the 1996 Olympic Games.
He won't compete but will coordinate planning and other details between the team and the United States Olympic Committee.
"Over the years, my involvement with modern pentathlon has grown from pure interest to an opportunity to raise the visibility of the sport," Mr.
Lundgren, who was once captain of the Swedish national karate team, said in a statement.


The Nation's Biggest Bank
The marriage of Chase Manhattan Bank and Chemical Bank may well be a boon for the two banks and their stockholders.
It means that a newly efficient and productive behemoth based in New York City will be better equipped to compete globally with the financial giants of Europe and Asia.
But the $10 billion merger is also a sign of the decline of this region's fortunes as a financial-employment center, as Chase and Chemical proceed with plans to cut $1.5 billion a year in expenses by eliminating 4,000 jobs and perhaps 100 bank branches in the metropolitan area alone.
Mindful of the potential blow to the economy and consumers in New York City, executives at both banks have gone out of their way to offer assurances that they will try to ease the pain caused by the merger.
They promise that the job reductions will be carried out by natural attrition and retirement incentives where possible.
They also promise not to reduce services in poor areas of the city, some already underserved by big banks.


Japan Throws The Switch On Reactor
Japan's prototype fast breeder reactor, the cornerstone of its program to use plutonium for energy production, generated electricity for the first time today.
The Monju reactor operated for a little over an hour, generating 14 megawatts, about 5 percent of its capacity of 280 megawatts, while about 100 protesters demonstrated outside the gates of the reactor site.
Despite the small scale of the test, electric industry and Government officials hailed it as a milestone.


Mainers Don't Disdain Pink-and-Khaki Set
To the Editor:
Re Carolyn Chute's "Invading Army, in Pink and Khaki" (Op-Ed, Aug. 25):


Finding Help on the Streets
To The Living Section:
Before anyone accuses John Hockenberry, a paraplegic, of reverse racism in discovering that black people are often more helpful to him in public than whites, I would like to second his claim  [ "Life in an Everyday War Zone," Aug. 2 ] .
As someone who negotiates the streets of Manhattan with a white cane, I, too, find it is most often African-Americans who offer to guide me.
NEIL DERRICK  New York


John Costello, 52, Who Wrote Of War, Espionage and Mores
John Costello, a Scottish-born historian who shed new light on aspects of World War II and helped to untangle the webs of cold war intrigue, died on Saturday while on a flight from London to Miami.
He was 52 and lived in Miami and Manhattan.
His New York agent, John Hawkins, said the exact cause of death awaited further tests.
He said Mr.
Costello was in Britain to do research and had suffered from shellfish poisoning a few days earlier.


Murder Suspect Takes Own Life
A man who had been accused of fatally shooting his estranged girlfriend Sunday night apparently used the same gun to take his own life, said Carmen Messano, the Hudson County Prosecutor.
One day after the body of Luz Portocarrero of North Bergen was discovered beside her bed, the Linden police found Miguel Lopez of Jersey City slumped in his 1989 Pontiac Sunbird with a pistol in his hand.


Water: Save to the Last Drop
Residents of seven northeastern counties are being urged to turn off the faucet while brushing their teeth, refrain from washing their cars and make other efforts to conserve water.
The State Department of Environmental Protection issued a drought warning yesterday, saying water supplies had dropped sharply because of dry weather and high temperatures, The Associated Press reported.


Wine Talk
THERE is in this country a loosely knit group of wine enthusiasts whose guiding principle is expressed in the letters A.B.C.
With so many institutions and ideas being questioned these days, this group is very much in tune with the times.
A.B.C. stands for anything but chardonnay.
It had to happen.
For almost 20 years, chardonnay, or more specifically, wine made from the chardonnay grape, has been the cornerstone of America's wine culture.
People who know nothing of and care little for the trappings of wine unhesitatingly request "a glass of chardonnay, please."


Holiday Travelers, Beware


Sao Paulo Journal; The Elevator Doesn't Lie: Intolerance in Brazil
Sonia Maria Nascimento cannot imagine casually strolling into someone else's apartment building.
She never kids around with, or even smiles at, doormen.
She does not dress down.
Instead, Miss Nascimento, a former prosecutor, wears her authority as an armor, within which she is braced for that moment when a doorman -- noticing not her tailored jackets or her neat, tight braids or her crisp manner, but only her black skin -- will assume she is a servant and point her toward the service elevator.


Metropolitan Diary
TO be filed under W, as in What's all this fuss about generation gaps?
There is a scene toward the end of "Pocahontas" when Pocahontas pleads with her father, Powhatan, not to declare war on the colonists, but to try negotiating.
Powhatan responds with something like: "Times have changed, my daughter. Life is not so simple anymore."


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Aug. 25
Aug. 18
Aug. 26
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.6
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.0
3.4
Gasoline stocks
195.5
199.2
209.4
Distillate stocks
125.0
124.6
132.6
Crude imports, daily
7.8
7.2
7.2
Product imports, daily
1.4
1.7
2.1
Crude stocks
305.4
305.7
322.9
Crude production, daily
6.4
6.4
6.6
Refinery utilization (%)
93.3
93.5
95.6
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Liz Claiborne Seeks New Agency
Liz Claiborne Inc. in New York said yesterday that it had begun a search for an agency to handle the creative portion of its account for women's and men's apparel, accessories and fragrances, as part of plans to increase its advertising spending to as much as $25 million to $30 million in 1996.
The creative portion of the Claiborne account had been handled for the last eight years by Altschiller &amp; Company in New York, a unit of the Omnicom Group, until the agency and Claiborne parted ways in March.
At that time, Claiborne billings totaled about $8 million.
Claiborne now plans to run nearly 300 full-page color advertisements during 1996 in more than 20 magazines, said Al Shapiro, a spokesman, and may expand into media like broadcast and outdoor advertising.


Book Notes
Close to Home, Long to Write
When she first began writing "Coming Home," Rosamunde Pilcher expected to finish the novel, her 13th, within a year, less time than it took to write her earlier best sellers, "The Shell Seekers" and "September."


NATO JETS ATTACK SERBIAN POSITIONS AROUND SARAJEVO
NATO warplanes swooped over Sarajevo in darkness early today and began bombing Bosnian Serb positions to the south and east of the city, the Western alliance announced.
The attack, which started around 2 A.M. and appeared to be concentrated initially in areas close to the Bosnian Serb headquarters in Pale, was a response to the devastating Serbian shelling of the Sarajevo market area on Monday.


Morris and Steelers Have a Few Things to Prove
Byron (Bam) Morris could barely contain himself as he stood on the sideline.
The Steelers were lined up at their 17-yard line with 5 minutes 13 seconds remaining in last season's American Football Conference championship game.
The Steelers trailed the Chargers, 17-13.
"I had two plays the whole day," he said recently.
"I thought I'd get in there on that drive. I was itching to get in there."


Job Security at Issue in Turnpike Talks
A 25-year-old contract provision that guarantees job security to toll collectors and maintenance workers on the New Jersey Turnpike is at the center of a new dispute between turnpike officials and the union representing its employees.
The New Jersey Turnpike Authority wants to eliminate the job security clause, a move that union officials said was the first step toward turning toll operations over to a private company.


L.I.R.R. Commuters in Tunnel for an Hour
An equipment problem trapped two New York City-bound Long Island Rail Road trains in a smoky tunnel under Manhattan for an hour yesterday morning, delaying hundreds of commuters.
About 10 A.M., a train from Huntington had just passed under the East River and was a few minutes from Penn Station when it lost power and coasted to a stop, railroad officials said.
The air-conditioning went out, as did the main lights, leaving only the dim emergency lights.


Corrections
An art review in Weekend on Aug. 18 misidentified an outdoor sculpture at the Snug Harbor Cultural Center on Staten Island.
The work, consisting of white cutout shapes, is "Single Mother" by Ann Gillen, not "Untitled Forms" by Grace Knowlton, as it was identified in a map provided by the center.


'Casual' Heroin Use Can Never Be Benign
To the Editor:
Re "Thinking About Drugs Without Hysteria" (letter, Aug. 20), on the death of a young stockbroker from heroin overdose:


Cigar Chic, and Drollery
To the Editor:
"Stogies, a Gal's Best Friend" (Styles, Aug. 27) is the most recent in a growing list of your articles extolling the pleasures and up-to-the-minute chic of the born-again cigar.


Turnpike Job Security
A 25-year-old contract provision guaranteeing job security to New Jersey Turnpike toll collectors and maintenance workers is now at the center of a dispute between turnpike officials and the employees' union.


Lawrence Lamm, 99, Pioneer in Book Packaging
Lawrence W. Lamm, a pioneer in book packaging, died on Monday at a nursing home in Stamford, Conn.
He was 99 and lived in Manhattan.
As a book packager, he would conceive the idea for a book or series of books.
When a publisher accepted the idea, Mr.
Lamm would select an appropriate author, take part in developing an outline, supervise the book from draft to conclusion and present the publisher with a finished manuscript.


Self Magazine Editor Resigns; Calls Decision Firm This Time
Alexandra D. Penney, the fervent and mercurial editor in chief of Self magazine since 1989, resigned yesterday.
S.
I.
Newhouse Jr., the chairman of Self's parent, Conde Nast PublicationsInc., whose magazines include Vogue and Vanity Fair, said Ms.
Penney would remain in her post until a successor was named.


HOSPITALS LEADER RESIGNS ABRUPTLY
The president of New York City's public hospitals, Dr.
Bruce Siegel, resigned abruptly yesterday, just two weeks after a panel appointed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani recommended dismantling the entire municipal hospital system.
In a letter of resignation to the chairwoman of the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation, Dr.
Siegel cited professional and personal reasons for his decision.
He said that he had accomplished most of his goals and that he and his wife were expecting their first child in November.


Sergeant Dies of a Shot From His Own Gun
A police sergeant died yesterday from what detectives said they believed was an accidental self-inflicted bullet wound to the head.
Sgt.
James McNamara, 41, who is separated, was with his girlfriend in the bedroom of his Astoria, Queens, house when his .380-caliber handgun went off around midnight.
One senior police official said the two may have been playing with the licensed gun at the time.


Deportation in Murder Case
An American accused of masterminding a botched jewelry store robbery in New Jersey on March 13 in which the owner fatally shot his wife was ordered deported to the United States yesterday, the A.P. reported.
The American, Avram David Gottlieb, who was arrested in Ottawa earlier this month, is charged with felony murder because shots fired by Jeffrey Wolf, the owner of the Franklin Township store, struck and killed his wife, Brenda.


Blue-Chip Stocks Rally as Dow Rises 14.44, to 4,608.44
The stock market recovered yesterday from a steep, early selloff in technology issues, which have become more volatile after their sharp rise this year.
Blue-chip stocks rallied, led by a jump in auto stocks.
The Dow Jones industrial average ended up 14.44 points at 4,608.44.


Evelyn Wood, Who Promoted Speed Reading, Is Dead at 86
Evelyn Wood, whose search for a way to improve the lives of troubled girls led to the development of speed reading techniques prescribed by Presidents and endorsed by multitudes, died on Saturday in Hospice Family Care in Tucson, Ariz.
Mrs.
Wood, who lived in Tucson, was 86.
The tiny, soft-spoken woman who gave her name to Evelyn Wood Reading Dynamics liberated students, professionals and business people from the habits that shackled them to the average American's reading rate of 250 to 300 words a minute.


Looks No Excuse in Rape Cases
The issue of how a woman was dressed or how she looked at the time she was raped will no longer be admissible as evidence in most cases under a bill signed yesterday by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman.


In Northeast India, Changes Come Swiftly and Violently
After centuries of isolation, many communities in India's remote northeast are facing sweeping changes and ethnic violence that threaten their way of life.
The changes and choices are stark and painful in this pleasant hill town, where the sight and scent of pine trees soothe the senses and the rain comes in a regular daily downpour.
Rebel movements, tensions with immigrants from Bangladesh and Nepal and other parts of India, as well as the lure of the outside world, newly visible with access to Western television, are all forcing rapid change on the region.


National Service Program Under New Attack
Taking aim at one of President Clinton's trademark projects, a leading Senate critic of Federal spending released an accounting report today that he said proved that Americorps, the national service program, "burdens taxpayers with big bureaucracy and excessive costs."
The Senator, Charles E. Grassley, an Iowa Republican who built a reputation for challenging waste at the Pentagon, contended that the program was "far exceeding original cost projections." He said half the money spent on each recruit went for administrative overhead.
In a letter to President Clinton, he said the report by the General Accounting Office, the auditing arm of Congress, showed that "the truth is Americorps is a costly big-government program."


Defense Completes Testimony In Bombing-Conspiracy Trial
With yesterday's testimony from Victor Alvarez, the last of eight defendants to contend they were involved only in helping the Muslim fight abroad, the defense rested its case in a bombing conspiracy trial that has lasted almost eight months in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
Prosecutors immediately began a brief round of rebuttal testimony in the trial, in which closing arguments are expected to start next week.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.50
5.72
4.67
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.32
5.34
4.57
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.35
5.34
4.88
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.35
6.33
7.19
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.71
6.70
7.46
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.60
7.60
8.29
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.15
6.16
6.36
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Antigay Minister Lost City Council Backing
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 23 news article on the Rev.
Ruben Diaz would have us believe that Mr.
Diaz has maintained the support of the New York City Council and was reappointed to the Civilian Complaint Review Board, which reviews complaints of police brutality, despite his homophobic attitudes.
When his reappointment came up before the Council this summer, it lacked the necessary support.


Where the Budget Ax Turns Dull
This was supposed to be the Lizzie Borden of Congresses, the one whose fiscal broadax would whack away at friend and foe alike in the name of a balanced budget.
And in some spots, what remains of Government programs is a gruesome sight indeed.
But eight months into the budget-slicing, the bleeding by corporate America seems to be not a great deal more than from your average shaving cut.
Of the $1 trillion that Republicans have pledged to slice from the budget by 2002, say experts at the right-leaning Cato Institute, Federal programs that subsidize business are so far contributing perhaps $75 billion -- and that figure is dropping fast.


Balet &amp; Albert's youthful campaign tries selling French wines American style, for the 'oui' hours.
IMAGINE hearing the perky singer Joanie Sommers warble in a television commercial, "Now it's French wine, for those who think young," or listening to her belt in a radio spot, "Come alive, you're in the Bordeaux generation!"
It's highly improbable that Pepsi-co would license the rights to its old jingles -- or furnish its commercial chanteuse -- to the organization that promotes the sale of French wines and food products to the United States.
But in a campaign now getting under way, the organization Food and Wines from France is emulating soft-drink marketers like Pepsi in presenting emotional, lifestyle messages rather than centering its pitches on taste or status appeal.


It Seems Anyone's Call As Polls Open Today
In the most hotly contested election since the Republicans snatched control of Congress from the Democrats last November, locked-out National Basketball Association players will vote today on the future of their union and perhaps the 1995-96 season.
The outcome of the National Labor Relations Board election is impossible to predict because no one knows how many of the 420 eligible players will vote at the N.L.R.B.'s 47 sites in 30 states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico.
A majority of the players who vote, not of those eligible, will determine the outcome.


Transactions
Baseball  Major League Baseball
ARIZONA DIAMONDBACKS -- Named Kendall Carter national scouting supervisor.
American League
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Claimed Kevin Wickander, pitcher, off waivers from the Detroit Tigers.
Placed Jamie McAndrew, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Activated Terry Steinbach, catcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned George Williams, catcher, to Edmonton of the Pacific Coast League.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about Senator Bill Bradley's annual beach walk misstated where the picture was taken in some copies.
The Senator was shown in Harvey Cedars, N.J., not in Cape May; the walk had begun in Cape May the day before.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about Broad Channel, a neighborhood in Queens, misattributed a quotation.
As the accompanying article reported, it was Glenn Marcisak who said, "It's like a little Peyton Place," not the resident who was shown in the picture, Daniel F. Mundy.


Baseball Keeps Meeting Short
In the latest of their series of moveable meetings, lawyers for baseball's club owners and players met in Pittsburgh yesterday.
Unlike their previous sessions in New York, Detroit and Milwaukee, this gathering lasted only one day instead of two, but the two committees may meet again this week.
The lawyers are exploring possible ways to resolve their differences over baseball's economic system.
Those differences caused an eight-month strike that wiped out last year's playoffs and World Series.


Japan to Shut Big Credit Union
In the largest collapse yet in Japan's financial crisis, Government officials moved today to shut down a credit union with $6 billion in nonperforming loans.
The collapse of the Kizu Credit Union, based in Osaka, is the biggest to date in the country's unfolding banking problems, which have stemmed from a plunge in real estate values.
The credit union has $12.5 billion in deposits.


New York Taxi Driver -- a Legend Still
To the Editor:
Re "Taxi!" (editorial, Aug. 23): It is appropriate that you write of the "legend" of New York City taxi drivers.


Giant Food Inc.(GFS.A,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 12


Study Finds AIDS Risk to Addicts Drops if Sale of Syringes Is Legal
Offering fresh hope in the battle to control AIDS, new studies have found that needle sharing among drug users fell 40 percent after Connecticut passed a 1992 law permitting pharmacies to sell syringes without a prescription.
With 75 percent of AIDS cases in Connecticut, and a majority nationally, occurring among intravenous drug users and their sex partners and children, the increased availability of clean needles should slow the spread of the virus by shared needles, the studies, published in The Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes, concluded.


Intelligent Electronics Inc.(INEL,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Personal Health
ALTHOUGH a decade ago specialists were still insisting that men retain the sex hormone levels reached in young adulthood throughout life, there is now no longer any doubt that starting at about the age of 40 or 50, blood levels of the so-called male sex hormone testosterone gradually fall, dropping to a third to a half of their peak by the age of 80.
There is also no question that aging is accompanied by changes that can be signs of insufficient testosterone: muscle size and strength decline, body fat increases, bones slowly lose strength-giving calcium, and sexual performance wanes.


Group Attacks Role Of Mayor in Parade
A group of religious and community leaders from Brooklyn yesterday criticized the choice of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani as one of four grand marshals of the West Indian American Day Parade and said elected officials who marched with him would risk alienating the rapidly growing Caribbean community.
But parade organizers defended the invitation to the Mayor, and several elected officials said they would march on Labor Day even though they disagreed with some of his policies.
The parade in Crown Heights, the city's largest annual street celebration, is expected to draw as many as three million people.


Faces Fearful Enough to Make You Cry
"Chronicle of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising According to Marek Edelman" proves that a documentary film about oppression need not show overt physical violence to strike a deep chord of disquiet.
The grim expressions on the faces of thousands of Polish Jews crowded together on the streets of the Warsaw ghetto, not knowing what is ahead but fearing the worst, speak volumes about the enormity of the Holocaust.
The grainy black-and-white silent films that make up the visual center of the movie were taken by the Nazis and have been kept in a Warsaw archive.
Much of that film consists of seemingly random scenes of Nazi officers patrolling the ghetto's cobblestone streets.
Some show crowds heading toward a train station, presumably to be sent to the Treblinka death camp nearby.
While there are shots of the doors of boxcars being closed, there are none of the human cargo being loaded.
Even without scenes of lashing physical brutality, the pictures are still devastating.
As edited and pored over by Jolanta Dylewska, the director of "Chronicle," they convey an eerie sense of the resurrective power of photography.
The names may be forgotten, but each face tells a story.
As Miss Dylewska's eye scours the Nazi film for expressive faces and family tableaux, one begins to imagine the richness and texture of the lives that are about to be cut short.
Some scenes are played and replayed in slow motion.
Others are examined frame by frame.
Sometimes a single frame is enlarged and brightened.
Juxtaposed with these vintage film clips is Mr.
Edelman's methodically recited account of the Nazi suppression of the uprising in the Warsaw ghetto in 1943.
The narrator, a successful Polish cardiologist and Holocaust survivor, was 23 years old when the events he recounts took place.
While working as a hospital messenger, he helped hundreds escape being sent to the death camps.
Mr.
Edelman's narration is as understated as the images that accompany it.
It begins in 1942 and focuses on the uprising from March 19 to May 10, 1943.
Rather than trying to paint a full picture of ghetto life and its sufferings, he concentrates on the preparation and organization of the uprising and on the Nazis' response.
The names of resistance fighters and personal facts about them are meticulously recalled, and at the end of the film, those names are listed and illustrated with snapshots, when available.
The resistance, as he describes it, was conducted by a loose association of groups hidden in bunkers that the Nazis systematically attacked with fire and poison gas.
Most of the leaders of this underground were very young, many in their teens.
Although Mr.
Edelman's story is a mostly factual recounting of names, dates and strategies, some indelible images pop up.
One of the most haunting is his recollection of hearing a merry-go-round playing day after day outside the walls of the ghetto.
For Mr.
Edelman, the sound is synonymous with the rest of the world's indifference to the suffering inside those walls.
The story's most dramatic moment is his description of a group escape through the sewers of Warsaw and of finally coming into the light, not knowing the time or day, and being given a bowl of potato and carrot soup.
Dry and dispassionate in tone, "Chronicle of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising" is a sobering document of remembrance.
CHRONICLE OF THE WARSAW GHETTO UPRISING ACCORDING TO MAREK EDELMAN
Written (in Polish, with English subtitles), directed and produced by Jolanta Dylewska; director of photography, Miss Dylewska; edited by Wanda Lemon; music by Jan Kanty Pawluskiewicz.
At the Film Forum, 209 Houston Street, South Village.
Running time: 72 minutes.
This film is not rated.
WITH: Marek Edelman and Adina Blady-Szwajgier


LeBow Appears Set to Start A Skirmish for RJR Nabisco
Bennett S. LeBow, the financier, apparently plans to make a play for the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation, which could kick off a takeover skirmish for the tobacco and food company.
The New Valley Corporation, which is controlled by Mr.
LeBow's Brooke Group Ltd., has received regulatory approval to buy up to 15 percent of RJR Nabisco's stock.
At current market prices, a stake that size would cost $1.1 billion.


Fisherman, 85, Is Killed In a Robbery in Brooklyn
For John Gianni, an 85-year-old retired construction worker from the southern edge of Brooklyn, life over the last five years had revolved around the daily challenge of outwitting the fish plying Plum Beach Channel, an inlet in Jamaica Bay.
Summer and winter, even on the coldest days, Mr.
Gianni would walk the few blocks from his home at 1485 East 23d Street to the water's edge in Gerritsen Beach, a quiet peninsula of frame houses surrounded by Plum Beach Channel, Shell Bank Creek and the marshlands of Marine Park.
He would then set up his tackle and plop in his line, finally tallying up the catch and making his way home about 6:30 P.M., like clockwork.


No Headline
Everything I worked for in college, student teaching, was just splattered by that decision. -- DIANE SILINSKI, a Pennsylvania teacher who was laid off when her school was given over to a for-profit company  [ B6:1. ]


Correction
A chart in this space yesterday misstated the number of vehicle accidents on the Triborough and Verrazano-Narrows bridges from 1991 to 1994.


Maxwell Faces Drug Charge
Guard VERNON MAXWELL, cut by the Houston Rockets in June after quitting the team at the start of the playoffs, faces a court appearance next Tuesday after police say they found 1.2 grams of marijuana in his car.
Maxwell was pulled over Monday night along Houston's Richmond Avenue, the city's nightclub district, for running a red light, the authorities said.
When the police determined that he had two outstanding traffic warrants against him, he was placed under arrest.


Food Notes
Mushroom Lore
Though the markets are filled with an increasingly familiar array of exotic mushrooms -- shiitake, cremini and so forth -- many others, less easily identified, sprout in the wild.
Classes in mushroom identification have been scheduled at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue (Eastern Parkway), near Prospect Park.


Bank of Nova Scotia reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


Yankee Minor Leaguers In Bar Brawl With Students
A member of the Yankees' Class A farm team in Oneonta, N.Y., and a college student were arrested early Monday after five players got into a bar brawl with a group of students, the police said.
The fight broke out inside the Sip &amp; Sail Tavern around 2:30 A.M. and moved outside, where first baseman GUVIA SAMUEL hit a student, ISAAC GOODMAN, and knocked him unconscious, the police said.
Goodman, of Port Washington, L.I., was admitted to A. O. Fox Hospital, where he was listed in stable condition.


CHRONICLE
When the venerable Lutece reopens on Sept. 8 after a five-week renovation, it will be a pristine version of what had been before.
MICHAEL WEINSTEIN, the president of Ark Restaurants, which owns Lutece, said customers think familiarity breeds comfort.
"We're trying not to put our stamp on it," Mr.
Weinstein said.
"We're continuing the tradition, the feeling that you're walking into somebody's home."
The architecture is essentially unchanged.
But the walls of the foyer and the dining room, once green, are now a dappled peach-yellow.
The ceilings, once covered in acoustic tiles, will be covered in beige linen.
The garden room is buttercream, no longer pink, while the upstairs dining room will have walls covered with green silk damask and pearwood wainscoting.


Troubles in China
In the final day of preparation for the opening of the forum of nongovernmental organizations, a parallel gathering to the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing was awash in recriminations over China's management of the meeting.
Intrusive security measures were a main source of complaints.
Article, page A10.


Century Communications (CTYA,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to May 31


Corrections
The Pulse chart in the Metro Section yesterday, about vehicle accidents on the Triborough and Verrazano-Narrows Bridges from 1991 to 1994, reversed the figures from the four years.
The bars on the right actually represented the 1991 data, while the bars on the left represented the 1994 figures.
A corrected version of the chart appears today on page B1.


Japanese Women Move Into The Open
The dining room fare at the United States Open might be new and improved enough to satisfy that Ukrainian food critic and member of the top 20, Andrei Medvedev, but it apparently still leaves something to be desired for Ai Sugiyama.
While her European and American peers in the players' lounge wolfed down pasta dishes or turkey and swiss on whole wheat, Sugiyama and her coach, Janichi Maryama, took chopsticks in hand yesterday and ate a boxed Japanese lunch prepared at Restaurant Nippon in midtown.


Clifford the Insider Lobbied Against War
To the Editor:
Your review of "Friends in High Places," the new biography of Clark Clifford (Arts pages, Aug. 24), takes issue with the view that the story is a "Greek tragedy" about a subject "of truly grand proportions," when "it can't be a tragedy if the main character was never really a hero."


No Weeping Here


Sports of The Times; Werewolves Of London Too Low-Key
WITH its history of always-a-full-moon antics, the United States Open was waiting for Jeff Tarango to strut his stuff.
But New York is letting us down.
Two days into the tournament and there has been no nuttiness to match the events at formerly staid and stuffy Wimbledon.
Tarango came and went yesterday, losing to the emerging young Russian star, Yevgeny Kafelnikov, 6-0, 6-4, 7-5.
Kafelnikov displayed a bit too much of himself by wearing only an athletic supporter beneath his drenched white, translucent tennis shorts -- can't some sponsor give the kid some underwear? -- while Tarango showed the despair of a man who may have wrecked his career.


Treasury Issues Weaken In Line With Bond Futures
Prices of Treasury securities sagged yesterday in sympathy with bond future contracts, which came under pressure from increasing doubt about the chances of another Fed easing.
Traders said a Market News Service report appeared to have been behind the raised anxiety level of a few market participants.
It suggested that Fed policymakers were increasingly confident that the economy was rebounding to an acceptable, noninflationary growth pace and were content to leave short-term interest rates unchanged unless they saw that demand would slacken.


TIME WARNER SETS $8.5 BILLION OFFER FOR TURNER CABLE
In a striking climax to a summer of mammoth media deals, Time Warner Inc. is offering $8.5 billion to acquire Turner Broadcasting System Inc., the cable-television powerhouse created by Ted Turner, according to executives who have been briefed on the negotiations.
Turner Broadcasting has not yet decided whether to accept the offer.
But as one executive close to the discussions said yesterday, Mr.
Turner, the brash media pioneer who founded Cable News Network, was "enthusiastic" about folding his company into Time Warner.


Brown Pauses to Joke About His Concussion
His concussion notwithstanding, Dave Brown's mind and memory are fine.
His sense of humor, too.
"I had a CAT scan this morning," the Giants' quarterback said after the afternoon practice.
"It was negative. There was nothing in there."


Time Warner Deal Seen With Japanese Investors
Time Warner Inc. reached an agreement yesterday with two large Japanese companies to restructure their investments in its cable systems and movie studio, an executive familiar with the discussions said.
The Japanese companies, the Toshiba Corporation and the Itochu Corporation, will swap their combined 11.2 percent stake in Time Warner Entertainment, which includes the Warner Brothers studio, Home Box Office and cable systems, for preferred shares in the parent company, which also owns publishing and music businesses, the executive said.


Even With a Rookie Coach, The Hurricanes Are Ready
Last season, when forecasters predicted the University of Miami's fall as a football power, the Hurricanes adopted the mantra, "It's not over until we say it's over."
Miami finished with a 10-2 record, losing to Nebraska, 24-17, in an Orange Bowl game played for the national championship.


Honda Meets Emission Rule Set for 1997 in California
The Honda Motor Company said today that its new Civic subcompact model met strict emissions requirements set by California for 1997, making it the first gasoline-powered mass-production car to do so.
But also today, California announced it had taken a step that could lead to a delay or softening of its toughest emissions standard, requiring 2 percent of all new vehicles to emit no pollution from their tailpipes by 1998.
Most auto makers reluctantly plan to meet that standard with electric vehicles.


Experts Doubt Iraq's Claims On A-Bomb
Experts at the international agency that monitors nuclear programs worldwide say that they do not believe that Iraq would have been able to produce a nuclear weapon in early 1991 as the Government of President Saddam Hussein now admits it had been trying to do.
The Iraqis may have been short of both nuclear fuel and structural components of a bomb, an agency spokesman said today.
Iraqi officials told United Nations inspectors that they had set a target date of April 1991 for building a nuclear explosive.
The work was interrupted when the Persian Gulf war began in January 1991.


Productivity-Geared Study Gives U.S. Schools Poor Marks
The United States does not get its money's worth from the $285 billion a year it spends on education, a panel of productivity experts concluded today.
The panel, the Consortium on Productivity in the Schools, took three years to examine the nation's network of 84,000 public schools as it would a business, focusing on productivity and return.


Response to a Shelling: A Knife-Edge Decision
Struggling vainly this afternoon to explain what the Western allies hope to achieve in their retaliation against the Bosnian Serbs for the shelling that killed 37 people in Sarajevo on Monday, a State Department official finally fell back on saying what they hoped to avoid.
"We don't want the response to be commensurate," he said, "but we don't want it to be disproportionate either."


PATH Cuts Weekend Service
Thousands of PATH riders will be inconvenienced over the Labor Day Weekend when service between Grove Street and Journal Square will be suspended so that a bridge can be replaced.
Free shuttle buses will run between the two stations from 11 P.M.
Friday to 5 A.M.
Tuesday, when service between the stations is expected to resume, said Joy Faber, a spokeswoman for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.


A Too-Fast Way to Earn Miles
An Essex County grand jury indicted a former Continental Airlines customer service representative on charges of stealing 1.4 million frequent-flier miles and giving them to friends and relatives.


Variations on a Tomato
Uncooked tomato sauce is a summer standard.
For a variation, add some sun-dried tomatoes and a yogurt-ricotta mixture.
The result is a deep, sweet sauce that melts right into the hot pasta.
Simple sauteeing of zucchini brings out the sweetness of that vegetable, too.
Double Tomato Sauce With Linguine
1/2 cup sun-dried tomatoes, packed dry
4 ounces ripe tomato  1 large clove garlic  A few sprigs fresh basil to yield 1/2 cup, lightly packed
1 ounce Parmigiano Reggiano ( 1/3 cup, coarsely grated)  1/4 cup nonfat plain yogurt  3/4 cup reduced-fat ricotta cheese  1 tablespoon balsamic vinegar  Freshly ground black pepper  8 ounces eggless linguine, plain, or flavored with black pepper.
1.
Combine sun-dried tomatoes with enough water to cover; bring to a boil.
Reduce to simmer and cook 10 minutes, until tomatoes are tender.
2. Put water for pasta in a large covered pot and bring to a boil.
3. Wash, trim and halve the tomato. Squeeze to remove some of the seeds and juice.
4. Mince the garlic.
5. Wash, dry and slice basil into strips.
6. Grate cheese.
7.
Drain sun-dried tomatoes and place in food processor with 2 tablespoons of the cooking liquid; process to a coarse puree.
8.
Add the fresh tomato and continue processing to make smoother; then add the yogurt and ricotta and blend until smooth.
Stir in the vinegar and black pepper to taste.
9. Cook the linguine according to package directions.
10. Add the basil and cheese to the sauce and process to blend.
11. Drain linguine and serve immediately topped with tomato sauce.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 660 calories, 10 grams fat, 25 milligrams cholesterol, 475 milligrams sodium, 35 grams protein, 115 grams carbohydrate.
Sauteed Zucchini
1 1/2 pounds zucchini  Pan spray  1 teaspoon olive oil.
1. Wash, trim and slice the zucchini into 1/4-inch-thick slices.
2.
Heat a large nonstick pan until it is very hot; reduce heat to medium-high and spray with pan spray; then add the oil.
3. Saute zucchini until slices are brown on both sides and tender.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 65 calories, 2 grams fat, 0 milligrams cholesterol, 8 milligrams sodium, 2 grams protein, 11 grams carbohydrate.
Game Plan Prepare the linguine dish through step 2.
Prepare the zucchini and saute.
Finish the linguine dish.


COMPANY BRIEFS
PROVIDENT AMERICAN, Norristown, Pa., a life and health insurance company, said it would buy an 80 percent stake in Medical Resource Ltd., Marlton, N.J., for $15 million cash.
The company said it would also have the option to acquire the remaining 20 percent of Medical Resource for $3.75 million in stock.
SERVICO INC., West Palm Beach, Fla., bought two Holiday Inns in Lawrence and in Manhattan, Kan., for $16.5 million from a partnership affiliated with Lehman Brothers Inc.


CHRONICLE
Calling all theater-loving owners of dogs, cats, iguanas, fish and birds!
There will be open auditions tomorrow for the musical revue "Pets!" at Theater East, 211 East 60th Street, from 1 to 3 P.M.
The parts are for nonspeaking, "carry on" roles in the show's finale.
The musical, which opened in July, has been using dogs and cats from animal shelters (the iguana, fish and birds have been fake, but live ones will now be auditioned).
"We were using strays because we wanted to get them homes," said HELEN BUTLEROFF, the show's director.
Each day after the animals appear they are offered for adoption, and as of Monday, 28 cats and dogs out of the 64 offered had been taken.


Being Biggest Is No Big Deal For Citicorp
It is certainly no surprise to John S. Reed, the chairman of Citicorp, that his bank will no longer be the largest in the United States.
In recent remarks to reporters, Mr.
Reed cracked that if Richard M. Rosenberg, the chief executive of the BankAmerica Corporation, made one more acquisition, the San Francisco bank would leap from second to first.
The name is different, but the outcome for Mr.
Reed is the same.
The combination announced Monday between the Chase Manhattan Corporation and the Chemical Banking Corporation would create a bank with $297 billion in assets, jumping ahead of Citicorp at $257 billion.


A China Agenda for Mrs. Clinton
It was never realistic to think that Hillary Rodham Clinton could lead the American delegation to the Beijing women's conference without becoming entangled in the difficult relationship between the United States and China.
Once her visit was linked last week to the release of Harry Wu, the connection became undeniable.
But that should not stop Mrs.
Clinton from going to China to make herself and her country heard as champions of women's needs and rights.
The challenge for Mrs.
Clinton is to advance the cause of women without seeming to bless China's repressive treatment of its own citizens by her presence.
She can manage that if she is fearless in her defense of women throughout the world, including China, and makes clear that she does not condone the clumsy steps taken by the Chinese authorities to suppress dissent outside the conference halls.


Casey's General Stores Inc.(CASY,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 31


Nebraska's Phillips Can Play
Nebraska running back LAWRENCE PHILLIPS can play tomorrow against Oklahoma State and in other games even though a National Collegiate Athletic Association investigation is continuing.
CARRIE DOYLE, the N.C.A.A.'s director of eligibility, said yesterday that the association has determined that Phillips's lunch with an employee of a California sports agent, STEVE FELDMAN, will not affect his eligibility.


INSIDE
Maritime Future in Question
A new report suggests that New York, after spending millions to subsidize its shipping industry, might be better off letting it die.
Page B1.
Evelyn Wood Dies
The woman whose students could read full pages while others would still be reading this sentence died on Saturday in Arizona at 86.
Page D17.


Paxson Joining Bulls' Staff
The Chicago Bulls have signed the former guard JOHN PAXSON as an assistant coach, the club said yesterday.
Paxson, who retired after the 1993-94 season, joins TEX WINTER, JIM CLEAMONS and JIM RODGERS on Coach PHIL JACKSON's staff.
Paxson was a Bulls radio color commentator last season.
He played 11 seasons in the National Basketball Association, 9 with the Bulls, whom he helped win three straight championships. (AP)


Virtual Beer Data
To The Living Section:
As your seasonal beer story  [ "Niche Brewing: A Beer for Each Season," Aug. 16 ]  recognizes, some beer is going the way of fine wine: Small producers using quality natural ingredients brew small amounts of a high-quality beverage.
Many Americans are discovering beer as a drink that can be enjoyed year-round as an accompaniment to fine food.


Cape Hatteras Journal; Underwater Surgery to Save a Historic Warship
Since it sank in 1862, the legendary Union ironclad, the Monitor, has rested in a watery grave 16 miles off this town on North Carolina's Outer Banks.
The scientists who discovered it in 1973 feared that raising it would destroy the historic ship, so they left it intact, upside down in 230 feet of water.
But in 1993, marine archeologists photographing the ship found that the anchor of a passing ship had snagged on the wreck, leaving the Monitor's propeller above the corroding hull in a position that threatened to crush it or pull it apart.


With Glowing Memories To Light the Way Home; Team Week Caps the Season at Raquette Lake
On a clear August evening, the girls of Raquette Lake gathered in a semicircle near the lake's edge.
Through the clearing, they could see the orange glow of torches in the distance, outshining even the brilliant white reflection of the waxing moon.
A boat, a blue canoe, landed at the dock below.
From it emerged a tall, slender girl dressed all in blue, carrying the first torch: Alissa Koerner, the captain of the Blue Team.
Behind her, from a white canoe, stepped Lauren Leyden, captain of the White Team, carrying an identical torch.


Spiritual Quest Discovers A Reality Only Too Real
JOURNEY TO ITHACA By Anita Desai 312 pages. Alfred A. Knopf $23.
The search for meaning, or, as one of the spiritual insurgents in Anita Desai's new novel puts it, for the Divine Visage, can tear life to shreds.
It makes people blind to others, contemptuous of mere reality.
And yet, of course, those deranged by their quest for the Light dwell in a glow of heroism and purity.
When the Buddha sat for 40 days and 40 nights under the bodhi tree he was not tending to household chores.
We envy the spiritual searchers and we worship them, even as we find them vaguely disreputable.


Haiti Offers Incentives to Keep Opposition in Political Race
With opposition parties threatening to boycott a final round of parliamentary elections, President Jean-Bertrand Aristide has turned to old-fashioned political deal-making to lure his rivals back into the fray.
Overriding objections by some of his own supporters in the Lavalas Platform, Mr.
Aristide has offered Cabinet posts to some opposition parties if they will take part in the vote, scheduled for Sept. 17.
He has also promised not to field Lavalas candidates in some races and to provide financial support for opposition candidates, according to Haitian and foreign officials here.


Bring On Miami! Glenn Knows Ropes
There is no collective memory by the Jets of their bad times, Coach Rich Kotite insisted yesterday.
"Most of them haven't been here that long," he said.
If so, then Sunday's reunion against Dan Marino and the Dolphins at Miami -- in the cauldron of the season opener -- will present a Jets squad thinking of now, not then.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Time Warner Offering $8.5 Billion for Turner  Time Warner was said to be offering $8.5 billion to acquire Turner Broadcasting System, but Turner has not decided whether to accept the offer.
An executive close to the discussions said that Ted Turner was "enthusiastic" about folding his company into Time Warner.
Under the terms of the proposed deal, Time Warner would purchase the 81 percent of Turner that it does not already own.
Shareholders of Turner would receive seven-tenths to eight- tenths of a share in Time Warner in return for each of their shares in Turner.  [ Page A1. ] Time Warner was said to have agreed with Toshiba and Itochu to restructure their investments in its cable systems and movie studio.
The Japanese companies will swap their 11.2 percent stake in Time Warner Entertainment for preferred shares in the parent company.  [ D3. ] Mutual Stock Funds Attracted Record $12.4 Billion in July  Investors poured more money into mutual funds that invest in American stocks last month than ever before, and the trend in August appears to be as good or better.
The Investment Company Institute, a mutual fund trade group, reported that investors put a net $12.4 billion into equity funds that invest primarily in American stocks in July, up 57 percent from June.
The July figures smashed the record of $10.2 billion, set in March 1993.
Market Place.  [ A1. ] L'Oreal in Boycott Settlement  L'Oreal agreed to pay $1.4 million to settle a long-running investigation into charges that it violated American laws against cooperating with the Arab economic boycott of Israel.
The settlement is the second largest in the 17-year history of the American anti-boycott law.  [ D2. ] Honda Civic Meets Smog Standard  Honda said its new Civic subcompact model met emissions requirements set by California for 1997, making it the first gasoline-powered, mass-production car to do so.  [ D2. ] Dow Rises in Mixed Market  The stock market recovered from an early selloff in technology issues, and blue-chip stocks rallied.
The Dow industrials rose 14.44 points, to 4,608.44, but the Nasdaq composite index lost 4.51 points, to 1,003.64.  [ D6. ] Pulling the Plug on a Port?
New York's harbor, one of the nation's premier ports, has lost much of its business to docks on the New Jersey side.
City planning experts are asking whether New York would be better off if it let some or all of its commercial shipping business die.  [ B1. ] Self Magazine Editor Quits  Alexandra D. Penney, the fervent and mercurial editor in chief of Self magazine since 1989, again resigned.
The announcement comes 13 months after Ms.
Penney quit, then returned a week later.
She will stay until a successor is named.  [ D16. ] Speeding Up Your Passport  Travelers often experience long lines when applying for a visa or a passport, but a number of companies will navigate these regulatory minefields for individual travelers.
Most companies' standard services include processing passports, visas and documents for business transactions that require approval from the State Department and foreign consular offices.
Business Travel.  [ D16. ] Putting Fizz in Wine Ads  In a campaign by the Balet &amp; Albert agency, Food and Wines from France is emulating soft-drink marketers like Pepsi-Cola in presenting emotional, life-style-tinged messages.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D3. ]


Georgia Redistricting Battle: A Tale of 2 House Speakers
After doing battle for eight months with the likes of Bill Clinton and Dick Gephardt, after debating the great issues of the day and writing a best seller, Newt Gingrich might seem to have bigger fish to fry than Tom Murphy.
But that would ignore all the history between Mr.
Gingrich, the resolutely Republican Speaker of the United States House of Representatives, and Mr.
Murphy, the yellow-dog Democratic Speaker of the Georgia House of Representatives.
And, perhaps more important, it would ignore the ongoing political upheaval in the South, where Mr.
Gingrich's kind are threatening to make Mr.
Murphy the last of a breed.


Garrison Jackson Puts Heart Into It
This United States Open was scheduled to be her Grand Slam swan song, but Zina Garrison Jackson has decided her intended retirement was a false alarm.
After scraping through the first round with a 6-3, 1-6, 7-6 (7-5) victory over Kristie Boogert of the Netherlands yesterday, Garrison Jackson pronounced herself unprepared to give up the game.


League's Leading Loser Loses No-Hitter
Pirates 4, Rockies 0
Paul Wagner, leading the National League in losses, came within one strike of pitching perhaps the most unlikely no-hitter in major league history last night, sending the Pittsburgh Pirates past the visiting Colorado Rockies, 4-0.
Wagner (3-13) lost his no-hit bid with two outs in the ninth inning when Andres Galarraga hit an infield single on a 3-2 pitch.
Until then, Wagner, pitching only because the 11-game winner Denny Neagle has an eye infection, didn't come close to allowing a hit against a Rockies team that was leading the National League in hitting.


International Briefs; Fisons Is Selling Two Supply Units
Fisons P.L.C., the target of a hostile bid from the French-controlled drug company Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc., agreed yesterday to sell two distributors of scientific supplies for $310 million.
Fisher Scientific International Inc., based in Hampton, N.H., will pay cash for the units, Curtin Matheson Scientific Inc. of Houston and Fisons Scientific Equipment of Loughborough, England.


Graf's Struggles Continue in First-Round Victory
Her father is in a German prison, arrested for allegedly evading taxes on a heaping helping of the estimated $125 million she has earned ever since she went to work on the tennis court.
Her back has been aching since a burr of a bone spur began digging into her two years ago.


No Headline
"These were the only detonations of the whole war that made us happy. NATO has given us the hope we had lost." MAIDA DAJDZIC, a 35-year-old Sarajevo woman.  [ A1:4. ]


CHRONICLE
MICHAEL PALIN, comedian, novelist and traveler, is going fishing in the Bering Strait.
On Tuesday he left London on his way to Little Diomede, part of the Diomede Islands in the middle of the strait, which separates Alaska and Siberia.
There he will join 160 Eskimos who make their living fishing for whales, walruses and seals.
As they fish, they will be filmed for "Palin's Pacific," a documentary that will follow Mr.
Palin around the Pacific Rim, through Japan, Vietnam and other countries, ending in Alaska next August.
The documentary, Mr.
Palin's third, is a production of BBC Worldwide Americas and Prominent Television Ltd.
It will be broadcast in the fall of 1997 on PBS.


Corrections
A report in the Guide column in the Connecticut Weekly on Sunday about an auction of dictionaries signed by celebrities to benefit the Noah Webster House in West Hartford misstated the date.
It will be on Sept. 29, not tomorrow.


Sacrifices From New York's Teachers
Not since the fiscal crisis of the mid-1970's have New York City schools been as financially strapped as they are now.
The Board of Education's projected spending has already been cut $500 million this year and the system is struggling to find roughly $230 million in additional cuts before school starts in a week.
Now that the State Education Department has denied the city's request to shorten daily class hours, the options for savings are dwindling.
No one involved in the schools -- including the teachers at the core of the educational process -- can be spared the pain.
Layoffs of teachers may be avoided, according to announcements yesterday.
But further concessions should be demanded from teachers by the board and City Hall as negotiations begin on a new contract.


At an Italian Air Base, the Runways Roar
Each day for months, American F-16 and Marine Corps F-18 fighters, A-10 tank killers, British Awacs aircraft and Spanish F-16's have roared off the runway of this northern Italian air base, Bosnia-bound.
Indeed, such has been the number of trial runs and flights monitoring the no-flight zone in Bosnia, or training for air strikes, that the change in routine that began in the early morning hours today seemed to have been taken well in stride.


After City's Public Hospitals Close Their Doors; Who Will Treat Them?
To the Editor:
I am a primary-care physician working at a public Health and Hospitals Corporation hospital in the Bronx.
As a physician who has studied at H.H.C. hospitals and as an intern and resident from 1980 to 1988, I am acquainted with the shortcomings of this system.
However, I disagree with the recommendations of the Mayor's panel to dissolve the Health and Hospitals Corporation.


Specialty Equipment Cos.(SPEQ,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


A Time When Loose Lips Could Really Sink Ships
"Cartoons Go to War" is a snappy fly-by of the animated shorts that were used to instruct, caution and cheer Americans in camps and living rooms during World War II.
Heroes like Mickey, Donald and Bugs (a k a Super Rabbit) gave their all to the war effort and can still bring smiles, along with an occasional shudder at the Japanese-bashing ("Bugs Bunny Nips the Nips") and the theatrical German and Italian accents, all of course politically correct at the time.
The clever people at Disney, Warner Brothers and other studios found comical ways to sell war bonds, teach recruits how to repair planes and warn everybody against leaking secrets and spreading rumors.
They celebrated home-front sacrifice: Donald Duck learns, "Your country needs taxes to beat the Axis!" And they delivered good guy-bad guy propaganda in an inimitably American fashion.
"Der Fuehrer's Face" won an Academy Award for Disney.


Dispute on Bus Ends in Gunfire On Busy Street
A dispute that began aboard a city bus in the Bronx ended in a blazing shootout yesterday afternoon when two fleeing passengers and pursuing police officers exchanged about a dozen shots on a busy street, sending startled pedestrians ducking for cover, the police said.
One suspect was shot and taken to Our Lady Of Mercy Hospital, where he was listed in critical condition.
The other suspect was captured unhurt.
No police officers involved in the gun battle suffered any physical injuries, but at least six were treated for trauma at Jacobi Medical Center, the police said.
No civilians were reported injured, they said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17 NATO ENTERS BALKANS WAR After 40 months of hesitation, NATO stepped into the midst of the Bosnian war, pounding Bosnian Serb targets with air strikes and declaring that the bombardment would not stop until Sarajevo was secure.
A1 U.S.
SEEKS TO FORCE NEGOTIATIONS News analysis: The underlying goal of President Clinton's new policy is not only to end the capacity of the Bosnian Serbs to shell Sarajevo again but also to force them to the bargaining table.
A1 SARAJEVO CHEERS NATO BOMBING The people of Sarajevo cheered as NATO bombed the Bosnian Serbs.
"These were the only detonations of the whole war that made us happy," said one city resident.
A1 ATTACKS A 'MIDDLING' SUCCESS The NATO campaign has managed to "seriously reduce" the Bosnian Serb artillery around Sarajevo, the U.N. said.
But two Pentagon officials said the raids have had only "fair to middling" success.
A17 ROMANIA SUED OVER CHILD'S H.I.V.
Challenging a Government with one of the worst records for AIDS prevention in Europe, a couple is suing Romania for causing the H.I.V. infection of their daughter.
A3 NORTH KOREA TESTS ARMISTICE North Korea appears to be trying to destroy the armistice that has kept the peace since the Korean War, apparently in an effort to win a formal treaty with the U.S.
A10 Shevardnadze said he will run for the presidency of Georgia.A5 Mexican officials insisted that drug traffickers killed a Cardinal.
A7 Saddam Hussein's half brother criticized the Iraqi leader's son.
A8 Rebels in Sri Lanka hijacked a ferry loaded with civilians.
A9 Bishkek Journal: Kyrgyzstan reclaims its national hero.
A4 National A18-23, B12-13 DRUG FOR ABORTIONS A study has shown that abortions can be safely performed in early pregnancy by administering two prescription drugs that are already widely available.
A1 SHAPING A DEAL FOR TURNER Executives of Time Warner, Turner Broadcasting and Tele-Communications Inc. shuttled among New York hotel suites and conference rooms yesterday, rushing to hammer out an $8.5 billion deal for Time Warner to acquire Turner.
A1 PUGILISTIC POLITICS Residents of Alaska, a state not know for subtlety in politics, have been shocked by a physical attack on a visiting Democrat.
A18 RACIAL ANXIETY IN LOS ANGELES Former Detective Mark Fuhrman's comments, played on tape at the O. J. Simpson trial, exposed deep racial divisions within Los Angeles and its Police Department.
A18 CNN and Court TV carried the Fuhrman tapes unedited.
A18 FINDING ON LEG AT BLAST SITE Officials said a mystery leg found in the rubble of the Oklahoma City Federal Building belonged to a black woman.
A19 RULING ON SUICIDE DOCTOR Murder charges against Dr.
Jack Kevorkian were dismissed by a Michigan judge, who then indicated he might order the doctor to be tried assisted suicide charges.
A21 A WORRYING FINDING ON AIDS A study suggests that disinfectant sometimes used on medical and dental instruments does not always kill H.I.V. and patients thus have a potential risk.
A22 PILOT CITED IN CRASH The National Transportation Safety Board said that a runway collision of two airplanes in St.
Louis last November was caused by the pilot of the smaller plane.
A23 EXECUTION AND RETARDATION Barry Fairchild is to be executed on Thursday unless his lawyer persuades a court that he is too retarded to kill under Arkansas law.
B12 IMPLANT DEAL IN JEOPARDY Lawyers failed to meet a court deadline toward renegotiating a $4 billion settlement involving thousands of women who say they were injured by breast implants.
B12 PEROT SPEAKS ON MEDICARE Ross Perot lectured Congress on how to save Medicare from bankruptcy, saying it must be re-engineered by experts with fresh ideas for controlling costs.
B13 MASS QUIZZING OF U.S.
OFFICERS Federal investigators have surveyed more than 50,000 law-enforcement officers to find out who attended a Tennessee picnic that may have included racist and anti-Semitic activities.
B13 A civil liberties group reported an increase in books banned.
B13  Metro Digest B1 TURF WARS OVER DEATH PENALTY As New York City braces for that most solemn of legal events -- the return of the death penalty after two decades -- preparations have been marked by sniping and turf skirmishes between lawyers.
A1 Business Digest D1 Arts/Entertainment C13-18 Montreal's festival: 400 films from 63 nations in 12 days.
C13 How blacklisting hurt Hollywood children.
C13 Theater: Sexier "Twelfth Night." C15 Music: Roy Hargrove.
C14 Books: "Art and Money," by Marc Shell.
C16 TV: "Cartoons Go to War." C16 The Home Section C1-10 No hinges.
No knobs.
No jeans, either.
C1 L.I. wildfire: nature's tool.
C1 At home with Kinky Friedman: Married to the wind.
C1 Sports B16-22 Baseball: Yankees are back in the A.L. wild-card race.
B17 Basketball: Players vote on labor agreement.
B17 Columns: Araton on N.B.A.
B17 Smith on baseball.
B19 Football: Giants waive Graham, their backup quarterback.
B17 Marino-led Dolphins getting ready for the Jets.
B22 Holtz goes for No. 200.
B16 Sports People.
B16 Tennis: Hingis and Muster share center stage at U.S.
Open.
B17 Obituaries B15 Fischer Black, economist.
Frank Perry, film director.
Bartlett Jere Whiting, authority on Chaucer and proverbs.
Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25 Editorials Force and diplomacy in Bosnia.
New York teachers' sacrifices.
Polluted fish, polluted legislation.
Letters Maureen Dowd: What Calvin means.
William L. Silber and Roy C. Smith: A big bank is not an end in itself.
Claude M. Steel: Black students live down to expectations.
Chronicle B26 Bridge C14 Crossword C14


One Twin Killed, Other Is Hurt
One twin brother was killed and the other critically wounded when a gun battle broke out late Tuesday at a grocery story, the police said.
Eric Dixon, 30, of Elizabeth, had been feuding with the twins, Dwight and Dwayne Foster, 20, also of Elizabeth, and shot them both before being wounded in the leg by an unknown gunman, said Lieut.
Mark Kurdyla, a police spokesman.


As Depositors Panic, Japan Shuts Largest Credit Union
The crisis in Japan's banking system, stemming from hundreds of billions of dollars in bad real estate loans, took a big jolt today as Government authorities closed the nation's largest credit union and bailed out a regional bank on the brink of collapse.
In Osaka, hundreds of frantic customers clamored to withdraw their money from the Kizu Credit Cooperative, which had roughly $12 billion in assets and $9 billion in problem loans, as rumors of its impending shutdown circulated.
Many customers were still without their money when the doors closed this afternoon, though Government officials assured them that all deposits would be honored.


Texfi Industries(TXF,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 28


How Blacklisting Hurt Hollywood Children
To most American children in the late 1940's, J. Edgar Hoover was a hero, a stern but steadfast bulwark against crime and chaos.
To young Tony Kahn, however, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation was a bogeyman: a relentless enemy who attacked his family by day and unleashed faceless monsters, which pursued him through his dreams, by night.
"It turns out I was dreaming the truth," Mr.
Kahn says in "Blacklisted," a six-part radio mini-series he wrote, produced and narrated.
Some stations affiliated with National Public Radio have start carrying it already, and in New York, WNYC will carry it at 10:30 P.M. on six consecutive Saturdays starting Oct. 14.


No Audibles by Marino Concerning Stock Deal
Dan Marino wants to talk about football, only football.
In a conference call today, Marino would not discuss the National Football League's investigation into a stock windfall from the quarterback's $390,000 purchase in May of part of a company owned by the Dolphins' owner, Wayne Huizenga.
The company stock has since quintupled in value and Marino's stake is now worth almost $2 million.
Commissioner Paul Tagliabue said today that the integrity of the salary cap was at issue and that the league was determining whether a player, Marino, was being subsidized by a third party.
Marino will receive about $3.9 million this year, but his total compensation is placed at $4.9 million for the salary cap because of a previous bonus.


G&amp;K Services Inc.(GKSRA,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 1


New York Acts to Safeguard Drinking Water
To the Editor:
Desmond F. Lawler of the University of Texas urges New York City to install filters to treat its water supply (letter, Aug. 19).
Estimates of the costs of such filters have been quoted as high as $8 billion.


Intermetco Ltd. reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 31


Fourth Highest in Foreign-Born
New Jersey trails only California, New York and Florida in the percentage of foreign-born residents living in the state, the United States Census Bureau reported yesterday.
The bureau said that for the first time the total number of immigrants exceeded one million, representing 13.5 percent of the state's population.
For New Jersey, the percentage of foreign-born residents was the highest since World War II, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
But census figures dating back to 1900 show that the state has consistently had an immigrant population 5 to 10 percentage points larger than the nation's average.


Seizing the Future, Or Running Scared?
Gerald M. Levin has been running uphill ever since he got the job of chairman at Time Warner Inc. in early 1993.
He inherited a company with loads of promise but lots of problems.
And judging by the stock market's response in recent years, his performance has hardly been dazzling.
So why Turner?


Sports of The Times; Learning The Fax Of Strife
OUTSIDE Room 3614 at 26 Federal Plaza yesterday in lower Manhattan, the polls were open and Anthony Mason was getting some last-minute counsel from his agent, Don Cronson.
"I am for decertification," Cronson had said a few minutes earlier, as Marc Fleisher, one of so-called dissident leaders, stood nearby.


Implant Pact In Jeopardy As Lawyers Miss Deadline
Raising the possibility that a $4.25 million breast-implant settlement may collapse, lawyers failed yesterday to meet a court-imposed deadline to renegotiate the outline of a new agreement involving tens of thousands of women around the world who say they were injured by the implants.
Talks involving at least two of the five former silicone-implant manufacturers involved in the litigation are expected to continue, said lawyers familiar with the matter.
But lawyers representing both the manufacturers and women who received the implants said they had not made substantial progress on a settlement.


When Holtz Needs Help, He Looks Back to Hayes
The name Lou Holtz had not yet been listed among college football's coaching giants, because he had not yet become Lou Holtz.
He was 32 years old in the spring of 1969, a wise-cracking, pipe-smoking assistant at Ohio State, his fifth stop in the business.
Holtz was years away from the intense scrutiny that will resume this Saturday, when the Fighting Irish of Notre Dame will attempt to erase the memories of last year's 6-5-1 season, the most exasperating of his nine in South Bend.
If the Irish defeat Northwestern, Holtz, at the age of 58, will become the 14th major-college coach to direct his teams to 200 victories, a figure that was not reached by the likes of Fielding Yost, Dana X. Bible and Howard Jones.


Twins' Rally Tightens Up Wild Race
Twins 6, Rangers 2
Kirby Puckett and Marty Cordova homered during a five-run rally in the eighth inning, and the Minnesota Twins sent the visiting Texas Rangers to their fourth consecutive loss, 6-2, yesterday.
It was only Minnesota's second victory in 15 home day games this year.
The loss tightened the race for the American League wild card.
Texas still leads, but by the end of last night's action, the Rangers' edge was down to half a game over the Brewers, the Mariners and the Royals.


N.F.L. TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Cleveland Browns
The Browns moved a step closer yesterday to a big off-field victory: the signing of the All-Pro safety Eric Turner.
Turner, who was tied for the National Football League lead with nine interceptions last season, has apparently agreed to terms on a three-year contract, ending his 40-day holdout four days before the start of the season.


ARCO's Russian Oil Stake Is Seen as Unusual Strategy
Adopting an unusual strategy to gain a foothold in the Russian oil industry, the Atlantic Richfield Company said yesterday that it had put up $250 million to buy a stake in Lukoil, Russia's largest private oil company, which holds vast reserves in Siberia.
Analysts said it was the first time a Western company had sought to make such a large direct investment in a Russian oil company and wondered how it could translate a stake that could total about 7 percent into something more than buying good will.


Farewell to Wyoming Fairways


Treasury Prices Advance On Fed Official's Comment
Prices of Treasury securities ended higher yesterday, helped by a stronger dollar and by comments from a top Federal Reserve official pointing to lower interest rates.
But trading was thin, with many market participants staying on the sidelines until tomorrow's employment report.


Perot Tells Senate Committee It's Time to Get Experts' Opinions on Reining In Medicare
Ross Perot, who made a fortune selling computer services to the Government, lectured Congress today on how to save Medicare from bankruptcy, saying the program must be re-engineered by experts with fresh ideas for controlling costs.
Mr.
Perot, who is again considering running for President as an independent, repeatedly likened Medicare to a decrepit airplane.


Texfi Industries(TXF,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 28


Currents; How to Succeed . . .
NOW you can enter middle management without ever leaving home.
A new game, "The Tom Peters Business School in a Box," was designed and written by Eric Goldberg, a simulation-game designer, with Tom Peters, a co-author of the best-selling book "In Search of Excellence."


Battling Another Brush Fire


Currents; A Boutique Of Exclusives
IF it's not an antique, it's exclusive to Slatkin," is how Harry Slatkin describes the items for sale at the new 800-square-foot Slatkin &amp; Company boutique at Bergdorf Goodman, which opens Sept. 8. "We design everything ourselves.
There's nothing here you'll find anywhere else."
Mr.
Slatkin and his brother, Howard, an interior designer, have operated Slatkin &amp; Company at 131 East 70th Street for four years.
They often design original textile patterns for private clients, and some of these prints will be sold at the boutique.
Other Slatkin originals include delicate painted furniture, hand-painted silk pillows, terry-cloth robes, tole trays, china, desk sets, dog accessories, handmade porcelain flowers and a line of scented candles.
Prices range from $50 to $2,000.


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article yesterday about Chinese Government restrictions on the United Nations women's conference in Beijing was omitted from some copies, and a duplicate of an article about India appeared in its place.
The missing article is reprinted today on page A10.


In 'trolling for sponsors,' organizers of the 1996 Games are playing against the clock -- and trailing.
WITH less than 11 months to go before the torch is lit, Atlanta's Olympic organizers are entering the final miles of their marathon effort to raise all of their planned revenue -- $1.59 billion -- entirely from nongovernmental sources.
And by all accounts, it remains an uphill struggle.
The Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games said three years ago that it expected to sign between 40 and 50 corporate sponsors at price tags as high as $40 million.
Altogether, it wanted to raise about $660 million from the sponsors.
The rest is to come from television rights, ticket sales and other sources.


INSIDE
Finding on Mystery Leg
Officials said a mysterious severed leg recovered in the rubble of the Oklahoma City Federal Building belonged to a black woman.
Page A19.
Tough Test for Students
Despite a major push by New York City's Schools Chancellor, a relative few ninth graders passed statewide tests in math and science.
Page B1.


His Job Is to Yell 'Fire!' In a Crowded Forest; Perched Atop a Tower in New Jersey, Looking for Plumes of White Smoke
John Carbone has spent a long stretch of rainless days perched in isolation atop a fire tower in the mountains here, peering out from a cramped 7-foot-square cubicle at a stunning vista of New Jersey.
The Manhattan skyline is stark, 25 miles off to the southeast.
In all other directions, bright green ridges, mountaintops and valleys stretch to the horizon.
In his solitude, Mr.
Carbone, 23, has scanned it all, over and over and over again, eight hours a day for three weeks, looking for the first signs of the wispy white smoke of forest fires drifting up from the carpet of treetops before him.


Boston Scientific to Gain in Heart Technology Takeover
The Boston Scientific Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire Heart Technology Inc., a maker of a device that reopens clogged arteries, in a stock swap valued at $500 million.
Heart Technology's product, the Rotoblator, has grown in use as an alternative to balloon angioplasty, the leading nonsurgical treatment for blocked arteries since its approval by the Food and Drug Administration two years ago.


Currents; Secret Friends: Just Fold To Mail
JEFFREY MILSTEIN, owner of Paper House Productions in Woodstock, N.Y., is putting his training as an architect to work in his new designs for greeting cards (above right).
They come in crisp geometric shapes and are printed with bold stripes and primary colors.
The cards, called Fun Houses, come flat to fit into envelopes.
Each folds into a four-inch-high, boxlike paper house with a peaked roof.
Children especially should enjoy the peekaboo window on one side that reveals photographs of people and dogs inside.


Safety Board Ties 2 Crashes To Pilot Error
The National Transportation Safety Board said yesterday that a runway collision of two airplanes in St.
Louis last November that killed two people was caused by the pilot of the smaller plane mistakenly thinking he was on his assigned runway when he moved into the path of a Trans World Airlines MD-80 jet trying to take off.
The safety agency, which typically takes months to determine conclusively the causes of crashes, also released its report yesterday on the crash of a DC-8 cargo jet in Kansas City in February.
The three crew members in that crash were killed after they tried a tricky maneuver to take off with only three of four engines working.


Growth Revised Upward, but It Was Still Weak
The economy grew at a somewhat faster clip in the second quarter than originally estimated, the Government said yesterday, but the rate of expansion was still the weakest in nearly four years.
For the April-June period, the Commerce Department said gross domestic product, which measures all goods and services, grew at an annual rate of 1.1 percent on an inflation-adjusted basis, more than double the rate of a half of 1 percent reported a month ago, when a preliminary estimate of second quarter growth was released.


Nine West Group Inc.(NIN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Picketers' Efforts Scaled Back
After the 38th day of picketing at the home of Mayor Bret Schundler of Jersey City, protesters were ordered by a Superior Court judge yesterday to scale back their effort.
The Mayor has sued to try to stop the picketing by a group of residents who are angry because the city's highest-ranking black officer was reassigned from a policy-making role to a supervisory post.
Judge Richard T. Nieto ordered the group to demonstrate only from 11 A.M. to 2 P.M. two days a week, with no more than four people at a time.
The group's leader, Councilwoman Melissa Holloway, said she would simply move the demonstration to City Hall on the other days.


Economic Scene
IS a revamping of the civil justice system another one-day wonder, an issue that lets politicians tut-tut over waste, fraud and abuse before it is nibbled to death by lobbyists?
It certainly is looking that way, as Congressional Republicans shuffle toward unambitious limitations on shareholder suits and product liability and President Clinton threatens to veto almost any change of substance that hits his desk.
But there is one area of civil justice that could win political points for Republicans long after the public has moved on to fresher outrages: auto insurance overhaul.


Ex-Detective's Tapes Fan Racial Tensions in Los Angeles
Mark Fuhrman's racist comments, heard on tape and read from transcripts yesterday at O. J. Simpson's murder trial, have exposed deep racial divisions within Los Angeles and its police force.
And even as police officers and residents here condemned the remarks, some said that playing the comments in court would ultimately aggravate racial and ethnic tensions in a city still recovering from the rioting that broke out after the 1992 acquittal of four white policemen in the videotaped beating of a black driver, Rodney G. King.


Mideast Peace Won't Be Stopped by Extremists
To the Editor:
Re "Israelis Want Peace" (letter, Aug. 25): Despite Israel Polak's claim to the contrary, the objectives of the Palestinian organization Hamas and the Israeli right-wing Likud Party are parallel and in agreement on the first task at hand.
Both wish to stop the peace process and deny the other people statehood.


Heidemij NV(HEIDF,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Pettitte Goes Distance to Keep Yanks in Wild-Card Race
Andy Pettitte had lasted a grand total of three and one-third innings his last two starts, surrendering a dozen earned runs over that span.
What better time for the young left-hander to try a new pitch -- even if he was going up against one of the better-hitting lineups in the American League?


Noted Photographer's Wife Charged in Theft of His Art
In 1984, O. Winston Link, a well-known photographer of steam engines and railroad towns, married Conchita Mendoza at a symbolic spot, a general store in Green Cove, Va., that was the setting for several of his pictures.
But yesterday, the lives of the now-divorced couple arrived at a less scenic but equally dramatic stop: a courthouse in Westchester County where Ms.
Mendoza was charged with grand larceny in the theft of 1,400 prints of her husband's famous photographs.


Expensive, Exotic Birds Are Targets Of Thieves
A trio of thieves has stolen at least five exotic birds valued at more than $1,000 each from pet shops in Nassau County in the last week, the police said today.
All the thefts occurred during regular store hours.
The police said that in most cases two of the thieves, a man and a woman, distracted a clerk while a third stole the bird.


Liberties; What Calvin Means
Statement from Calvin Klein, Inc. (With subtext by Calvin)
The message of the CK Calvin Klein Jeans current advertising campaign is that young people today, the most media savvy generation yet, have a real strength of character and independence.


Frank Perry, 65, the Director Who Filmed 'David and Lisa'
Frank Perry, the director of "David and Lisa," "Diary of a Mad Housewife," "Mommie Dearest," "On the Bridge" and other films, died on Tuesday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 65 and lived in Aspen, Colo.
The cause was prostate cancer, said the writer Barbara Goldsmith, who was his second wife.


Specialty Equipment Cos.(SPEQ,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


Bartlett Jere Whiting, 90, an Authority on Chaucer and Proverbs
Bartlett Jere Whiting, a professor emeritus of English at Harvard University who was renowned for his compilations of proverbs and for his classes on Chaucer, died last Thursday at Waldo County Hospital in Belfast, Me.
He was 90 and lived in Northport, Me., in the house where he was born.
Professor Whiting was a scholar of Middle English whose witty classes on the great early English poet were a fixture of campus life at Harvard for some 40 years.


Butcher in Bronx Is Killed, And Police Suspect Mob Hit
A 71-year-old Bronx butcher was shot to death and his brother was critically injured late Tuesday during a drive-by shooting that the police said appeared to be a mob hit.
The two men, Mario Petrullo and his brother, Anthony Petrullo, 68, were driving away from a bowling alley on the corner of Hutchinson and Hollers Avenues in Eastchester when two gunmen drove alongside and opened fire, killing Mario and hitting Anthony several times in the head, said Officer Debra Kearns, a police spokeswoman.


Weather Threatens Launching of Shuttle
Low, dark clouds and rain, the lingering effects of Tropical Storm Jerry, threatened to delay the launching of the space shuttle Endeavour, scheduled for 11:04 A.M. on Thursday.
Meteorologists said there was a 60 percent chance that weather conditions would force a postponement of at least one day.
But technicians at the Kennedy Space Center continued preparations today without interruption, hoping for a break in the weather during the two and a half hours in which the liftoff could occur.


After City's Public Hospitals Close Their Doors; Emergency-Room Habit
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 28 news article on difficulties that result from the forced marriage of Medicaid and managed care in New York State suggests that Medicaid managed-care patients use the emergency room because of long waits for service at health maintenance organizations.
While expanding the primary-care physician supply is critical to moving the state's Medicaid population into managed care, changing the health-care-seeking behavior of the poor is equally important.


Shaky 9th-Grade Test Results As Math and Science Toughen
Even though thousands more New York City ninth graders took and passed tougher college-level mathematics and science courses this spring, only a relative few passed the statewide standardized tests for those subjects.
The students took the courses as part of a push by Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines to raise the city's academic standards.
In the past, these Regents-level courses were generally taken by college-bound students.
Others took what Mr.
Cortines called "bonehead" math and science classes, learning how to balance a checkbook or make change from a register.
Last year, Mr.
Cortines abruptly halted those classes for ninth graders and required them to take Regents math and science.


Part of the Problem
To The Home Section:
Lucy Danziger is right.
She is part of a national problem, as evidenced by her decision to undergo a scheduled Caesarean birth, blithely dismissing all medical and maternal advice to the contrary.
She fails to gain reader sympathy, for she fails to render evidence of responsible decision-making.
The reader is left to imagine a silent husband concerned about the undue strains of delivery upon his wife.


Man in Jordan Prison for Murder Of Wife in New Jersey Is Indicted
A man who is serving time in a Jordanian prison for strangling his wife in New Jersey was indicted today by a Morris County grand jury on charges of first-degree murder and kidnapping.
Mohammad I. Abequa, a naturalized American citizen, fled to his native Jordan with the couple's two children in July 1994, a few days after killing his wife, Nihal, in her Parsippany-Troy Hills apartment.
After Mr.
Abequa was apprehended, King Hussein allowed the children, Lisa and Sami, who were 6 and 3 at the time, to return to New Jersey to live with their mother's sister, Nesime Dokur.


CHRONICLE
The artist AL HIRSCHFELD is no Deadhead.
"I'm a swing enthusiast," said Mr.
Hirschfeld, who is 92.
But two weeks ago, when MARGO FEIDEN, his dealer of 25 years, suggested that he draw a portrait of the Grateful Dead's Jerry Garcia, who died on Aug. 9, Mr.
Hirschfeld produced an image (shown at right) working from photographs of the musician.
Mr.
Hirschfeld said of the drawing: "It drew itself. It went rather fast, because his character is so obvious, it's so likable."
"He has a kind, pixilated face, and he was a charismatic character," the artist continued.
"He's bigger than life -- and that reflects in the way he looks, just from the way he stands."


COMPANY BRIEFS
COMMUNITY BANKSHARES INC., Concord, N.H., a savings and loan holding company, plans to acquire Centerpoint Bank, Bedford, N.H., a state-chartered commercial bank, for $10.5 million, or $17.70 a share, in a stock-swap transaction.
HOME SHOPPING NETWORK INC., Clearwater, Fla., said it was seeking a buyer for a subsidiary, Ortho-Vent Inc. of Salem, Va., which markets Stuart McGuire men's shoes via mail orders.


Reeves Gives Giants a Wake-Up Call for Cowboys
Kent Graham went to work this morning thinking it would be like any other day.
When he arrived at Giants Stadium, Coach Dan Reeves wanted to speak to him.
It was the beginning of a day that would rock the Giants' locker room; a day when Dave Brown should begin looking over his shoulder.
"The conversation took one minute," Graham said today in a telephone interview.
"Dan said: 'Kent, we're waiving you. Tommy Maddox is coming in. Have a good day.' That was it. I was so shocked I didn't know what to say. I was stunned.


Four-Posters for Fido
IN the doggy days of summer, where might a dog lay its weary head?
Two years ago, Addison Berkey, a house restorer, designed a four-poster bed for his dog, then showed it to his friend Diana King.
From that one bed sprouted a partnership and a company -- Beastly Beds, in Pine Plains, N.Y.


Goal of Bombers: The Bargaining Table
When he learned of the intensive NATO air strikes on Bosnian Serb positions around Sarajevo, the President of Bosnia's Muslim-dominated Government, Alija Izetbegovic, told reporters, "The world has finally done what it should have done a long, long time ago."
No doubt many agreed with him, not only his own countrymen but people of other nationalities around the world who have been horrified for more than three years by pictures of Muslim civilians maimed or killed by Bosnian Serb artillery and mortars.
Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, has long since earned an international reputation as a heartless bully.


Panel Backs Major Fix-Up Of Erie Canal For Tourists
Over the objections of Gov.
George E. Pataki, a state commission today approved a $146 million plan to remake the Erie Canal into a 524-mile-long tourist attraction replete with outdoor cafes, bike paths and pier-side retail shops.
By an 8-to-3 vote, the Canal Recreationway Commission approved the plan to refurbish the 170-year-old canal system, which includes the original Erie Canal, from Troy to Tonawanda, and connecting waterways that reach Lake Ontario and Lake Champlain.
The three dissenting votes were cast by Mr.
Pataki's representatives on the commission.


N.B.A. Vote Raises Puzzling Questions
National Basketball Association players went to the polls yesterday, but many didn't like it and many were confused.
On the first of two days of a National Labor Relations Board election on the decertification of the union, players said it was unfair that the election had also been turned into a referendum on the union's tentative six-year labor agreement with the league.


No Pizazz By Piazza Is Permitted By the Mets
One more game and the Dodgers can bid good riddance to the Mets, who seem determined to single-handedly sabotage Los Angeles's attempt to win the National League West.
The surprising Mets defeated the Dodgers for the fifth straight time tonight with an easy 8-1 victory that left the home team wondering what it had to do to beat the last-place team in the N.L.
East.


Lawyers Prepare for New York's Death Penalty
Dennis C. Vacco, the New York Attorney General, says his motives were pure when he sent a letter to state prosecutors, saying he was ready to help them press the new death penalty, which takes effect tomorrow.
He already has a team -- two trial lawyers and an investigator -- primed to rush in at a moment's notice.
But while Mr.
Vacco is on standby for prosecutors, prosecutors may not be standing by for him.
"If he wants to be helpful to us, there's a way of doing it, and it's not by sending out blunderbuss letters," said Charles J. Hynes, the Brooklyn District Attorney and president of the New York State District Attorneys Association.
Money, he noted, not more lawyers, would be welcome.


Market Place; CS First Boston and an ex-trader are fined over trading strategy.
AS Wall Street has dreamed up new trading techniques, regulators have put in rules to keep the techniques from roiling markets.
And the traders have then tried to find ways to make money from playing games with the new rules.
Yesterday, the New York Stock Exchange and the Chicago Board Options Exchange said they had determined that CS First Boston and its former head of program trading, Andrew A. Ellner, went too far with those games, and announced fines of $450,000 for the firm and $125,000 for Mr.
Ellner.


Sex and Low Humor Beyond Shakespeare's
K.
G.
Wilson apparently decided that if there is confusion about sex and identity in "Twelfth Night," along with some low humor, there might as well be more of both.
In the Kings County Shakespeare Company production playing at the band shell in Prospect Park in Brooklyn through Sunday, this energetic director changes several male roles into female ones and often turns the antics of Sir Toby Belch and his friends into slapstick. (The one person who always rises above that level is Lynn Marie Macy as Maria the maid: bawdy, sexy, smart, as tempting as spiced honey.)
This performance inspires more outbursts of laughter than most productions, but at a cost.
What is lost is the air of romance that should infuse the opening scenes and, at the end, give an audience a sense of fulfillment that makes it forget humiliating moments in between.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about an initial public offering planned by Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Inc. misstated when the Equitable Companies acquired the brokerage firm in some editions.
It was 1985, not 1974.


Disabled Man Hears Intruder Kill Wife
A 70-year-old woman was killed during a break-in at her Brooklyn home yesterday morning as her bedridden 88-year-old husband listened to her cries from their second-floor bedroom, the police said.
Anna and Victor DeBicary, of 553 54th Street in Sunset Park, were awakened early yesterday morning by noises coming from the first floor, said Doram Tamari, a police spokesman.
Mrs.
DeBicary went downstairs to investigate, but never returned.


Gerald Breese, 83, Urban Sociologist
Gerald W. Breese, a sociologist who analyzed the structure and growth of large urban areas, particularly in the third world, died on Friday at the Meadow Lakes retirement community in Hightstown, N.J.
He was 83.
The cause was leukemia, his family said.


Fischer Black, 57, Wall Street Theorist, Dies
Fischer Black, an economist whose groundbreaking work in financial theory helped revolutionize modern Wall Street, died yesterday at his home in New Canaan, Conn., after a yearlong battle with cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Black, 57, was a partner in the investment banking firm of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Montreal Trustco reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


Currents; New Ways To Tame Small Space
"WE architects are being asked to make a lot out of a little today," said Norman Smith of Washington, the author of the new "Small Space Living Design" (Rockport, $34.95).
"Houses have to work harder."
Photographs, drawings and plans included in the book show how dozens of architects like Clark &amp; Menefee and Hariri &amp; Hariri have built additions or reinvented existing spaces to serve new functions. (Above, interior and exterior views of a small kitchen addition by Mr. Smith.) There are lots of ideas to borrow.


Chinese Aides Vex a Women's Forum
Just after dawn today, a senior staff member of an international women's forum assembling here left her hotel room for stroll around Huairou reservoir, where the mist-shrouded Fragrant Hills loomed to the west and the morning light caught delicate pagodas in silhouette.
A policeman stepped into her path and ordered her back to her room.


Transactions
Auto Racing  Nascar Winston Cup
ROUSH RACING -- Signed Jeff Burton, driver, to a multiyear contract.
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Placed Lee Tinsley, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Matt Stairs, outfielder, from Pawtucket of the International League.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Placed Chico Lind, infielder, on waivers for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
Recalled Andy Allanson, catcher, from Lake Elsinore of the California League.
National League
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Recalled Eddie Perez, catcher, from Richmond of the International League.
International League
ROCHESTER RED WINGS -- Announced they have placed Russ McGinnis, infielder, on the disabled list, retroactive to Aug. 28.
Added Edgar Alfonzo, infielder, to the roster.
Football  National Football League
ARIZONA CARDINALS -- Signed Walter Dunson, running back-kick returner; Carlos Brooks, cornerback; and Jerry Drake, defensive lineman, to the practice squad.
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Agreed to terms with Eric Turner, safety, on a three-year contract.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed Kirby Dar Dar, running back; Jason James, offensive lineman; Calvin Jackson, cornerback; Chico Nelson, safety; and Joe Planansky, tight end, to the practice squad.
Placed Kevin Brothen, center, on injured reserve.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Signed Rickey Brady, tight end, to the practice squad.
Waived Selwyn Jones, cornerback, and Jeff Davidson, guard-tackle, from injured reserve.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Waived Kent Graham, quarterback. Signed Tommy Maddox, quarterback.
ST. LOUIS RAMS -- Signed Dave Barr, quarterback. Released John Reece, cornerback.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Signed Terrence Warren, wide receiver-kick returner, and Tim Harris, defensive end.
Waived Darryl Hall, safety.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Signed Kris Pollack, guard, to the practice squad.
Canadian Football League
CALGARY STAMPEDERS -- Signed Bob Torrance, quarterback.
SASKATCHEWAN ROUGHRIDERS -- Signed Donny Brady, defensive back.
Released Albert Brown, cornerback.
SHREVEPORT PIRATES -- Signed Preston Jones, quarterback, to the practice squad.
Released Curt Douglas and Bobby Hamilton, defensive linemen, and Reggie Robinson, defensive back, from the practice squad.
Hockey  National Hockey League
NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Agreed to terms with Mick Vukota, right wing.
TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS -- Acquired the rights to Dimitri Yushkevich, defenseman, from the Philadelphia Flyers for 1996 first- and fourth-round draft picks, and a 1997 second-round draft pick.
International Hockey League
CINCINNATI CYCLONES -- Signed Mike Dagenais, defenseman, to a one-year contract.
HOUSTON AEROS -- Signed Myles O'Connor, defensman.
LAS VEGAS THUNDER -- Signed Gord Mark and Greg Hawgood, defensemen.
LOS ANGELES ICE DOGS -- Signed Mark Krys and Steve Bancroft, defensemen.
MICHIGAN K-WINGS -- Named Matt Koeck equipment manager.
PHOENIX ROADRUNNERS -- Signed Ken McRae, center, to a two-year contract. Soccer  CISL
MONTERREY LA RAZA -- Signed Samuel Ekeme, defender, to a two-year contract. College
CALDWELL -- Named Dean Johnson softball coach, and Donna McGoldrick and Gary Varjian women's assistant basketball coaches.
CENTRE -- Named Brian Chafin women's interim basketball coach.
CLEVELAND STATE -- Named Bill Reith fencing coach.
MARIST -- Named Colin Sullivan assistant to the athletic director for operations.
MOREHEAD STATE -- Named John Dorosario assistant athletic trainer.
NAZARETH, N.Y. -- Named Nelson Whitmore men's assistant basketball coach; Kevin Cox assistant lacrosse coach; and Lorrrie Deyle and Cathy Moss women's assistant soccer coaches.
NIAGARA -- Named Jennifer Pasternak and Christine McGee women's assistant basketball coaches, and Jessica Gaglianese assistant athletic trainer.
NORTH CAROLINA-CHARLOTTE -- Named Stephen Ott assistant cross-country and track and field coach.
PEPPERDINE -- Named John Weida assistant trainer.
PFEIFFER -- Named Jason Barker women's soccer coach.
PITTSBURGH -- Named Bobby Jones associate head basketball coach.
WAGNER -- Named Glen Payne softball coach.


Polluted Fish, Polluted Legislation
If anyone needs further proof that the House of Representatives is behaving recklessly when it undermines the nation's air and water pollution laws, he will find it in a Federal report released on Monday.
The report says that in 1994, nearly every state in the country issued warnings advising the public to avoid or limit the consumption of fish caught in local waters.
It also says that the total number of "health advisories" nationwide rose 20 percent from 1993.
Yet the House would now allow even more pollution.
To some extent, these increases reflect improved reporting by state agencies.
But they also mean that the wider these agencies cast their net, the more contaminated bodies of water they find.
Nine states issued advisories covering all their waters.
These warnings do not mean the fish should not be eaten.
But they do suggest caution.
New York, for example, advises that consumption be limited to half a pound a week of fish taken from the state's fresh-water bodies.


CS First Boston Newcomer To Build Mortgage Products
Seeking to bolster its mortgage- and asset-backed securities business, cobiCS First Boston has hired Andrew D. Stone, the former head of the mortgage products business of Daiwa Securities America Inc.
Mr.
Stone will be charged with rejuvenating CS First Boston's mortgage-backed securities business, which went into a tailspin over the last two years as several traders and executives who specialized in mortgage products defected to Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, a unit of Morgan Stanley Group Inc., and the market for the volatile securities dried up.


Four-Day Jail Term for Rider
The Minnesota Timberwolves' ISAIAH RIDER was sentenced to four days in jail yesterday when a judge in Minneapolis revoked his probation on a 1994 assault conviction.
Hennepin County District Judge DOLORES OREY found that Rider, the Wolves' leading scorer last season, had violated the terms of his probation by failing to stay in touch with his probation officer.
Rider reported to the county's Adult Detention Center last night and will be held there until until 7 A.M.
Saturday.


Port Authority Has Long Favored New Jersey, Pataki Says
In comments that could add fuel to a simmering border war with New Jersey, Gov.
George E. Pataki said tonight that New York had been traditionally shortchanged in the web of operations administered by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
"The Port Authority has been in the past very poorly run and has favored New Jersey over New York," Mr.
Pataki said at an impromptu news conference before he addressed a gathering of the state's police chiefs here.
"I've made that plain a dozen times. I think it needs significant restructuring and changing of priorities."


Plot Changing Sharply on Showalter Success Story
What is unfolding in baseball in New York City this season is not a tale of two cities, but a tale of two managers.
For the Mets, the emergence from the horrors of the early 1990's is seen as change of a positive nature, leaving the organization to decide whether the veteran manager Dallas Green or simply someone greener should marshal their young talent from here on.


The Tie That Binds, From a World Away
IN a courtroom in Frederick, Md., a divorced couple and a handful of lawyers wrestled last year with a central issue of being a parent: how best to create a world where a child can grow healthy and confident, curious and challenged, safe and happy.
The mother, a diplomat named Elizabeth Rood, wanted to take her children, then age 11, 9 and 6, to the American Embassy in Moscow where she was scheduled for a three-year tour.
The father, Mark Kimbrell, argued against allowing them to go, saying that among the more generic considerations like the effect of uprooting children, Moscow would pose peculiar hazards: their health would be at risk from the city's poor air quality and long winters.


Calendar: Art, Talks And Farmers' Designs
Mississippi Inspiration Liberty Street Gallery, World Financial Center (225 Liberty Street off West Street); (212) 945-0505.
An exhibition of paintings, sculpture and carvings by folk artists from the Mississippi Delta region opens on Tuesday and continues through Oct. 8.
The artists include Bessie Harvey, Herbert Singleton and Mary T. Smith.


Asia-Pacific Regional Trade Group Is Showing Signs of Life
A six-year effort to strengthen trade and economic cooperation among the United States and 17 other nations in the Asia-Pacific region is showing new signs of vigor.
At a meeting in Indonesia last November of heads of government of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, President Clinton and the other leaders set 2010 as the goal for "free and open trade and investment" among the group's richer nations, with a target of 2020 for the poorer countries.
Now, efforts are under way to accelerate the trade-liberalization process.


Currents; Playing With the Magic Of Light
THE main waiting room at Grand Central Terminal is "on a Roman scale," said Hsin-Ming Fung of Hodgetts &amp; Fung, Los Angeles architects who designed the installation "The Magic of Play," a monthlong photography show opening there on Tuesday.
"You can never win over this space, so we played with its scale," she said.


Leg in the Oklahoma City Rubble Was That of a Black Woman
The mystery of a severed human leg found in the wreckage of the Oklahoma City Federal Building appeared to be partly solved today when the Oklahoma medical examiner issued a report saying the limb belonged to a black woman.
The authorities have not yet identified the woman who they said would be counted as the 168th victim of the April 19 bombing.
But Federal law-enforcement officials said the determination of the race and sex tended to rule out the possibility that the victim was a suspect because neither of the men charged in the blast were seen in the company of a black woman.


A Familiar Face Gets a Scrubbing


Trumpeter Shows Off Surprises
The Panasonic Village Jazz Festival held its major event on its last day: a free concert by the Roy Hargrove Big Band in Washington Square Park on Monday afternoon.
Mr.
Hargrove, an outstanding young trumpeter, usually leads small groups, and his big band was a cautious advance into new territory.
Like Mr.
Hargrove's small groups, the big band's stylistic center is hard-bop, and it delves into ballads and standards.
Playing arrangements by Mr.
Hargrove and other band members, including Ron Blake (saxophone) and Stephen Scott (piano), the 17-piece band followed the template of groups led by Toshiko Akiyoshi and Thad Jones and Mel Lewis.


With L.I. Fire Nearly in Check, Tanker Planes Are Sent Home
The giant tanker planes sent to Long Island on Saturday to fight a mammoth brush fire left for home today as Federal officials said they were close to declaring the blaze under control.
But to prevent other fires, the Long Island Rail Road began spraying water along nearly 10 miles of track that winds through parched forested areas between Amagansett and Montauk, and the authorities said that Federal firefighting teams would probably remain on the Island well past Labor Day.


Bridge
If a four-four fit in a major suit is known to exist, selection of a game contract is usually easy.
But if, as sometimes happens, it is known that the suit will break badly, there is considerable room for misgiving.
The diagramed deal was played in the Tri-State Regional Swiss Teams played in Port Chester, N.Y., in January.
The South player was Kenneth Jacobs of Mamaroneck, N.Y., and he eventually settled in four hearts, knowing that there would be four or five trumps on his left.
As it turned out, three no-trump would have been much easier.


Woman and Daughter Stabbed to Death
A 17-year-old girl and her mother were stabbed to death Tuesday night by two men who broke into their home and spent hours ransacking it, the Suffolk County police said today.
The woman's husband, who came home during the robbery, was also stabbed.
He was listed in critical condition and was undergoing surgery tonight at State University Hospital at Stony Brook.


Prudential Pact: $110 Million To Settle Suit
Nearly two years after Prudential Securities agreed to repay every customer it cheated in the biggest investment fraud in history, the firm has been forced to open its wallet again.
A Federal judge in Manhattan has granted preliminary approval to a $110 million settlement of a class-action lawsuit that accused Prudential of engaging in a racketeering conspiracy in its fraudulent sale of limited partnerships in the 1980's, according to court records filed yesterday.


Crash on Second Avenue


Force and Diplomacy in Bosnia
Yesterday's Western military intervention in the Balkan war may lead to wider fighting and Bosnian Serb reprisals against civilians, but there is also a chance it will help produce a political settlement.
It was a risk worth taking in this particular situation and for the purpose of sustaining the specific diplomatic initiative now under way.
For the first time since the Bosnian conflict began three years ago, America and its allies used punishing force against the Bosnian Serbs, launching multiple air and artillery strikes.
After Monday's deadly shelling of the central Sarajevo market, the Clinton Administration, with important Republican backing, decided that Western military credibility had to be established so that the current American diplomatic initiative could proceed.


North Korea's New Target: The Armistice
On the most heavily fortified border in the world, the Communist authorities of North Korea appear to be trying to destroy the armistice that has kept the peace since the end of the Korean War.
Most of the worry about North Korea has focused on its suspected nuclear weapons program, but some experts believe the challenge to the armistice also poses a significant threat to peace on the Korean Peninsula.


Tufts Divided on Freshman Who Killed Mother
As they awaited Gina Grant's arrival at Tufts University today, students voiced criticism and support for the 19-year-old Miss Grant, whose admission to Harvard University was rescinded after it was learned that she had killed her mother.
This morning members of a conservative student journal, The Primary Source, posted hundreds of fliers on campus criticizing administrators for what they described as hypocritical behavior for accepting Miss Grant, who pleaded no contest when she was 14 to fatally bludgeoning her mother, Dorothy Mayfield, 42, with a candlestick in 1990.


ABORTION METHOD USING TWO DRUGS GAINS IN A STUDY
A large new study being published in a leading medical journal concludes that abortions can be safely and effectively performed in early pregnancy by administering two prescription drugs that are already widely available.
If even bigger studies bear out that finding, the treatment is expected to transform the practice of abortion in this country by allowing women to obtain abortions without surgery and in the privacy of a doctor's office, specialists in reproductive health said yesterday at a news conference where the results of the research were discussed.


The Fun Begins Near the Lockers
The Flushing Meadows tennis complex is usually the target of player complaints, most of them justified, but Luke Jensen had only accolades for the renovated locker room.
Too bad the facility will be defunct in two years if the new $220 million stadium actually is completed on schedule.


In the Northernmost State, Politics Takes a Pugilistic Turn
Politics in the Last Frontier State has long been a bare-knuckle trade where opinions are seldom sheathed in the kind of politeness found elsewhere.
But even by local standards, the recent physical attack on a visiting Democratic lawyer from Capitol Hill has left many people stunned.
Jeffrey P. Petrich, the minority counsel to the House Resources Committee, was beaten in the face and on the side of the head by John Winther, a prominent Republican campaign contributor, according to a police report and the accounts of several people who saw the Aug. 13 incident.


Edison Brothers Stores Inc.(EBS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Arrest Order for Lassiter
An arrest order was issued in Raleigh, N.C., yesterday for ROY LASSITER, a member of the United States national soccer team, after he failed to appear for a hearing on 3-year-old charges of breaking-and-entering and forgery.
Lassiter's lawyer, CONRAD AIRALL, sought a delay, telling Wake District Judge WILLIAM CREECH that his client was in Costa Rica playing professional soccer and would arrive in North Carolina today, according to a court official.


Voice of America Seeks Private Financing
Faced with severe budget cuts, the Voice of America is seeking other sources of money to help pay for its broadcasts to Europe.
The radio service announced the move a month after the House voted to cut $54 million out of a proposed $395 million budget for the United States Information Agency's broadcasting services.
The Senate is expected to vote on the bill after it returns from recess next week.


Lancaster Colony Corp.(LANC,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Attempts to Ban Textbooks
Three incidents of attempted censorship were reported in New Jersey public schools during the last school year, placing the state 36th among the 50 states in a ranking of censorship cases, a liberal advocacy group said yesterday.
In all, 458 incidents in 49 states were reported by teachers, librarians, school officials and parents, a study by People for the American Way found.
In Palmyra, the school board banned the textbook "Populations" from an eighth-grade science class after parents claimed it contained age-inappropriate and biased information.
But efforts by parents in Bloomfield and Montville to remove other textbooks proved unsuccessful, the report said.


Governor Puts Foot to the Pedal
First, New Jerseyans were treated to Bradley on the Beach.
Today, they get a chance to see Whitman on Wheels.
Governor Whitman, an avid cyclist, will cross New Jersey by bicycle, starting at Washington Crossing State Park and winding up at Point Pleasant Beach.
Last year, the Governor posted 52 miles in a bike trip that took her from Trenton to Seven Presidents Park in Long Beach, her spokesman, Carl Golden, said.
The Governor is undertaking the effort "because she's an outdoor person and loves to talk to people," Mr.
Golden said.
Senator Bill Bradley walked the state's beaches earlier this week.
TERRY PRISTIN


Murder Charges Against Kevorkian in 1991 Case Are Dismissed
Murder charges against Dr.
Jack Kevorkian were dismissed today by a Michigan judge, who then indicated that if asked, he would order the doctor to be tried instead on charges of assisted suicide in a 1991 case involving the deaths of two women.
"There is no proof of the necessary elements for a murder charge," said the judge, David F. Breck of Oakland County Circuit Court.
He had dismissed the same charge against Dr.
Kevorkian in February 1992, but a second ruling was forced by the Michigan Supreme Court's decision last December that a murder charge can be brought against someone who assists in a suicide if there is reason believe that death was the "direct result of the defendant's act."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Time Warner and Turner Seeking to Please Malone
Executives of Time Warner, Turner Broadcasting and Tele-Communications Inc. shuttled between New York hotel suites and conference rooms, as they worked on an $8.5 billion deal in which Time Warner would buy Turner.


Place Asterisk By Rubin's 'Upset'
The unseeded Chanda Rubin beat the 15th-seeded Helena Sukova yesterday, but make no mistake: This was no upset.
If not for the return of Monica Seles, Rubin would have been seeded herself at the United States Open, and her 6-1, 6-3 victory in the second round over the once-formidable Sukova was a convincing display of newfound self-assurance and all-court dominance.


S.&amp; L.'s Win Court Victory Against U.S.
In a ruling that could mean billions of dollars for the savings and loan industry, a Federal appeals court said today that the Government was liable for damages for abruptly changing the rules by which savings and loan associations were allowed to calculate their assets when they took over weaker institutions.
The 9-to-2 ruling by the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit was eagerly awaited by the savings and loan institutions, which had filed nearly 90 court claims charging that the Government breached its contract with them.
Industry analysts have estimated that the claims could total $10 billion to $20 billion.


When Texans Say 'One Ranger, One Riot'
To the Editor:
"Women Rangers: Struggle in a Macho Bastion" (front page, Aug. 27) seems to perpetuate the myth that despite the Texas Rangers' good ol' boy problems with accepting women into their ranks, the rangers had a rather glorious history in Texas.


Sting on Bogus Cabs in Queens Nets a Yellow One That Isn't
It looked like a cab, yellow and cheery. It smelled like a cab, musty and dreary.
But legally, it was not a cab, as police officers and taxi inspectors cracking down on illegal cars for hire in Forest Hills, Queens, learned yesterday when they took a close look at the rate and passenger information card inside.
It was an elegant forgery, officials said.


AT HOME WITH/Kinky Friedman; Married to the Wind
There's nothing Kinky Friedman likes better than talking about himself.
He's totally self-absorbed, and he's fully aware of it.
"It's part of my charm," he says, his rakish mustache twisting into a smile.
At the moment, he is explaining how the name Richard, which is on his birth certificate, evolved into Kinky.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Common  *
Enterprise Systems Inc., Wheeling, Ill., filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell 2.35 million shares in an initial public offering.
Robertson, Stephens will be the lead underwriter.


No Bid for Senate


Teachers and Officials Say Layoff Threat Has Diminished
The prospect of teacher layoffs this fall has diminished considerably, officials from the the New York City Board of Education, the Mayor's office and the teachers' union agreed after a meeting yesterday, although they said a solution to the school system's budget problems was still unresolved.
The apparent 11th-hour thaw, less than a week before the opening of school, followed months of dire predictions by the board that it would need to lay off 1,000 or more teachers to meet budget cuts of $230 million imposed by the Giuliani administration, although the teachers' union and the city had reached a side agreement pledging that there would be no layoffs.


To Every Thing There Is a Season, and a Rehearsal


Hingis and Muster Prove All Business
The teen-aged debutante has been criticized for playing too much tennis at too tender an age.
The third-ranked man in the world has been criticized for being a dilettante when it comes time to perform on any other tennis surface besides his slippery favorite, clay.
Center stage at the United States Open was shared yesterday by a pair of controversial characters, 14-year-old Martina Hingis, a two-time junior French Open champion who has been ubiquitous on all surfaces since turning professional last year, and the 27-year-old Thomas Muster, the clay-confined maestro who finally ended a quixotic 10-year fixation on the French Open by winning it this June.


Officials Say Hospitals Chief Was Accused Of Harassment
When Dr.
Bruce Siegel resigned abruptly as head of the Health and Hospitals Corporation on Tuesday, he was under investigation after allegations of sexual harassment, several city and hospital officials said yesterday.
It is unclear whether the investigation directly prompted his departure, and Dr.
Siegel, who had been widely praised as an effective leader of the city's public hospital system, refused to comment further on the matter.
He said through his spokeswoman that his "letter of resignation speaks for itself." That letter said he was leaving to spend more time with his family, referring to the birth of his first child, which is expected in November.


Bring Back the W.P.A.
To The Home Section:
Architectural treasures, landmark structures in the national parks, are crumbling ("America's Crumbling 'Parkitecture,' " Aug. 10), and in the inner cities, unemployed, untrained young men and women are hanging out idly, wasting time and their young lives.


Noh in Central Park
Three performances of "Takigi-Noh '95," a free theatrical program blending poetry, drama, dance and music, are to take place by firelight at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park at 8 P.M. on Sept. 8, 9 and 10.
Tickets may be picked up on the day of the performance, after 1 P.M at the Delacorte or from 1 to 3 P.M. at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village.
Information: (212) 598-7100 or (212) 861-7277.


Wide Net Cast in U.S. Inquiry on Gathering
In an unusual mass questioning, Federal investigators are surveying more than 50,000 law-enforcement officers to find out who attended a country picnic in the East Tennessee mountains that may have included racist and anti-Semitic activities.
The questioning of virtually all Federal law-enforcement officers by supervisors from the Treasury and Justice Departments has raised protests from civil liberties groups and unions of Government employees.
They say political and Congressional pressure have prompted a blunderbuss investigation that is trampling the officers' constitutional rights of privacy and freedom of association.


After City's Public Hospitals Close Their Doors
To the Editor:
I write on behalf of the Citizens Budget Commission to applaud the wise decision by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani to defer action on the report submitted by his advisory panel on the future of New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation, and to commend an alternative the panel did not consider but should have.


Governor Closes Harlem Development Agency
After months of wrangling, the Pataki administration yesterday formally shut down the Harlem Urban Development Corporation, a semi-independent 23-year-old agency that used state and private funds to spur economic activity in the hard-pressed area.
In its place, Gov.
George E. Pataki created a new entity, the Harlem Community Development Corporation, which will receive 40 percent less in funding and will have a board of directors dominated by appointees of the Governor.


Some Protest Vulgarities; Networks Back Their Use
Some cable-television viewers found Mark Fuhrman's words so offensive that they complained after hearing his racial slurs and barnyard language on Tuesday.
But cable executives said yesterday that they had no second thoughts on their handling of the tape recordings in the O. J. Simpson murder trial.
Both CNN and Court TV carried unedited tapes in which the former Los Angeles police detective used the word "nigger" more than three dozen times as he carried on vulgarity-laced conversations with Laura Hart McKinny, an aspiring screenwriter.


Rebels Hijack Civilian Ferry In Sri Lanka
A Sri Lankan ferry carrying 128 passengers was riding at anchor off the island's northeast coast today, apparently under the control of Tamil Tiger rebels who hijacked the ferry then sank two Sri Lankan naval gunboats that went to investigate.
All 28 of the gunboats' crew members were believed to have been killed.
Sri Lankan Defense Ministry officials said they had no information on the condition of the ferry's passengers, mostly ethnic Tamils who boarded the vessel at the east coast port of Trincomalee on Monday for what was to have been an overnight journey to Karaitivu, a Government-held island off the northwest coast.
At nightfall on Wednesday, the ship had been at sea for 48 hours, with minimal supplies of food and water.


A Little Rain May Fall


Mexican Officials Stand by Theory Drug Gang Killed Cardinal
After more than two years of investigation, the questioning of scores of witnesses and the pursuit of hundreds of leads, the Mexican authorities say they have reached a tentative conclusion about the murder of the Roman Catholic Cardinal of Guadalajara.
Government officials say they still believe a group of drug traffickers shot the Cardinal, Juan Jesus Posadas Ocampo, by mistake, confusing his car with that of a rival trafficker.
And most Mexicans, it appears, still do not believe them.


Parents Sue Romania Over Child's H.I.V. Infection
Challenging a Government with one of the worst records for AIDS prevention in Europe, a couple is suing the Romanian Health Ministry for causing the H.I.V. infection of their daughter.
The case of Iasmina Calinciuc, 6, a wide-eyed girl with a loopy grin and a great fondness for TNT cartoons, has attracted wide attention and encouraged other parents to take on the Health Ministry for failing to eliminate what critics describe as sloppy practices that cause the needless spread of AIDS.


Just Off in the Distance, a Stadium Is Taking Shape
The quietest place at the National Tennis Center during the United States Open is next door, where a steel and concrete shell will be a 23,500-seat stadium by 1997 -- the major part of a project estimated to cost $227 million.
But the price tag, which began as a $150 million project, could go up to $265 million.


Dairy Mart reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


RESULTS PLUS
WORLD UNIVERSITY GAMES  U.S. Gains Basketball Semifinal
The United States basketball team bounced back from a 10-point first-half deficit and defeated the Czech Republic, 77-62, yesterday to advance to the semifinals of the World University Games tournament in Fukuoka, Japan.
The Americans, seeking their fourth consecutive gold medal, play Japan, which beat Canada.
The victory ran their University Games winning streak to 24 straight since a loss to Yugoslavia in the 1987 final.
Guard Allen Iverson of Georgetown led the Americans with 14 points. (AP)


Testimony Ends in Terror-Bombing Trial
After seven months and more than 200 witnesses, testimony ended last night in the bombing conspiracy trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and nine other men.
Closing arguments are expected to begin on Tuesday and to take at least a week.


No Hinges. No Knobs. No Jeans, Either.
WHERE the ads are loaded with innuendo, the store is all proportion and purity.
Architecturally speaking, of course.
The paradox of Calvin Klein, whose continuing success is founded on the seamless melding of explicit sexuality and archetypical classicism, has never been so blatant.
The advertisements keep pumping up the volume on his message of eternal youth on the edge; his clothes -- and now his first store -- preserve the aura of timeless serenity.


Mid Ocean Ltd.(MOCNF,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


For a Change, Crash of Shells Heartens Sarajevo Residents
The people of Sarajevo cheered the shells that rocked them from their slumber overnight and lit the night sky with orange traces.
These were not the Bosnian Serbs' guns, which regularly pounded their city, killing their relatives, neighbors and friends over the past 40 months.
The impossible had happened -- NATO was bombing the Bosnian Serbs.
"These were the only detonations of the whole war that made us happy," said Maida Dajdzic, 35, adding that she first took the booming shaking her windows to be the usual barrage of Bosnian Serb shells.
"NATO has given us the hope we had lost."


Kean Rejects Senate Bid, Citing a Rise In Meanness
Saying Washington had become a "mean-spirited" place, former Gov.
Thomas H. Kean announced today that he would not run for the Senate seat that Bill Bradley is giving up.
The terse statement that Mr.
Kean released -- "I have decided not to seek the Republican nomination for the U.S. Senate" -- ended two weeks of speculation about his political future and restored Representative Dick Zimmer of Delaware Township to the role of favorite to win the Republican nomination in June.


The Public Halts 2 Programs
The Joseph Papp Public Theater has suspended two long-running programs, Film at the Public and Playwriting in the Schools, George C. Wolfe, the theater's producer, said yesterday.
In a statement, Mr.
Wolfe said both programs had initially been created "as additions to the main mission" of the institution.
"This suspension period will afford us the time to make them more integral to the vision of the Public Theater," he said.


Readying for Death Penalty, Pataki Picks Execution Site
Two days before New York State's death penalty law will take effect, Gov.
George E. Pataki announced today that a prison near the Canadian border would house the state's death row for men, and that a Dutchess County prison would be the site of the executions.
All male inmates sentenced to death will be held at the Clinton Correctional Facility, a maximum security prison 15 miles west of Plattsburgh and 25 miles south of the Canadian border, he said.
Women will be held at the Bedford Hills prison in Westchester County.


A Furnishings Primer For Back-to-School


Rift on Fuhrman Tapes
The racial epithets of Mark Fuhrman that aired at the O. J. Simpson trial have exposed deep racial divisions within Los Angeles and its police department.
Some residents and police officers said the comments could aggravate racial and ethnic tensions in the city.
Article, page A18.


A Primer for Back-to-School Furnishings
DROVES of parents and school-age children (in small, medium and large sizes) are now preparing for earlier bedtimes, school bus schedules and -- groan -- homework.
By choosing age-appropriate furnishings tailored to the right size, parents can help young people create personalized places for studying.


Hollywood The Blase Is Impressed
With one huge deal after another reshaping Hollywood and the television business in recent weeks, the entertainment industry thought it could not be shocked -- until the news of a possible merger between Time Warner and the Turner Broadcasting System made the rounds here this morning.
Amid the widespread skepticism that the merger would work out was a matter-of-fact acceptance that this proposal, along with the Walt Disney Company's acquisition of Capital Cities/ABC, continues very basic changes in the environment of the entertainment business.


NATO PRESSES BOSNIA BOMBING, VOWING TO MAKE SARAJEVO SAFE
After 40 months of awkward hesitation, NATO today stepped squarely into the midst of the Bosnian war, pounding Bosnian Serb targets with air strikes across the country and declaring that the bombardment would not stop until Sarajevo was secure.
The onslaught unfurled in at least five waves, beginning in the early-morning darkness and proceeding throughout the day.
Large fires burned in Vogosca, a Serbian-held suburb northwest of Sarajevo, and Lukavica, the Serbs' main barracks southwest of the Bosnian capital, as NATO bombs struck ammunition and fuel dumps.


L.I. Wildfire: Nature's Tool
Late last Thursday night, Susie Rasmussen was hosing down her porch and trees in Westhampton to keep falling cinders the size of quarters from burning her house on Montauk Highway near the blazing pine barrens.
The fire, which started a week ago in the tinder-dry woods near Suffolk Community College, consumed 5,500 acres of scrub oak and pitch pine and burned about a dozen houses and several other buildings before 2,200 firefighters brought it largely under control late Saturday.


3-Way Haggle Is Now Shaping Deal for Turner
Executives of Time Warner Inc., Turner Broadcasting System, and Tele-Communications Inc. shuttled between hotel suites and conference rooms in New York yesterday in a rush to work out a deal in which Time Warner would acquire Turner for roughly $8.5 billion.
Time Warner and Turner confirmed that they were negotiating to merge their companies.
If the takeover is completed, the new company would be the world's largest entertainment empire, combining the biggest collection of Hollywood studios and the leading music company with major interests in cable-TV programming and systems, theme parks and even the Atlanta Braves baseball team.  [ Page D1. ]


Safer Than Ever
To The Home Section:
Lucy Danziger is to be commended for her courage in expressing publicly her views on Caesarean section, which contradict positions taken by some obstetric "authorities," managed-care providers, political opportunists and feminist groups ("Parent &amp; Child: Natural Birth vs. On-Time Delivery," Aug. 3).


METRO DIGEST
LAWYERS PREPARE FOR THE DEATH PENALTY Dennis C. Vacco, the New York Attorney General, says his motives were pure when he sent prosecutors a letter saying he was ready to help them press the new death penalty.
Now the lives of the couple, since divorced, have arrived at a less scenic but equally dramatic stop: a courthouse in Westchester County.  [ B6. ] KEAN DECIDES NOT TO RUN FOR SENATE Saying Washington had become "mean-spirited," former Gov.
Thomas H. Kean of New Jersey announced that he would not run for the Senate seat that Bill Bradley is giving up.  [ B6. ] PANEL BACKS MAJOR FIX-UP FOR ERIE CANAL A New York State commission approved a $146 million plan to remake the Erie Canal into a 524-mile-long tourist attraction.  [ B7. ] EXOTIC BIRDS STOLEN FROM L.I.


Silence Is Golden
To The Home Section:
Regarding "Close to Home: War Legacies From Fathers to Children" by James Schembari (Aug. 17) -- my father had remained silent about his war.
Pop died last September, and after the funeral, Mom said Pop was in the Battle of Berlin.
From what I have read and have seen in film clips, Pop experienced one horrible and grueling time.
Since the day of the funeral I have been feeling a lot of anger toward him for not sharing that difficult time in his life.


Military Aides Uncertain About Air Attacks' Effects
The bombing and shelling campaign unleashed by NATO in the last 24 hours has managed to "seriously reduce" the Bosnian Serb artillery around Sarajevo, the commander of United Nations troops in the former Yugoslavia said today.
But two Pentagon officials said the raids had had only "fair to middling" success, largely because of poor weather and the difficulty of hitting targets as small as telephone lines.


Montreal Lays On A Feast of Cinema, Bigger Than Ever
Can a festival be big and small at the same time?
Yes, if it's the Montreal World Film Festival.
The festival, now in its 19th year, is bigger than ever.
By the time the last reel of film has unspooled on Monday night, about 300,000 viewers will have seen 400 films from 63 countries in 12 days.
Only in Montreal can die-hard film buffs expect to see not one but three films from Mongolia.
As a commercial force, however, the festival is probably less important now than at any time in its history.
A decade ago, Montreal was the natural entry point for European films testing the North American waters.
With close ties to Cannes and the French film market, it routinely offered North American premieres of films by top French directors, as well as choice films from the four corners of the earth, often by unknown directors.
Its opening day, in late August, means that it gets the early start on a late summer and early fall season of festivals in Venice, Telluride, Toronto, Vancouver and New York.


Court Orders Students in Bias Case to Take Sensitivity Course
The case against three Manhattan high school students charged with harassing a teacher with an anti-Semitic note was dismissed yesterday by a criminal court judge on one condition: that they attend an anti-bias course and perform community service for Jewish organizations.
After the dismissal, the teacher, Stacy Mitgang said she was generally satisfied with the decision, although she added that she still felt that the students, with whom she had been close, had not truly apologized.


The Marriage of Art and Money
ART AND MONEY By Marc Shell Illustrated. 213 pages. University of Chicago Press. $35.


Ex-Cowboy Reynolds Signed for Offensive Line
The Giants have added depth to their beleaguered offensive line.
They signed Jerry Reynolds, a former Dallas Cowboys offensive tackle/guard, to a one-year contract yesterday, according to several people familiar with the situation.
While Reynolds is expected to be a backup, his signing may be an indication that the team is worried about the status of center Brian Williams.
If Williams needs more time to heal his ankle, then Adam Schreiber would move to center.


With Finance Chief's Ouster, Chirac Opts for a Social Agenda
When Jacques Chirac ran for the French Presidency earlier this year, critics pointed to the contradiction in his campaign speeches, as he championed costly Government programs to reduce France's record unemployment, while promising to bring down the country's soaring budget deficits.
Last week, confusion over the economic policy of President Chirac was cleared up.
Mr.
Chirac's free-market Finance Minister, Alain Madelin, was ousted for proposing to cut the generous pensions of French Government workers and other social benefits.


Dole Disappoints in Log Cabin Rebuff
To the Editor:
Re "Dole, in a New Bow to Right, Returns Gay Group's Money" (front page, Aug. 27):


Intertan Inc.(ITN,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Execution of Retarded Man Is Fought
The best reason that Barry Lee Fairchild should not be executed on Thursday occurred at his clemency hearing two weeks ago, Mr.
Fairchild's lawyer said today.
"I'm sitting there arguing my guts out, trying to save his life," the lawyer, Charles Baker, said in an interview.
"We're in a room crowded with people and television cameras at 10 o'clock in the morning, and he falls asleep!"


Islanders Re-sign Vukota
MICK VUKOTA, whose eight seasons in the National Hockey League have all been with the Islanders, reached an agreement with the team for season No. 9 yesterday.
No terms of the deal with the 28-year-old right wing were announced.


Minneapolis Paper Honors Past and Future
To the Editor:
Re "Press Fad, or Future, in Minneapolis?" (Business Day, Aug. 21): Two cheers for your article on some of the changes being made or tested at The Minneapolis Star Tribune.


Fleetwood Enterprises Inc.(FLE,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 30


City's Homicide Rate Climbs
The murder rate in the state's poorest city is accelerating.
A paroled drug dealer was fatally shot on Monday, becoming the 43d person to be killed in Camden this year, the A.P. reported yesterday.
Last year at this time, nine fewer homicides had been recorded.


Koor Industries reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


No Seal of Approval for Video
Officials of the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace said yesterday that they did not seek Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's permission before they began selling a videotape of a speech she made at the library last April.
"Since the Governor was a public official speaking at a public event on matters of public interest, the library did not seek her permission to release the video," officials said.
Democrats are angry that taxpayers footed the $9,500 bill to fly Governor Whitman and security officials to California to make a partisan speech and want her to reimburse the state.


