Colts' Irsay Has Stroke
The Colts announced yesterday that their 72-year-old owner, ROBERT IRSAY, was conscious and in stable condition in Indianapolis after suffering a stroke Wednesday night.
Irsay became owner of the Baltimore Colts in 1972, when he traded the Los Angeles Rams to Carroll Rosenbloom for the Colts franchise.
He moved the Colts to Indianapolis in 1984. (AP)


Specter Savors Failed Run for Roses
Where are the Republican moderates of yesteryear? asks Senator Arlen Specter, now that his Presidential bid has expired as softly as the tree falling unnoticed beyond the forest fringe.
"We didn't get them activated," conceded the Senator, still convinced that the party has a decisive middle ground to be tapped despite the single-digit ennui his candidacy received this fall in the campaign polls.


From an Era in Venice When Chic Was Illegal
How serene was Venice until the 18th century?
So serene that the notion of a  designer was forbidden; those who outdated clothing by creating new shapes could end up rowing a ship in chains.
So serene, in fact, that its nickname was "Serenissima," which is the title of a new exhibition of the arts of fashion in Venice from the 13th to the 18th century, now at the Equitable Gallery.


Girl's Death Resonates at Hearing on Secrecy Law in Child Abuse Cases
At a hearing yesterday to examine what was called the "veil of secrecy" surrounding child abuse cases in New York State, that very veil seemed to prevent any fresh insights into what the city might have done to prevent the killing of 6-year-old Elisa Izquierdo.
The irony was lost on no one, and it produced a number of tense moments during the testimony of Kathryn Croft, the Executive Deputy Commissioner of the city's Child Welfare Administration.


A Well-Dressed Saint In a Den of Wiseacres
There's a mug in Gary Fleder's "Things to Do in Denver When You're Dead" who  talks wistfully about his dream: to "do the foxtrot with a $2,000-a-night hooker in Paris." Students of this form -- the one involving hip criminals, heavy-duty  jive, a big crime gone wrong and a luncheonette for holding group meetings -- will immediately recognize foxtrot as the essential word.
Paris?
Ho-hum.
Same for hookers, especially hookers with high prices.
But the dance connotes a debonair flamboyance, a certain rakish style.
And style is everything -- the only thing -- in a movie like this.


Refs' Salaries at Issue
Negotiators for the National Basketball Association and its locked-out referees met for about three hours yesterday but remained far apart on financial issues.
Discussion centered on pension and benefits, but salary remained a stumbling block.
Talks will resume today in Manhattan.


Inside Art
Wrong Galleries


2 Salvador Suspects Reported in U.S.
Two men involved in the murders of six Americans in El Salvador in 1985 are living in the United States with the apparent approval of the United States Government, three Senators said today.
One, Senator Richard Shelby, Republican of Alabama, said the two men were Gilberto Osorio, an American citizen living near San Francisco, and Pedro Antonio Andrade, whose home town is unknown.


Richard Halverson, 79, a Senate Chaplain
The Rev.
Richard C. Halverson, who retired in March after 14 years as chaplain of the United States Senate, died on Tuesday at Arlington Hospital in Virginia.
He was 79 and lived in Arlington.
Mr.
Halverson's successor, the Rev.
Lloyd Ogilvie, said Mr.
Halverson had been in "declining health."


Dangerous Times for Haiti
Haiti's new democracy stands at a precarious moment.
The next few weeks will  require scrupulous adherence to law, and finely tuned political tact on all sides.
The United States has invested too much in returning President Jean-Bertrand Aristide to power, and the Haitian people have suffered too much in their long wait for democracy, to allow the situation to deteriorate further.
Mr.
Aristide hastened to assure reporters yesterday that he intends to step down as President in February, as his Constitution requires.
That is the right decision, and it should end speculation that he might cancel presidential balloting later this month.


Alabama Penalties Eased; Miami Braces for Its News
Though it is still prohibited from playing in a bowl game this season, the University of Alabama had sanctions against its football team modified yesterday in the first significant reduction of penalties ever levied by the National College Athletic Association's infractions committee.
A third year of probation was dropped, nine football scholarships were restored and a faculty representative was cleared of charges of unethical conduct by the N.C.A.A. infractions appeals committee.
After the announcement, the embattled football coach, Gene Stallings, said that he would return next season.


Archeologists Deny Cave Belonged to Maccabees
Archeologists said today that they no longer believed that a recently discovered 2,000-year-old burial cave was used by the ancient Jewish warriors known as the Maccabees.
Hopes were raised when burial containers found in the cave were thought to bear the first three letters of the Hebrew name Hasmonean, another name for the  Maccabees.


Philadelphia Police Arrest 2 in Slaying
Two suspects have been arrested in the rape and slaying of an early morning jogger whose death jarred one of the city's wealthiest, safest neighborhoods.
The suspects, Herbert Haak, 25, and Richard Wise, 19, were arrested on Wednesday and charged with rape and murder.
They each gave statements implicating the other, the police said.


The Speaker's New Problem
In court documents filed this week, the Federal Election Commission charges that Gopac, the political action committee led for years by House Speaker Newt Gingrich, improperly aided his 1990 re-election, which Mr.
Gingrich won by just  974 votes.
The agency found evidence that the organization supported him and other candidates for Federal office at a time when it was legally limited to spending money on state and local candidates.
This is a serious matter deserving investigation by the House Ethics Committee.
Such an investigation will require the committee's Republican chairwoman, Nancy Johnson of Connecticut, to muster the independence to hire a special outside counsel to break the partisan gridlock that now prevents resolution of the various ethics complaints involving Mr.
Gingrich.


Furiously Treading Water
Chad Ganden's parents knew two things from the time he started Naperville North High School in suburban Chicago: One was that their son's swimming skills  and work ethic would make him a natural for college competition.
The other was that his learning disabilities might make it difficult for him to meet the National Collegiate Athletic Association's eligibility requirements.
This past fall, with their 17-year-old son a senior and a state swimming champion, they were proved right on both counts.
Ganden is a sought-after recruit for college coaches around the country.
But the N.C.A.A. declared him ineligible for early-recruiting visits because some of his high school classes were basic courses, taught at a slower-than-normal pace.


Aristide Insists He Will Leave Office When Term Ends
Acting to end the widespread uncertainty over his political plans and the friction it has generated in Haiti's relations with the United States, President Jean-Bertrand Aristide said today that he would step down in February despite calls by his supporters that he remain in office for three more years.
"I kept saying a long time ago that I will be happy to go home on Feb. 7," Mr.
Aristide said during an informal early morning meeting with foreign reporters in his office at the National Palace.


Doctor Pleads Guilty to Fraud
The bus crash had been staged, but Dr.
Henry Miles Sherman did not know that.
Nor did he know that the six passengers who became his patients were undercover  agents, faking their injuries.
Yesterday, Dr.
Sherman, a family practitioner in East Orange, pleaded guilty to cheating insurance companies out of more than $70,000 by submitting bills for examinations and physicals that never took place.
He faces 25 years in prison and $1.25 million in fines.


Rebuffed and Ignored, a Tribe Waits to Be Confirmed as Indian
AFTER all their recent protests and press, the Ramapough Mountain Indians are in no way assured that the Federal Government will see fit to call them the Ramapough Mountain Indians.
No one has promised anything.
Their local Congressman rebuffed them.
Washington bureaucrats ignored them.
Letters from supporters to government officials go unanswered.


Burrell Group Buys DFA in New York
The Burrell Communications Group in Chicago, an agency company specializing in advertising aimed at black consumers, said yesterday that it had acquired DFA Communications Inc. in New York, a general market agency that handles advertising, direct marketing and graphics.
The terms were not disclosed.
DFA will operate as a wholly owned subsidiary of Burrell, which also has an  office in Atlanta.
Ed Forti, 49, who founded DFA in 1986, will continue as president.
DFA has 35 employees and billings estimated at $25 million from clients like Citicorp and Fuji Photo Film U.S.A..
Burrell has 144 employees and  billings estimated at $115 million from clients like Coca-Cola, McDonald's and Procter &amp; Gamble.


Castro All Hugs and Kisses On First Visit to Old Ally
Fidel Castro began a visit to China today to embrace fellow leaders of one of the world's last Communist-run nations, and to find a willing ally in his defiance of the United States.
The Cuban President, a belated convert to market reforms since aid from the Soviet Union dried up, and perhaps eager for a new source of handouts, enthusiastically praised China's economic miracle.


In Russia, Change Must Take a Little Longer
To the Editor:
It is not surprising that Jeffrey D. Sachs (Op-Ed, Nov. 29), one of the architects of economic shock therapy in the former Soviet Union, should claim that the corruption, inflation and privatization now rampant in Russia is a result of the failure of Western governments to provide adequate financial support.


3 Violent Incidents Raise Tension in West Bank
Tensions rippled through the West Bank today after two Israeli soldiers were  taken hostage in one town, troops clashed with stone-throwing Palestinians in another, and two other soldiers were wounded in an ambush.
The Israeli commander in the West Bank, Maj.
Gen.
Gabi Ofir, announced that Israel was freezing its staged withdrawal from West Bank cities pending a meeting with the commander of Palestinian forces in the West Bank, Ismail Jaber.
But both Israeli and Palestinian officials insisted that the pullout would continue.


City With a View Wary of Ads
Mayor Bret Schundler says noth ing certainly not billboards -- should come between his city and views of the Statue of Liberty and the New York City skyline.
In a letter to the Turnpike Authority, he warned that if it puts the billboards up, "We will cut them down."


Old Elegance Meets New Glitter on 57th Street
To the Editor:
The writer of your article on New York City's West 57th Street ("A T-Shirt for Every Theme," Nov. 24) seems to have walked up and down the street with blinders on until the lights became garish enough to see.
Too late.


TIME WARNER SELLS SOME OF ITS STOCK IN 3DO
The stock of the 3DO Company jumped 15 percent yesterday as Time Warner Inc.  sold a big chunk of its 13 percent stake in 3DO, a video-game maker.
A Time Warner spokesman, Ed Adler, said that the company had sold about 2.8 million 3DO shares to help Time Warner reduce its debt.
The sale of 3DO stock and previous asset sales have helped raise at least $1.6 billion, Mr.
Adler said. 3DO has about 25.6 million shares outstanding.
It was unclear who bought the stock, which rose $1.125, to $11.125, in Nasdaq trading, where 3DO topped the most-active list with more than 7.8 million shares changing hands.
Separately, Time Warner said yesterday that Time Warner Telecommunications, a division of Time Warner Entertainment, would be consolidated into Time Warner Cable, the company's telecommunications arm.


What the Mockingbirds Taught Darwin
To the Editor:
A Nov. 28 article on the Galapagos Islands summarizes the political crisis that has placed their ecological integrity at risk.
The article, unfortunately,  perpetuates myths about Darwin's experiences in Galapagos.
Not only are there fewer than "39 kinds of finches" in the archipelago (there are 13 species), but  also Darwin observed only 6 species during his brief stay (on four islands) in 1835 -- including 2 that he did not even recognize as finches!


Retailers Had Weak Sales In November
Retailers found more reason to weep yesterday as they posted weak November sales, following the worst October in four years.
Salomon Brothers said its same-store growth index rose only 2.9 percent in November from the month a year earlier.


Good News! I.R.S. to Expand Direct Deposit Refund Service
Some Americans will receive their 1995 Federal tax refunds more quickly next  year because the Internal Revenue Service will deposit the refunds directly into their checking or savings accounts, the I.R.S. said today.
"This option is good news for taxpayers and good news for us," said the I.R.S.
Commissioner, Margaret Milner Richardson.
"It makes life easier for those who pay taxes while improving our efficiency."


A 2d S.E.C. Official Quits
The Securities and Exchange Commission announced the departure today of its general counsel, Simon Lorne.
The S.E.C. chairman, Arthur Levitt Jr., said there was no connection between the departures of Mr.
Lorne and Brandon Becker, former head of the agency's market regulation division, who resigned on Tuesday.


Columbia Donations Reach $1.15 Billion
Roughly five years ago, several unbalanced budgets forced Columbia University to bite into its endowment and close a few departments.
Today, the university seems to have worked its way out of the troubles.
Columbia is to announce today  that it has surpassed its five-year goal of raising $1.15 billion.
The donations are to be put to a multitude of uses, though almost half will go toward operating the university.
Article, page B1.


A Budget Debate Not About Dollars, But About Whose Plan Makes Sense
Usually when families or companies or even governments think about budgets, the main issue is money -- how much is in the till, how much will be spent and how those two figures relate to each other.
But the big budget showdown this year between President Clinton and Congress  is much more about principles.
Because splitting the difference is impossible, compromise could be more difficult to achieve.


RITE AID PLANS TO ACQUIRE REVCO FOR $1.8 BILLION
The stock of both the Rite Aid Corporation and Revco D.S.
Inc. rose yesterday as Rite Aid formally announced that it would acquire Revco for $1.8 billion in cash and stock, strengthening Rite Aid's position as the nation's largest drugstore chain.
The transaction would create a company with an expected $11 billion in annual revenues and more than 4,800 stores.
Rite Aid said that it would eventually close about 300 stores.
Under the agreement, Rite Aid will buy at least 50.1 percent of the outstanding shares of Revco for $27.50 a share, in cash.
Rite Aid then will convert the remainder of the Revco shares into Rite  Aid stock.
Shares of Rite Aid closed up $2.625, at $31.25 yesterday, and shares  of Revco closed up $2, at $27.50.


Talk About Weather: U.N. Says People Do Something About It
After intensive review, a United Nations panel of experts yesterday confirmed its conclusion that human activity is likely to be at least partly responsible for the changing climate.
"The balance of evidence suggests that there is a discernible human influence on global climate," the science working group of the Intergovernmental Panel on  Climate Change said, endorsing preliminary findings made in earlier draft reports.


Seeing Franz Kline in Eastern Scrolls
Does it make sense to view Chinese art through the lens of Western art, or should we strive to understand it on its own terms, without reference to familiar models?
It's a question that comes repeatedly to mind in two current exhibitions, "Abstraction and Expression in Chinese Calligraphy," at the China Institute, and "Masterworks of Chinese Art From Cornell University," at the Taipei Gallery.
Otherwise, the two shows couldn't be more different.
The first includes 17 works, all drawn in ink on paper, most of them dating from the 130 years between 1520 and 1650.
The second offers almost 100 works in a variety of media -- earthenware, porcelain, jade, lacquer, bronze, ink, paint and wood -- produced over a period of 4,500 years, from 2,500 B.C. to A.D. 1955.


We Enter Bosnia And Injure Europe;If Not Now, When?
To the Editor:
United States engagement in Bosnia is in our vital national interests.


Biotech Surges On Cancer Trial
Shares of British Biotech P.L.C. soared 88 percent yesterday after the company said an interim look at early clinical results suggested that its drug might inhibit the growth of cancerous tumors.
The stock price almost tripled during the day, its American depository receipts reaching a high of $105.125, before falling $38 to close at $67, up $31.50, in Nasdaq trading.


Pataki Asserts Medicaid Rule Won't Change
Gov.
George E. Pataki announced today that his administration would not repeal a regulation that requires hundreds of nursing homes across the state to  set aside many of their beds for Medicaid recipients.
"It is not the policy of this administration," Mr.
Pataki said at an impromptu news conference today.
And a senior aide added that Mr.
Pataki would not abolish the regulation because he was concerned about "unfair treatment to Medicaid recipients."


25 and Under
Let me just say this about Republic, the new Asian noodle restaurant spun off by the owners of Indochine in a large, stylishly modern room off Union Square: I love it.
On entering the restaurant, its appearance is immediately striking.
The long, lofty dining room is simple and stark.
In the front, opposite a white brick wall with big mirrors, is a bar and a long, slate counter with a view of the open kitchen, just right for solitary diners in for a quick meal.
In the rear are polished blond wood tables and benches, with walls the color of sea foam, dark green and vermilion.
Recessed halogen lights bathe the room in a warm glow.


Ottawa Unity Plan Draws Fire From Both Quebec and West
A Government plan announced on Monday to head off another secession attempt by Quebec is drawing disdain from many Quebecers, who say it does not grant them enough autonomy, and is infuriating many other Canadians, who say it grants the  province unfair advantages.
The chilly reactions point up the delicate balancing act facing Prime Minister Jean Chretien in trying to keep Canada together after the Oct. 30 referendum, in which Quebecers voted by only a slim majority to remain in the federation.


AIDS After Randy Shilts: Still Blame Enough for All
THE GRAVEST SHOW ON EARTH America in the Age of AIDS By Elinor Burkett 399 pages.
Houghton Mifflin Company. $24.95


Art in Review
Kasimir Malevich Leonard Hutton Galleries 41 East 57th Street Manhattan Through Dec. 22


Perot Party Gains in Maine
Supporters of Ross Perot's new Reform Party said today that they had gathered enough signatures to get the party on the 1996 Presidential ballot in Maine, the third stop in their 50-state drive.
Reform Party volunteers gathered at least 28,500 signatures -- 3,000 more than needed to qualify for the ballot, said Stephen Bost, who heads the party's  effort in Maine.
He said volunteers would continue to register additional voters.


Art in Review
Norris Embry Snyder Fine Art 20 West 57th Street Manhattan Through Dec. 9


BUSINESS DIGEST
G.M. to Recall Cadillacs In Settlement With U.S.
General Motors agreed to recall nearly a half-million late-model Cadillacs and spend nearly $45 million in fines and other costs, settling a Federal complaint  that the auto maker had installed devices that caused the cars to emit illegal amounts of carbon dioxide.


Restaurants
Imagine how Eberhard Muller felt the night he was offered Lutece.
In his heart he must have had misgivings about taking over from the country's most famous chef, Andre Soltner.
Lutece, after all, is not a restaurant but a beloved institution.
I imagine Mr.
Muller taking a long and unsentimental tour of the restaurant.
It was -- let's say it straight out -- unbeautiful.
"Comfortable," "unpretentious" and "cozy' are euphemisms that have been used for years to describe the garden room. Mr. Muller might have looked past the pretty white latticework and, calling a spade a spade, admitted that it was an attempt to disguise a Quonset hut. He might have mounted the narrow staircase and noted that the once-charming dining  rooms upstairs had become worn and rather dingy.


Alexander Takes Aim at G.O.P. Congress
Congress has sunk so low in the public's esteem that Lamar Alexander has come full circle and is once again running vigorously against it.
The Republican takeover of the House and Senate a year ago blunted Mr.
Alexander's attacks on Congress, once a chief theme of his long campaign for the Republican Presidential nomination.
But he is now frequently urging voters to "cut their pay and send them home," trying to draw a bright line between himself and those he sees as his chief rivals for the nomination, Senators Bob Dole of Kansas and Phil Gramm of Texas.


Merger Will Cost 2,000 Jobs
About 1,600 jobs in New Jersey and an additional 400 in Philadelphia will be  eliminated when PNC Bank Corporation acquires Midlantic Corporation, based in Edison.
PNC, which is based in Pittsburgh, also said yesterday that it would close about 85 branches in 1996.


Official Is Autograph Hound
Brett Favre's signature wasn't the only autograph obtained by the head linesman before last Sunday's Tampa Bay-Green Bay game.
Buccaneers running back  Errict Rhett said Wednesday that he also signed football cards for the official, Jerry Bergman, who visited the teams' locker rooms and told players he wanted the autographs for his grandson.
Buccaneers linebacker Hardy Nickerson, who was ejected by Referee Walt Coleman after taking a swing at Packers center Frank Winters, was also asked for an autograph, but didn't sign.


Some Cabby Stories Have a Happy Ending
To the Editor:
Re "Cabby Made Taste of Democracy Costly" (letter, Nov. 28):


Abidjan Journal;Psychiatry's Terra Incognita: Healing in Africa
His utterances come in muddled bursts, and when he speaks with his glassy gaze and his knowing smirk it is not to answer questions, but to pour forth a wisdom that comes from voices that only he can hear.
"You think I am wrong, but it is you who are mistaken," the lanky man, known  as Jacques, with wildly matted hair and disheveled clothes, says to those who pass him at a busy intersection on the outskirts of this city each day.
"You keep going the way you are going. But I know the truth.


El Pollo Loco Names 5 Agencies to Review
The El Pollo Loco unit of the Flagstar Companies has named five agencies to compete for its account, with billings estimated at $10 million.
The account had been at dGWB in Irvine, Calif., for four years, until the company decided in November to seek an agency with both domestic and international capabilities.


Billionaire's Gift Helps Columbia to Exceed Its Fund-Raising Goal
Alfred Lerner is one of America's wealthiest men, with a net worth of $1 billion gained in real estate and banking.
But he started life in the back of a  Queens candy store run by his parents.
Looking back, he credits his four years as an undergraduate at Columbia University with setting him on a path toward many of life's riches.
"Whatever good fortune I have, Columbia was part of that, so I owe them something," said Mr.
Lerner, 62, the chairman and chief executive of the MBNA Corporation, one of the nation's largest credit-card issuing companies.


Lawmaker on Mission to Bosnia
A New Jersey Congressman, Rodney P. Frelinghuysen, is on his way to Bosnia.
He is scheduled to leave this morning with lawmakers from both parties who want  to gather information for the Congressional debate on President Clinton's plan to send American troops to Bosnia.
"We should not and cannot make decisions in a vacuum," said Mr.
Frelinghuysen, a Republican of Harding, who has expressed reservations about the President's plan.


Colgate Planning a Big Shift Of Its Advertising to Y.&amp; R.
In one of the largest realignments ever for an advertising account, the Colgate-Palmolive Company unexpectedly announced yesterday that it would dismiss one of the two giant worldwide agencies that have shared the bulk of its assignments.
The billings in the consolidation, affecting familiar household brands like Ajax and Mennen, involve about $550 million of the company's worldwide total of $625 million to $650 million.
Colgate-Palmolive will remove from its agency roster Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, owned by True North Communications in Chicago, and shift about $150 million to $200 million in billings to Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. in New York.
Those gains are expected to lift Colgate-Palmolive into the ranks of the four largest accounts at Y.&amp; R., along with the AT&amp;T Corporation, the Ford Motor Company and the Philip Morris Companies.


Arms Bound for Libya Seized in Italian Raid
The bill of lading for the container seized at Turin's airport listed auto parts, shoes, soft drinks and electrical products.
But Italian police who broke  it open this week found wing components for MIG combat planes and sophisticated  electronic weaponry, en route to Libya from manufacturers in Britain, Canada and the United States.
The discovery came less than a week after the United Nations renewed a trade  embargo with Libya that was first imposed in 1992 because of Libya's refusal to  extradite a suspect in the bombing of an American plane over Scotland in 1988 that killed 270 people.


Fighting the River


The Last Stand
America's only significant privately held stand of ancient redwoods might soon be destroyed by a failed Texas savings-and-loan owner.
Only President Clinton can save it.
For more than a century, the family-operated Pacific Lumber Company, which owned the forest in Humboldt County, Calif., was a model corporation.
Its conservative logging practices left its nearly 200,000 acres of forests healthy  long after other companies' trees had been "liquidated." It was especially protective of Headwaters Forest, the 45,000-acre area that includes the ancient  redwood grove.


Rasheed Puts Naps Aside As He Prepares to Join Jets
For the last 12 weeks, Kenyon Rasheed was more a fan than a former Giant.
"I watched the Jets and Giants every Sunday, back to back," he said today.
"I must admit I fell asleep a couple of times."


Parents Fight Plan to Move Program for Gifted Students
On its surface, the proposal seems barely capable of causing a ripple: administrators of the community school district on the Upper West Side of Manhattan hope next fall to move a kindergarten class for gifted and talented students from an elementary school on West 84th Street to another one five blocks away.
To the District Superintendent, James Mazza, the rationale is simple: Public  School 9, where the gifted program is now housed, is not accessible to the handicapped.
Public School 166, where all five grades of the gifted program would eventually move, will be soon.


The Effort That Turns a Teen-Ager Into a Dancer
Anyone interested in ballet will want to see "The Dancer," in which Donya Feuer, an American choreographer who often collaborates with Ingmar Bergman, follows the teen-ager Katja Bjorner through three years of training at the Royal Swedish Ballet's school.
To say the camera adores the long-legged and charming Ms.
Bjorner is an understatement.
Gunnar Kallstrom, responsible for the exquisite cinematography,  and Ms.
Feuer, with her shrewd sense of structure, even seem unduly in love with the young dancer's feet and profile.
Yet through their frequent focus on the ankles, which do the heavy work, and the concentration on their subject's face,  they convey the beauty that pours through the sweat of this serious apprenticeship.


6th Financial Institution Collapses in Japan
The Fukuiken Dai-Ichi Credit Cooperative has become Japan's sixth financial institution to collapse since last December, failing under 1.9 billion yen ($18.7 million) in bad loans.
The small savings institution -- the 351st largest of Japan's 372 credit cooperatives -- will be taken over by the Fukui Bank, the  sole regional bank in the Fukui Prefecture, the Ministry of Finance said yesterday.
Ministry officials said the cooperative had no hope of recovering 600 million yen of its loans.
Those numbers pale in comparison with those of the other five failed institutions, which include the Osaka-based Kizu Credit Cooperative, Japan's largest at the time of its collapse in August, and the Cosmo Credit Cooperative, Tokyo's largest when it failed in July.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Sara Lee Proposing to Sell Food Distribution Unit to JP
The Sara Lee Corporation offered today to sell its food-distribution business to JP Foodservice Inc. in an $821 million stock transaction that would give Sara Lee a majority interest in JP.
Sara Lee said it would receive almost 52.4 million shares in JP, raising Sara Lee's stake in that company to 84 percent from 39 percent.


A Storm Over Housing Codes
Should home windows or shutters be required to withstand a direct hit from an eight-foot-long two-by-four shot from a cannon at 34 miles an hour, without creating a hole big enough to let through a three-inch sphere?
That is the central question in a battle between home builders and insurance companies over  new standards for windows designed to stand up to the high winds and flying debris of hurricanes.
The insurance industry, still smarting from $16.5 billion in losses from Hurricane Andrew in 1992, is pushing for tougher standards.
It contends that tougher windows could have eliminated much of the up to $5 billion in claims that resulted from water damage in the hurricane.
Intact windows cut in half the likelihood that a home's roof will be blown off in a hurricane.


Wet Clay No Factor This Time
The day before the Davis Cup final was spent listening to Andre Agassi and to jokes about a soggy tennis court.
It was diverting, even intriguing, but the irony is that neither Agassi nor overly damp clay should play much of a role when the United States and Russia begin the three-day, three-of-five event on Friday with two singles matches.


Budget Talks Face Hurdle Of Hostility
With face-to-face budget negotiations between the White House and Congressional Republicans going nowhere fast, each side retreated today to a familiar strategy, swapping accusations and ratcheting up the rhetoric to try to sway public opinion.
It was clear from the increasing animosity that the two sides had not made and did not expect to make any headway in their first week of talks.
After today's two-hour session, they said they would return to the table on Monday, scrapping plans to work on Friday and Saturday.


2 Shows as Bookends to the Mondrian Exhibition
Great museum shows usually spawn related efforts, and the magnificent Mondrian retrospective under way at the Museum of Modern Art is no exception.
Several commercial galleries have mounted Mondrian tributes this fall, and lately two small but engaging efforts have sprung up within the museum itself, one drawn from the Modern's architecture-and-design collection, the other from its painting and sculpture holdings.
Between them, these two shows briefly consider Mondrian's legacy in life and in art, placing his work in a broader context.
The stronger and more pertinent of the two is "Piet Mondrian's de Stijl Colleagues," organized by Christopher Mount, a curatorial assistant in the department of architecture and design.
It traces Mondrian's influence on Dutch painters, architects and designers who were part of de Stijl, the utopian geometric style that took its name from the journal founded by Mondrian and Theo van Doesburg in 1917.


Griffith Joyner's Plans
FLORENCE GRIFFITH JOYNER, winner of three gold medals in sprints at the 1988  Seoul Olympics, insisted yesterday that she was serious about coming out of retirement to go for a world record in the 400 meters.


Rapper in Slain
A year ago, Randy Walker was with his fellow rapper, Tupac Shakur, when Mr.
Shakur was wounded in a shooting in Midtown Manhattan.
Yesterday, Mr.
Walker himself was shot -- fatally -- during a high-speed car chase in Queens.


U.N. Votes to Make Haste Slowly in Retreat From the Balkans
The Security Council moved today to extract the United Nations from the Balkans by limiting the presence of its peacekeeping force in Bosnia to two more months and to just 45 more days in Croatia.
Only in Macedonia, another former republic of Yugoslavia, did the Council extend its peacekeeping mandate for six months, the duration previously applied.
A United Nations contingent of 1,105 soldiers, nearly 500 of them American, is stationed in Macedonia to prevent the kind of ethnic warfare that erupted in Bosnia and Croatia.


The Question Is: What Would Ken Think?
IN 1959, a chesty 11-and-a-half-inch doll wobbled into the marketplace in a zebra-striped maillot and steep stiletto mules.
She was haughty and scary and sexy, having been closely modeled on the German newspaper Bild's Lilli doll, a lascivious plaything for grown men.
Her target audience, however, was young girls, and she soon wormed her way into a nascent generation's inner lives.
Her name, of course, was Barbie.
And 36 years later, she has metamorphosed into much more than a toy.
Almost immediately, but especially in the last decade, artists and writers began to exploit the voluptuous clotheshorse as muse and metaphor, developing a rich body of images and texts that used the doll to comment on class inequality, gender conventions, racial stereotypes and the dark evanescence of childhood sexuality.


Critic's Choice;24 Hours Of Action On AIDS
Dancers Responding to AIDS, formed in 1991 by the Paul Taylor dancer Hernando Cortez, has become known for its innovative ideas for raising money.
But its latest endeavor, "The Remember Project," goes a long stretch further, in dancer  language.
Starting today at 12:01 A.M. and continuing for 24 hours, it will be possible to watch performances by the Taylor and Merce Cunningham companies, Susan Marshall and Company, Neil Greenberg and others, as well as to take a modern dance class, at the Danspace at St.
Mark's Church, Second Avenue at 10th Street, East Village.
There will be other events, too, all of them taking place as the pianist Richard Cameron-Wolfe works his way through all 839 repetitions of Erik  Satie's "Vexations," a 103-second piece that the composer intended to be played  over a 24-hour period.


Bosnia Town Prepares for G.I.'s And Switch From War to Peace
Tuzla's muddy roads are rutted by sinkholes.
Its three movie theaters lie empty and abandoned.
Its two seedy nightclubs close with a 10 P.M. curfew.
Cheeseburgers are nonexistent.
But this remote Bosnian city, its skyline shrouded in a haze of noxious coal  smoke and its phone system barely able to click and wheeze from one neighborhood to another, is expected to be the temporary home of some 20,000 American soldiers.


On Stage, and Off
But After Julie Andrews, Then What?


In a Shift, U.S. Grants Asylum For Mexicans
The United States has quietly granted political asylum to at least 55 Mexican citizens in the last 14 months, a major shift after many years in which virtually all asylum applications from Mexicans were routinely rejected.
Immigrants-rights advocates hail these grants of asylum, which are made by individual Federal immigration agents and judges on a case-by-case basis, as a collective milestone that amounts to formal recognition by the United States that political repression occurs in Mexico.
But the actions have created a growing diplomatic headache for the Clinton Administration by angering the Mexican Government and the ruling party that has dominated the country for more  than 60 years.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows:
JIM ANDERSON, Ronald Feldman Fine Arts, 31 Mercer Street, near Grand Street,  SoHo (through Dec. 16).
Wearable sculptures and other quasi-erotic objects that  evolved from the bodies of electric guitars, and vapid music videos featuring a  Fabio look-alike, show further evidence of Matthew Barney's influence.
That the  final sculpture is a generic biomorphic abstraction seems more to the point (Roberta Smith).
WALTER ANDERSON, Luise Ross Gallery, 50 West 57th Street (through Dec. 16).
More than 20 radiant watercolors by Walter Anderson (1903-1965), one of the least-known American masters of the medium, who painted from nature yet reconstituted the world in terms of energetic decorative patterns that fuse aspects of Asian, Assyrian and pre-Columbian art (Smith).


Iraq Sanctions Kill Children, U.N. Reports
As many as 576,000 Iraqi children may have died since the end of the Persian  Gulf war because of economic sanctions imposed by the Security Council, according to two scientists who surveyed the country for the Food and Agriculture Organization.
The study also found steeply rising malnutrition among the young, suggesting  that more children will be at risk in the coming years.
The results of the survey will appear on Friday in The Lancet, the journal of the British Medical Association.


Japanese Stocks Higher
Stock prices were higher here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 88.68 points, or 0.47 percent, at 18,833.10.
On Thursday, the Nikkei rose 210.44 points.


Art in Review
Jonathan Silver 'Heads' Sculpture Center 167 East 69th Street Manhattan Through Dec. 23


Union Vows A Rail Strike As Talks Stop
The teamsters will strike the Metro-North Commuter Railroad today, union leaders said yesterday, after contract talks broke down in mounting anger over what both sides acknowledged was a small difference in their positions.
"There will be a job action tomorrow," said Glenn Conklin, president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters Local 808.
"We'll strike selectively where we want, when we want."


Financing Allocated For Watershed Pact
The Senate late Wednesday took a first step toward helping New York City protect its drinking water, as it approved $105 million for the watershed agreement that was signed earlier this month between the city and the upstate communities that supply its water.
The bill is aimed at prying free Federal money for the $1.2 billion agreement, the cost of which is now to be borne mostly by New York City.
But in  an atmosphere of great skepticism in Congress toward financing projects in New York, the money would go only to novel programs and monitoring devices that could be used in other cities where the water supplies are endangered.


No Wonder the Guests Are Nervous
Movies like "Traps" that glibly equate kinky sexual behavior with political and moral decay are at best naive, at worst ludicrous.
This solemnly overheated  drama, which opens today at Cinema Village, is set in French Indochina in 1950.
Whenever it wants to put Daniel (Sami Frey), the ruthless French owner of a Southeast Asian rubber plantation, in a sinister light, it shows him making creepy passes at his nervous house guests.
Those guests, Louise and Michael Duffield (Saskia Reeves and Robert Reynolds), are an English writer and photographer who have been engaged to concoct a photojournalistic essay for the rubber company's corporate publication.
Although their assignment is to show Asian workers submitting happily to French domination, the world the couple stumbles into is far from serene.
Communist insurgents are methodically taking over the country's rural areas, and even Daniel's trusted Asian servant, Tuan (Kiet Lam), has joined the  Vietminh.


We Enter Bosnia And Injure Europe;  A Political Ploy
To the Editor:
This rush to send our troops to Bosnia pre-Christmas is a political ploy.
Our President states that this is not war and the boys will be back in less than a year (pre-Christmas 1996).
Now we all know that sending 20,000 or more ground troops into the fray during the winter will result in all types of casualties and hardships.
A great deal of intense military and politicial activity will coincide with the program of re-electionitis.


Rapper Slain After Chase In Queens
A rap artist who was with the rapper Tupac Shakur when he was shot last year  was himself shot and killed early yesterday during a high-speed automobile chase in Queens, police officials said.
Randy Walker, 27, who performed in the group Live Squad, was being chased by  at least two men in a black car when he was shot at least four times, crashing his minivan at the corner of 112th Avenue and 209th Street in Queens Village just after 12:30 A.M., said Lieut.
Vito R. Spano, commander of the detective squad in the 105th Precinct.


Softkey Gets an Ally in Hostile Takeover Bid
Softkey International Inc. gained a powerful ally today in its hostile bid for the Learning Company, getting a commitment from the Tribune Company to invest $150 million if the deal is completed.
Softkey also agreed to acquire Compton's New Media Inc. from Tribune for stock valued at $106.5 million.
The proposed transactions came on a day when the Learning Company and Softkey filed lawsuits against each other.
Moving first, the Learning Company contended  that Softkey had failed to disclose material information about its finances.
Softkey later contended that the Learning Company and Broderbund Software Inc. had misrepresented its business and financial condition.


Missouri Executes a Confessed Serial Killer
A drifter who confessed to more than a dozen slayings was executed by injection early Wednesday for slashing a teen-ager to death during a burglary.
The inmate, Anthony Joe LaRette, was put to death at the Potosi Correctional  Center after the United Stated Supreme Court rejected a last-minute appeal.


TOYOTA PLANS TO BUILD NEW TRUCK PLANT IN INDIANA
The Toyota Motor Corporation formally announced yesterday that it would invest $700 million to build a new truck assembly plant in Princeton, Ind., that will begin production in the fall of 1998.
As expected, the plant would directly employ about 1,300 people who would build about 100,000 T100 full-size pickup trucks a year.
The company has chosen a 1,100-acre site in Gibson County, 21 miles north of Evansville, for the facility.
The new plant would be the Japanese auto maker's fourth vehicle manufacturing facility in North America.
State and local officials said that they would provide Toyota an incentive package worth about $72 million, including $29.8 million from the state and $42  million from local sources.


Howard Higman, Academic Impresario, Dies at 80
Howard Higman, the agile-minded academic impresario whose annual World Affairs Conferences at the University of Colorado attracted a dazzling and diverse array of fun-loving intellectuals, died on Nov. 22 at Boulder Community  Hospital.
He was 80.
Officially, Mr.
Higman was a sociology professor, but that was merely an academic cover for his role as the thinking person's Nathan Detroit, the founder and proprietor of the oldest established permanent freewheeling gabfest in academia, a weeklong extravaganza of discussion and debate that was once compared to a cross between a think tank and a fraternity party.


Ragged and Risque Not in Style
For the last year, payday in Newark every other Friday -- has been a day for  city employees to work in casual attire.
Too casual, some officials thought, citing problems with jeans that were fashionable but frayed, jeans with holes in them and tops that exposed too much  skin.
This week the city's business administrator, Glenn A. Grant, called a halt to the dress-down days.
"Neatness and cleanliness are essential," he said in a letter to department directors.
SUSAN JO KELLER


Half-Million Cadillacs Recalled In Federal Pollution Settlement
The General Motors Corporation agreed today to recall nearly a half-million late-model Cadillacs and pay nearly $45 million in fines and other costs, settling a Federal complaint that the automaker had installed devices that caused the cars to emit illegal amounts of carbon monoxide.
The company agreed to pay $11 million in fines and spend about $30 million on recalling and repairing the cars and about $4 million on compensatory programs to help control air pollution, senior officials of the Environmental Protection  Agency and the Justice Department said.


Sports of The Times;Exit Sign Best Thing For Darryl
SO what was this all about?
What was Darryl Strawberry doing in a Yankee uniform in the first place?
What was all this blather about helping his rehabilitation from drugs and tax penalties?
What was all this babble about Darryl's helping the Yankees?
It was all willy-nilly, as most things are around the Yankees.
Yesterday the  team decided not to offer Strawberry a $1.8 million contract but rather to pay his $175,000 release fee.
So much for the brave words of last summer.


Gravediggers' Claims Unsettle a Parish
So deeply do some parishioners of the Church of St.
Peter value the smallest  shred of human life that outside the doors they pass through every Sunday they have put up a small "Tomb of the Unborn Child" lamenting the national tide of abortions.
That reverence for life helps explain why there has been such distress at allegations of burial practices that went on for 40 years at the Roman Catholic  parish's own cemetery on the edge of town.


COCA-COLA TO DOUBLE ITS INVESTMENT IN RUSSIA
The Coca-Cola Company said yesterday that it would double its investment in Russia to more than $500 million by 1997.
Coca-Cola, the world's biggest soft drink maker, made the announcement at the opening of a new $40 million plant in  St.
Petersburg, which will produce Coca-Cola, Fanta, Sprite and BonQua soft drinks.
The company said that 300 workers would be employed at the new plant.


Accounts
Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, to Gotham Inc., New York, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Cos., as the first agency to handle advertising for Keri hand and body lotion in Canada.
Gotham already handles advertising for the brand in the United States.
The billings were estimated at $1 million.


Browsing Among Memories of Performances Past
THE youngest of them is at least 70 now.
They all look fragile and often, frankly, decrepit.
The clippings they hold, records of mostly forgotten triumphs, are the color of advanced jaundice and tend to shed their edges like flakes of dried skin.
But to spend time with any of the hundreds of gilt-tooled red scrapbooks in the Robinson Locke Collection, on the third floor of the New York Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center, is to enter into a passionate, obsessive  conversation with a weighty chapter of America's theatrical past.


File Search In 1992 Race Wasn't Illegal
The independent prosecutor who headed a three-year criminal inquiry into the  State Department's 1992 search of Bill Clinton's passport files said today that  several top Bush Administration officials had behaved stupidly in the incident,  but none had broken the law.
The prosecutor, Joseph E. diGenova, said he had found no evidence that President Bush, Vice President Dan Quayle or anyone else in the Bush Administration had acted illegally in the effort to unearth damaging information about Mr.
Clinton when he was the Democratic nominee engaged in a bitter campaign with Mr.
Bush.


Nets Grant Coleman's Wish With Trade to Sixers
In a shocking six-player trade that changed the course of two franchises, the Nets traded forward Derrick Coleman to the Philadelphia 76ers last night while acquiring the 7-foot-6-inch center Shawn Bradley from Philadelphia.
The deal sent Coleman, forward Sean Higgins and guard Rex Walters to the Sixers in exchange for Bradley, forward Tim Perry and guard Greg Grant.


Art in Review
Bruce Davidson 'Central Park' Aperture/Burden Gallery 20 East 23d Street Manhattan Through Dec. 9


Market Place;U.S. utilities buy in Britain to learn deregulation for home use.
THE British utility industry is in its fifth year of deregulatory turmoil.
And some American utilities have eagerly cast about in those turbulent waters to land one of the few remaining fish from the fragmented industry.
The Southern Company of Atlanta, one of the largest utilities in the United States, has already caught its prize, a major regional power-distribution company in Britain, South Western Electricity P.L.C., at a price of L1.1 billion.
Southern's stock rallied after the purchase, to a high of 24 5/8 in October.
It has since slipped, closing yesterday at 22 7/8, down 3/8.


Panel Clears Senate Minority Leader on an Ethics Complaint
The Senate Ethics Committee said today that it had decided to clear the Senate minority leader, Tom Daschle, of accusations that he might have behaved improperly by intervening with Federal air safety inspectors on behalf of a friend who owned a small aviation company.
In a brief statement, the bipartisan committee, three Republicans and three Democrats, said it had concluded that Mr.
Daschle, a South Dakota Democrat, had  done nothing more than provide routine, proper constituent services to the company.


Diner's Journal
And then we have . . .
" My companion and I roll our eyes. The waiter has been standing at our table for a full three minutes unreeling an impossible-to-remember list of specials. "That's more dishes than are listed on  the menu," we protest. He nods solemnly.
It is little surprise, then, to discover that the owner of Da Vittorio is related to the owner of Da Umberto.
His son, in fact.


INSIDE
Aristide Reaffirms Deadline


For Children
Art Workshops Newark Museum 49 Washington Street Newark (201) 596-6550 Recommended ages: 3 to 7 Weekends through December


Familiar faces take center stage in public service campaigns created for World AIDS Day.
FACES and voices that are familiar from places like Broadway and Seventh Avenue -- as well as Madison Avenue -- are beginning to be featured in advertising meant to encourage the fight against AIDS.
Celebrities are the central elements of several public service and pro bono campaigns being introduced on or around World AIDS Day, which will be observed today for the eighth time.
The trend indicates that personalities known to consumers are becoming more comfortable with helping to combat a disease that still carries a substantial stigma among many Americans.


Fraud Charges for Boston Securities Dealer
The Securities and Exchange Commission charged a Boston municipal securities  dealer yesterday with stealing more than $7 million from investors across the country and with fraud in the sale of more than $14 million in securities.
The commission obtained a temporary restraining order against Robert Gersh, head of Boston Municipal Securities, a small broker-dealer, as part of a special enforcement action.
The agency said that since 1990, Mr.
Gersh offered and sold  more than $14 million in certificates of participation, a form of municipal-equipment lease, from 34 municipalities.


New European Airline?
The head of the Virgin Group, Richard Branson, is in talks with potential partners about setting up a low-fare carrier in Europe next year, a spokesman said yesterday.
Mr.
Branson, the founder of Virgin Atlantic Airways, is looking  at several sites in Europe as the hub or hubs of the new service, the spokesman  said.
(Bloomberg Business News)


DOLE BACKS PLAN TO SEND U.S. FORCE ON BOSNIA MISSION
In a major boost to President Clinton's decision to send American troops to Bosnia, Bob Dole, the Senate Majority leader, today threw his support behind the mission.
Mr.
Dole made his announcement from the Senate floor in tandem with Senator John S. McCain, the Arizona Republican and former prisoner of war in Vietnam who has been one of his party's most bitter critics of any military intervention in  Bosnia.


Nicaragua Volcano Threat
The Cerro Negro volcano spewed hot ash, steam and 50-pound rocks 1,000 feet into the air today, blanketing the area and sending people fleeing.
The likelihood of a full-scale eruption from the volcano, 75 miles northwest  of Managua, was not clear.
But ash piled up across thousands of acres, crushing trees, shrubs, ripe sugar cane, corn and other crops.


Recipe for California's Political Chaos: Term Limits, Party Loyaltyand Power
Coming out of the 1994 elections, Republicans held a 41-to-39 edge in the California Assembly and for the first time in two decades were in the majority in the 80-member body.
They forthwith promised to replace the veteran Democratic Speaker, Willie L.  Brown Jr., with a Republican and to push through a solidly conservative agenda of tax reductions and cuts in social spending.


Art in Review
Jerry N. Uelsmann Witkin Gallery 415 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through Dec. 9


On a Day of Peace in Belfast, Faiths Join to Cheer Clinton
President Clinton ranged across a remarkably transformed Northern Ireland today, promising the once bitterly hostile Catholic and Protestant communities that if they persevered in their search for peace, "the United States of America will proudly stand with you."
Tens of thousands turned out to cheer Mr.
Clinton, the first American President to visit Ulster, where 13 American presidents, from Andrew Jackson to  Mr.
Clinton himself, can trace their roots.


Abortion Foes Transfer Base From Houston
A year after a jury here required one of the nation's more militant anti-abortion groups and its leaders to pay more than a half-million dollars in  damages for "harassing" patients and doctors at Houston abortion clinics, the group, Rescue America, has left town, moving its headquarters to Baltimore.
Don Treshman, the director of Rescue America, which has been based in Houston for a decade, said that the move was in August but that the organization wanted  "to keep it quiet until we were all set up."


EXODUS OF TOP LOTUS OFFICIALS CONTINUES
Two executives at the Lotus Development Corporation, including a corporate officer, have joined the exodus of Lotus officials from the software company since it was acquired by I.B.M. in June.
The resignation of June L. Rokoff, the  company's senior vice president of worldwide services and support who is highly  regarded for her management skills, will take effect on Dec. 31.
The company also said yesterday that Hamang Davey, a vice president of strategic alliances,  was leaving.
A Lotus spokesman said Mr.
Davey had headed the company's merger and integration team following the acquisition by I.B.M. and that the work had essentially been completed.
Ms.
Rokoff's departure essentially ends the post-takeover presence by the company's top officials.
Dave Champagne, who has been at Lotus for 12 years, will replace Ms.
Rokoff.
An I.B.M. spokesman declined to comment on either departure.


CBS, Under Its New Owner, Plans a Series With Cosby
CBS will announce a deal with Bill Cosby today for his first new situation comedy since his "Cosby Show" was television's biggest hit in the 1980's.
The deal, which will reunite Mr.
Cosby with the production team of Marcy Carsey and Tom Werner, is one of the biggest financial commitments made by a network in recent years, said a senior executive at a rival network.
The agreement guarantees the new show a two-year run on CBS.


APPLIED MATERIALS TO TELL OF CHIP-MAKING ADVANCE
Applied Materials Inc. is expected to introduce a powerful chip-manufacturing technology on Friday that could increase its revenues by 10 percent and further  its position as the leading provider of semiconductor-manufacturing equipment.
The announcement would cap a positive week for Applied.
On Tuesday, the company  reported that its fiscal fourth-quarter earnings more than doubled.
And including a 50-cent gain yesterday, its stock has surged so far this week by $6.25, or 15 percent, closing at $48.625.
Applied Materials has scheduled a news conference for Friday where it is widely expected to introduce its offering in so-called CMP, or chemical mechanical planarization, tools.
CMP tools, which are currently being sold by two much smaller companies -- the Integrated Process Equipment Corporation and Ontrak Systems Inc. -- enable chip makers to polish individual layers of a chip to make them flatter, without applying high heat that would melt metal layers.


That's No Leak
To the Editor:
In Maureen Dowd's "Gaslight Strategy" (column, Nov. 26), she stated that "the New York Daily News publisher Mort Zuckerman let it leak that he and the President had been playing hearts on the ride home."


Executive Changes


U.S. Reopens Trade Dispute, Saying China Ignores Piracy
Reopening a major trade dispute with China, the United States has told Beijing that it has 90 days to enforce an agreement struck with Washington earlier this year to end the pirating of computer software, music and movies, or once again risk the imposition of large trade sanctions.
The public warning comes after numerous private admonitions during meetings with top Chinese leaders, Clinton Administration officials said.


On My Mind;The Blockades Of Taiwan
They come almost every day now the military threats to this island country from the Communist Government in Beijing.
Chinese Army commanders order repeated amphibious landings at the mainland coast nearest the island -- the precise kind of operation that would be needed to invade Taiwan -- and "tests" of missiles in the straits dividing China and the island.
In recent days there has been a series of leaked reports that Beijing is considering a naval blockade of Taiwan.


Netanyahu Silenced Anti-Rabin Chants
To the Editor:
Arthur Hertzberg (letter, Nov. 15) regrettably dregs up the new big lie of the Israeli left: that the Likud leader, Benjamin Netanyahu, ignored chants that termed the late Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin a traitor and ignored a placard showing Rabin in an SS uniform during an Oct. 5 demonstration in Jerusalem.


Team Folds in Memphis
If the Houston Oilers of the National Football League want to play in Memphis while waiting for a stadium to be built in Nashville, there is no longer a Canadian Football League team to get in the way.
The Memphis Mad Dogs of the C.F.L. folded today after one season in which they drew an average of fewer than 10,000 to a stadium that seats 62,953.
"The public has spoken," the coach and general manager ,Pepper Rodgers, said.


Move to Delay Emissions Tests
The state's tough new program to test auto emissions does not go into effect  until 1997 and already legislation has been introduced to scrap it.
A group of Assembly Democrats introduced a measure yesterday that would put  the emissions program on hold while the state tries to cut air pollution in other ways, like providing tax breaks for cars powered by natural gas and electricity.
The new emissions tests were part of a law passed last summer to bring the state into compliance with the Federal Clean Air Act.


In a Parking Lot, a Quest For Corpses of 2 Mobsters
Not far from the continuing life-and-death dramas at Staten Island University Hospital, a sideshow is going on.
The secondary show is very much about death, mob style.
The stage is a gravel lot normally used for hospital-employee parking.
The actors are a score of Federal agents and New York City police officers and one handsome German shepherd, Zeus.
The props include a backhoe, at least one big power drill and various police vehicles.


Mets to Inspect Mexico Site
Padres Manager Bruce Bochy and other team officials will meet with Mets Manager Dallas Green next Tuesday in Monterrey, Mexico, to inspect Monterrey Stadium as a potential site for a three-game series next Aug. 16-18.
Possible scheduling conflicts with the Republican National Convention and the San Diego Chargers have led the Padres to pursue an alternate location for the series on those dates.
If the games are moved to 26,500-seat Monterrey Stadium,  they would be the first regular-season major league games played outside the United States or Canada.


Doll Account Moved In-House by Mattel
Mattel Inc. has moved the account of its Cabbage Patch Kids line of dolls in-house after a year at Deutsch Inc., the agency said.
The billings were estimated at $5 million.
Donny Deutsch, chief executive at Deutsch, which has offices in New York and Santa Monica, Calif., confirmed a report of the change this week in Adweek.
He said the shift was made because the agency's assignment, to reintroduce the doll line, had been completed.
Mr.
Deutsch disputed part of the Adweek report suggesting that Mattel might reassign the account to another agency.
Telephone calls to Tim Kilpin, the executive in charge of Cabbage Patch Kids at Mattel in  El Segundo, Calif., were not returned.


For Germans, Villains in Forest Are Too Real
For centuries, the vast tracts of Germany's woods have been the hiding place  for villains real and fictitious that haunt the German psyche, so much so that almost every schoolchild learns at least the first line to an old folk song: "In the forest, there live the robbers. Yoo-hoo, the robbers."
Now, say the police, new thieves have emerged from the forests: roaming bands of Romanians who cross into the country illegally, break into banks, post offices, stores, gas stations and businesses of country towns like Remsfeld, and then escape into the woods.


Esker K. Davis, 60, a Space Probe Official
Esker K. Davis, a manager of several missions of planetary exploration, died  on Friday in La Canada, Calif.
He was 60.
The cause was cancer, a spokesman for the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., said yesterday.


Hanson Says Profits Surged 33% in Year
The British-American conglomerate Hanson P.L.C. yesterday reported a 33 percent surge in profits for the year ended Sept. 30.
Pretax profits before exceptional charges were L1.37 billion ($2.10 billion) in the year that ended on Sept. 30, up from L1.03 billion a year earlier.
Revenue rose 7.9 percent, to L9.97 billion ($15.26 billion) from L9.24 billion.
Hanson said prospects were extremely good after a year in which some of the  British parts of its empire were hit by a downturn.
"Our future lies in the growth and development of our chemical, consumer energy and building materials and equipment interests and the concentration on fewer, larger businesses," the  chairman, Lord Hanson, said.
The group said it planned a further revamping and reduction of debt.
(Reuters)


Franco's New Role: Guiding Mets' Youth
My job now," said John Franco, "is to be the gatekeeper.
I mean, someone's got to keep an eye on the young guys."
Franco, the oldest left-handed reliever on the Mets, as well as the oldest player on the Mets, at age 35 and with 13 years of major league experience, smiled when he discussed his veteran's role on the very young ball club.


Star Shine
Chandeliers that plunge toward the audience are all well and good.
So are helicopters that land on stage.
Rolling fog that swallows up the players' feet is effective too.
But if you really want to knock people in the aisles, the best way to do it is with a star, the kind that is all charisma, guts and glory.
That is the lesson Julie Andrews, Carol Burnett, Zoe Caldwell and Carol Channing are teaching Broadway this season.
Most began on Broadway when very young, and all four know everything one needs to know to make a crowd stand up and cheer.
If people are flocking to see "Victor, Victoria," "Moon Over Buffalo," "Master Class" and "Hello, Dolly!" it is not because they are hooked on nostalgia for Eliza Doolittle in her glorious youth, the staggeringly shoulder-padded Mildred Fierce, Jean Brodie in her prime or a three-decades-younger Dolly Levi.
It is because Andrews, Burnett, Caldwell and Channing put on a great show.


Condoms Used in Safe-Sex Programs Are Recalled for Defects
Over the last month, the New York State Health Department has been recalling  thousands of potentially defective condoms sent last summer to community-based organizations in the state for distribution to poor people, college students and other clients of safe-sex programs, health officials said yesterday.
While the recall involved 3 million Chinese-made Olympus brand condoms sent to the community organizations, and thousands were apparently given to and used by clients of the safe-sex programs, the officials characterized the dangers as minimal and the recall as a precaution undertaken by the state voluntarily.


MCN TO BUY GAS AND OIL PROPERTIES FOR $120 MILLION
The MCN Corporation, a natural-gas holding company, said yesterday that its subsidiaries had agreed to buy gas- and oil-related properties in six states for a total of $120 million.
MCN said that the purchase included gas producing and pipeline properties in Virginia from Consol Coal Group.
The acquisition includes a 100 percent interest in 130 producing wells and rights to undertake additional development drilling on about 100,000 acres of Virginia coal bed properties.
MCN also agreed to buy gas and oil properties in Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas, Colorado and North Dakota.


Anderson Interests Knicks and Kings
Kenny Anderson coming to Madison Square Garden?
Not quite, but the Knicks are one of several teams interested in possibly trading for the Nets point guard.


Germany Doesn't Change Rates, But Dollar Still Gains vs. Mark
The dollar rose to a two-month high against the German mark yesterday, holding on to gains even after the Bundesbank left interest rates unchanged.
While a number of currency traders were expecting a rate cut after the German central bank's policy meeting today, many still hold out hopes of a rate cut soon, given Germany's flagging economic growth and moderate inflation.


U.S. Indicts 11 Brokers on Investor Fraud
Pledging more severe punishment for investment brokers who defraud customers, the Federal Government announced indictments today against 11 brokers who prosecutors said stole amounts, large and small, in 10 states.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball


Chronicle
A glimmer of good news for Buckingham Palace?
London newspapers were fanning  speculation yesterday that PRINCE EDWARD, Queen Elizabeth's youngest son, and SOPHIE RHYS-JONES, whom he has been seeing for two years, would become engaged in the near future and marry in the summer.
The conjecture was fueled by the announcement that Miss Rhys-Jones is leaving her job with the public relations firm of MCM.
Her job involves daily contact with journalists, who were more interested in her relationship with the prince than in her clients.
NADINE BROZAN


METRO DIGEST
PATAKI TO RETAIN NURSING HOME QUOTAS


Home Video
Best, Le Meilleur, Lo Mejor


Broken Hill Of Australia Agrees to Buy Magma Copper
The Broken Hill Proprietary Company of Australia, one of the world's largest  natural resources and industrial companies, said late yesterday that it had agreed to buy the Magma Copper Company of Tucson, Ariz., for $1.8 billion plus the assumption of about $600 million in debt.
The acquisition would make Broken Hill the largest publicly traded producer of copper in the world, second only to Codelco, the state-owned copper producer in Chile.
After buying Magma, Broken Hill would produce roughly 10 percent of the world's copper.


Imagining Race Relations With Roles Reversed
Watching "White Man's Burden," you can almost hear the sound of feet treading lightly on eggshells.
This didactic political fable, which imagines an America in which the roles of blacks and whites are reversed, approaches its subject with such nervous self-consciousness that the arguments in its debate about racial injustice are measured out in quarter-teaspoons.
Were it not for John Travolta's big-hearted portrayal of an unemployed white factory worker driven to commit a desperate act, the movie would be an emotionally frozen exercise in  cautious high-mindedness.
As Louis Pinnock, a hard-working family man who loses his job and eventually  his home through a minor misunderstanding at work, Mr.
Travolta creates a sympathetic portrait of a man who comes unstrung.
Until disaster strikes, Louis  lives with his tight-lipped wife, Marsha (Kelly Lynch), and their two children in a poor white neighborhood of chain-link fences and decomposing auto parts that resembles south central Los Angeles.


Grand Met Net Up 3.7%
Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. said yesterday that its profit rose 3.7 percent in  the year ended Sept. 30, helped by strong performances at its Pillsbury and Burger King divisions that offset lower liquor earnings.
Grand Met, based in London, said it earned L636 million, or $1 billion at the year's average exchange rate of $1.58 to the British pound.
Revenue was up 3.1 percent, to L8.03 billion, or $12.68 billion, compared with L7.78 billion a year earlier.
(AP)


2 McCann Accounts Get New Agencies
The Whitehall-Robins Healthcare division of the American Home Products Corporation said yesterday that it and McCann-Erickson New York had mutually agreed to part company on the accounts of the Dristan decongestant and Preparation H line of hemorrhoid products.
As a result, those brands, with combined billings estimated at $10 million to $20 million, have been reassigned  to two other agencies on the Whitehall-Robins roster.
Thomas Cavanagh, a vice president at American Home in Madison, N.J., said that Grey Advertising in New York, which handles brands like Anacin pain reliever and Chap Stick lip care products, was named to handle Preparation H, and Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS in New York, which handles brands like the Robitussin cough products, was assigned Dristan.
Lowe, like McCann New York, is owned by the Interpublic Group of Companies.
McCann New York handled Dristan since 1984 and Preparation H since 1989.


Dodgers Make Gagne Part of New Infield
Rebuilding the left side of their infield over a two-day span, the Los Angeles Dodgers agreed yesterday to a one-year contract with shortstop GREG GAGNE, a deal said to be worth $2.6 million.
The Dodgers, the National League's worst-fielding team last season, acquired third baseman MIKE BLOWERS in a trade with Seattle on Wednesday.
Gagne, an 11-year veteran who is 34, hit .256 with Kansas City last season.
He will take over for JOSE OFFERMAN.
(AP)


Lazard Freres to Leave Municipal Finance
Lazard Freres &amp; Company, whose municipal finance operation has been plagued by plummeting business and political scandals, announced yesterday that it was getting out of the business entirely.
In a terse statement, the company said, "After careful study, we have decided to curtail our municipal operations." This brings to an end an effort by Lazard to become a bigger player in municipal finance; the push started in the late 1980's but ended in a series of political missteps that cost the firm clients and money.


Abroad at Home;What Is at Stake?
There is a curious aspect to the debate about sending American troops to Bosnia.
Members of Congress opposed to the idea of helping to carry out the Dayton peace agreement are some of the same people who added $7 billion to President Clinton's defense budget.
They want to maintain the largest, most powerful military force on earth.
But what for?
The Soviet challenge is no more.
And those opposed to the Bosnian deployment  are effectively saying that we must take no risks with our military in meeting the new challenge after the cold war: the ethnic conflicts that are the greatest menace to peace today.


Coffee Drops to 1 1/2-Year Low; Natural Gas and Fuel Oil Fall
Coffee prices fell yesterday to an 18-month low on the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange in New York, dragged down by expectations that harvests in Central America and Mexico would soon flood the market.
On other markets, natural gas and heating oil prices fell.
The Commodity Research Bureau index of 21 commodities gained 0.10 point, to 241.71.


Agencies Are Told to Brace for More Cuts
Facing another looming budget gap, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday ordered New York City's agencies to prepare to cut spending by 7.5 percent for the fiscal year that begins next July.
The Mayor's order would eliminate 4,500 jobs through attrition and raise the specter of more reductions in services used by millions of New Yorkers.
The proposed cut would fall hardest on the Board of Education, the city's largest agency, which under yesterday's order must cut about $180 million in the city's share of its budget, which is roughly half of the school system's total budget of $7.3 billion.
But the proposed reductions could also affect agencies from the Department of Parks and Recreation, which faces a cut of about $10 million, to the Department of Sanitation, with a proposed cut of $40 million.


SONY RESTARTS WORK AT FIRE-DAMAGED BATTERY PLANT
The Sony Corporation has restarted limited production at a manufacturing site for lithium ion batteries that was damaged by a fire in early November.
A company spokesman this morning in Tokyo said the plant, in Koriyama, about 100 miles north of Tokyo, is producing finished batteries, though he declined to say how many.
The fire, on Nov. 4, damaged two floors of a three-story building at the plant.
The cause of the fire has yet to be determined.
The building houses Sony's main manufacturing site for lithium ion batteries.


Private Prisons' Profit
To the Editor:
Re your Nov. 24 article on private prisons: I distrust private prisons because the drive to make a profit will cause companies to cut rehabilitation, education and job training.
Because for-profit prisons benefit from greater numbers of prisoners, recidivism is in their interest.
We need to change their incentives.


Disruptions Planned Against Metro-North
After labor talks with the Metro-North Commuter Railroad broke down last night -- in mounting anger over what both sides acknowledged was a small difference in their positions -- the teamsters promised another spot strike against the rail line today.
Union leaders would not specify where they planned to strike, but on Tuesday they disrupted service on the northern part of the Hudson line.
A walkout would leave Metro-North riders in New York State stranded, since railway officials said they would offer only limited bus service to help riders.


Councilman to Take New Post
Charles Millard, a Republican City Councilman from the Upper East Side of Manhattan, has been selected by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani to be president of the Economic Development Corporation.
The Mayor is scheduled to make the announcement today at City Hall.
The corporation tries to encourage business growth in the city and attract and retain private-sector jobs.
Mr.
Millard, 38, will replace Clay B. Lifflander, who resigned in August to become president of Millbrook Management,  an investment company with holdings in wineries owned by John S. Dyson, Mr.
Giuliani's Deputy Mayor for finance and economic development.


METROMEDIA TO BUY ALLIANCE ENTERTAINMENT
Metromedia International Group Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to buy  music distributor the Alliance Entertainment Corporation in a stock exchange worth at least $390 million.
Alliance, the largest full service distributor of prerecorded music in the United States, will be merged into a newly formed Metromedia subsidiary.
Metromedia, in the latest of a string of deals, said it would acquire Alliance for about $12 a share in Metromedia stock.
Alliance has about 32.8 million shares outstanding, giving the deal an apparent value of about $393 million.
But the deal also calls for giving a five-year warrant to buy 0.2 share of Metromedia at an exercise price $21 a share for each Alliance share, which would make the deal worth much more.
The companies did not give a total value for the deal, and officials could not be reached to comment.
Metromedia, controlled by the billionaire John Kluge, is a communications and media company.


Yankees Won't be Giving Strawberry a Second Chance
Darryl Strawberry's brief and very complicated career with the Yankees came to a very odd conclusion yesterday.
The Yankees asked Strawberry for a 15-day extension to contemplate whether or not they should exercise his $1.8 million contract option for 1996.
When he denied the request, their second in a month, the Yankees released him under a $175,000 buyout clause.
So Strawberry -- the former Mets slugger who evolved into George Steinbrenner's personal rehabilitation project when he returned to major league  baseball last summer -- saw his relationship with the Yankees end with a one-sentence news release from General Manager Bob Watson.


Rabin Killer Denies Rabbi Approved Act
Yigal Amir, the confessed assassin of Yitzhak Rabin, today denied suggestions that he had acted with the approval of a rabbi, and insisted that he had decided on the killing alone after careful deliberation.
"I may seem a little cool-headed to you," he told reporters before a hearing  at the Tel Aviv Magistrate Court.
"But it's not cool-headedness at all; it's trust in God, something you're not familiar with. You trust in peace, I trust in God."


Stanley Adelman, 72, Repairer Of Literary World's Typewriters
Stanley Adelman, whose Upper West Side typewriter-repair shop served as an intensive-care unit for the malfunctioning margin releases and cantankerous carriage returns of well-known writers, died yesterday at the Washington Adventist Hospital in Takoma Park, Md.
He was 72 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.
He had had health problems since a bicycle accident in Putnam Valley, N.Y., in 1984 left him unable to speak.


Art in Review
Karen Kilimnik 303 Gallery 89 Greene Street SoHo Through Dec. 22


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in Manhattan that are to close soon:
Closing This Weekend


Packard Bell Denies Rumors Of Problems
Packard Bell Electronics Inc., responding to analysts' comments about its sales of home computers, said today that it was not experiencing financial problems and that demand for the company's personal computers was high.
"The recent rumors about Packard Bell are unfounded and totally groundless,"  said Beny Alagem, chief executive of the privately held computer maker.
"Packard Bell is not experiencing financial difficulties."


Republican Whitewater Inquiry To Focus on Role of Mrs. Clinton
Republicans on the Senate Whitewater committee today signaled their intention to focus on the role of Hillary Rodham Clinton and her Arkansas law firm in the  failure of a savings and loan association that cost taxpayers more than $60 million.
Opening a new line of inquiry in the long-running proceedings, the Republicans elicited testimony from the Government lawyer who hired Mrs.
Clinton's firm in 1989 to represent the savings association, Madison Guaranty, after it collapsed.


We Enter Bosnia And Injure Europe
To the Editor:


Chronicle
The Collegiate Chorale, the 54-year-old chorus formed by Robert Shaw, was deep into rehearsals for Handel's "Messiah," which it will perform on Dec. 14 in Carnegie Hall, when it heard Hollywood's siren call.
"About six weeks ago, we got a call saying that BARBRA STREISAND was shopping for a chorus to appear in her new movie and to record a work for it," ROBERT BASS, music director of the chorale, said yesterday.
"We submitted a tape and about two weeks ago, we were asked if we could fit filming this week into our schedule. We said it could be done but with a lot of extra effort."


Orders for Durables Fell 1% in October
Led by plunging demand for aircraft, orders to United States factories for expensive, long-lasting goods fell 1 percent in October, the first drop in three months.
The Commerce Department said today that the decline pushed durable-goods orders down to a seasonally adjusted $167.3 billion.


Hickok Did Not Go Gentle Into That Good Sunset
Most of Walter Hill's "Wild Bill" takes place during the last days of Wild Bill Hickok's life, as he grapples with the residue of his rip-snorting, showdown-filled career.
"Maybe you can help me," mutters the gunfighter to the Chinese woman who runs an opium den, though she doesn't understand him.
"Where the hell did things go wrong?"
That gives "Wild Bill" the makings of a sunset western, mournfully dedicated  to a hero's regrets and the taxidermic perfecting of his legend.
But Mr.
Hill's  film turns out to be much more interesting than that, bristling with a vitality  that belies the nearness of Hickok's doom.
This imaginatively offbeat western, on a par with Mr.
Hill's "Long Riders," tries to embrace the full range of pride, sorrow and doubt prompted by Hickok's exploits.
Along the way, it assesses the glare of celebrity that made Hickok both star and target, ruefully  calculating the price of fame.


Barings Trader Pleads Guilty to 2 Charges in Singapore
Nicholas W. Leeson, the former financial trader, admitted fraud and forgery today in a trading scheme that toppled Barings P.L.C., Britain's oldest merchant bank, under $1.38 billion in debts.
"I plead guilty," Mr.
Leeson, 28, calmly told Judge Tan Siong Thye in a packed courtroom after the charges of fraud and forgery with the intention to commit fraud were read aloud.


An Evocation Of Nature
The 92d Street Y Harkness Dance Project festival got off to a provocative start Wednesday night at Playhouse 91 with new and recent work by Molissa Fenley.
Performing for the first time since an onstage injury in January, Ms.
Fenley was joined by two other solo dancers.
The results were fascinating.
To see Peggy Baker and Michele Pogliani in Ms.
Fenley's solo choreography is  to realize that her unusual pure-movement style is as much minimalist theater as it is dance.
And that is also the message of Ms.
Fenley's mysterious, rooted new "Regions," which she performed to a magical score by Maggi Payne.


NEWS SUMMARY
InternationalA3-20


Giants Find an Oasis In Arizona's Desert
When the comedic actor Chris Elliott ran on the field at halftime to film a potato chip commercial, he should have run toward the sideline where Arizona Coach Buddy Ryan was standing wearing his headset.
They could have talked football -- one comedian to the other.
Buddyball is no longer a cute phrase for the kind of football coached by a man once considered one of the finest defensive minds in the game.
It stands for ineptitude.
The Cardinals are a joke.
And even the lowly Giants have figured out the punch line.


Art in Review
Nicholas Mukomberanwa Reece Galleries 24 West 57th Street Manhattan Through Dec. 23


Election Gain By Mubarak Is Under Fire
Egypt's ruling party was headed today for an overwhelming victory in parliamentary elections that opposition parties and human rights groups said were unfair.
The governing National Democratic Party won 87 of the first 96 seats decided  in the first round of voting on Wednesday, according to reports Thursday on state television.


Full Day's Work Till the Cows Come Home
SOMEWHERE a child wailed, troubling the unfamiliar night.
Whose child was it, I wondered groggily from deep inside a soft cocoon of sleep.
I stirred awake, heart pounding.
Was it mine?
Where was I?
My watch said 20 minutes to 5.
There it went again, a piteous cry that suddenly became recognizable.
Now I remembered.
We were far from Manhattan's comforting lullaby of police sirens.
We were on a farm in Pennsylvania.
Our little daughter was safe in her bed.
And that ghastly din was a rooster's crowing.
We had needed an antidote to civilization, a quick and cheap respite from famous-visitor gridlock and prewinter urban blues.
Nothing so venturesome as a Club Med holiday.
A weekend out of the city would do.
But something different, something that would hold the interest of a fidgety kindergartener who stops to  pet every dog she sees and thinks food comes from D'Agostino's.
The answer was clear.


South Wales Rejects Bid
South Wales Electricity P.L.C., a British electric company, said yesterday that it had rejected Welsh Water P.L.C.'s latest takeover offer of L9.16 a share as inadequate.
On Tuesday, South Wales Electricity rejected an initial proposal  by Welsh Water of a maximum of L8.4 a share.
The utility has said it wants a price "well north of L9" a share.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Rookie Tries to Channel His Considerable Intensity Into Games
Coach Rich Kotite calls Matt O'Dwyer a tough guy, just like he used to be.
Boomer Esiason reminded the rookie in the huddle last Sunday at Seattle, "You came in with a reputation as the toughest guy in the draft." Esiason, the old pro who delights in bringing newcomers down a peg, paused and added, "The only reason you're starting is Carlton Haselrig isn't playing."


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.


No Headline
Whatever good fortune I have, Columbia was part of that, so I owe them something." -- ALFRED LERNER, who gave the university $25 million. [B1:2.]


Economic Data and Dollar Aid Rally in Bond Trading
The bond rally built a head of steam yesterday, aided by weak economic data and a firm dollar that helped to push the rate of the 30-year Treasury bond to its lowest level in more than two years.
A sharp drop in the Chicago Association of Purchasing Agent's report for November yesterday raised expectations for a subdued report by the National Association of Purchasing Managements which is scheduled for release today.
That, in turn, helped to stoke anticipation of another interest-rate cut by the  Federal Reserve, the better to stimulate what some perceive is a slowing economy.


Clash of Careers For First Lady; Donna Hanover's 2 roles are not always separate
The most important thing to know about Donna Hanover, her friends say, is that work was at the center of her life long before her husband, Rudolph W. Giuliani, became the Mayor of New York.
So it does not surprise anyone close to her that Ms.
Hanover, as she is known professionally, has in recent months begun to work outside of Gracie Mansion nearly full time.
Although it has been little discussed, she is the first First Lady of New York to do so.


Gingrich Asserts Election Panel's Accusations That He Got Illegal HelpAre 'Totally Phony'
Speaker Newt Gingrich today dismissed as "totally phony" accusations by the Federal Election Commission that he got illegal campaign help in 1990 from Gopac, the political action committee he headed.
Four hours later, his party stood solidly behind him and voted to kill a Democratic request that the House ethics committee report to the House on what progress it had made in its 14-month inquiry into a variety of charges against the Speaker, and what plans it had to name an independent counsel to conduct a thorough investigation.


50's Revisited in New 'Bye Bye Birdie'
The television producer Robert Halmi Sr. ("Lonesome Dove," "Streets of Laredo") has a thing for adapting Broadway musicals.
He scored nicely with "Gypsy," starring Bette Midler.
Now, on Sunday at 8 P.M. on ABC, he is taking a  whirl with "Bye Bye Birdie," which opened on Broadway, starring Chita Rivera, Dick Van Dyke and Paul Lynde, in April 1960 and ran for 608 performances.
Will a prime-time audience sit still for three hours of a fluffy musical about a 1950's teen-idol singer, bearing more than a little resemblance to a guy named Elvis, who is drafted into the Army, much to the anquish of his perpetually screaming fans?
As it happens, the musical, with a score by Charles  Strouse and Lee Adams, is a repertory favorite in schools across the country.
Mr.
Halmi is counting on a strong recognition factor.


Breach of Agreement Is Charged In Big California Health Deal
Health Systems International said yesterday that Wellpoint Health Networks and Blue Cross of California were in breach of the terms of an agreement to acquire Health Systems for $1.89 billion in stock.
The move followed an announcement on Monday that Dr.
Malik Hasan, chairman and chief executive of Health Systems, and five other big shareholders in that company had withdrawn their support for the deal.


BOND FUNERAL HOME CHAIN MUST POST IS CUT
The Mississippi Supreme Court yesterday slashed the amount of money the Loewen Group, the nation's No. 2 funeral home chain, must pledge before appealing an antitrust and breach-of contract lawsuit.
Loewen must post a $125 million bond under the court's ruling.
The company had complained that a lower court's order on Wednesday that it put up $650 million could wipe out its business.
Loewen's stock was up $1.50 a share, at $27.50, in Nasdaq trading after the appeals court made its ruling.
On Nov. 2, a Hinds County jury ordered  Loewen of British Columbia to pay $500 million in damages to Jerry O'Keefe, a businessman in Biloxi, Miss.


Anderson Complicates Nets' Plan
Kenny Anderson could be throwing a monkey wrench into the Nets' attempt to re-sign or trade him before he becomes an unrestricted free agent.
The point guard said today that he wants to replace his current agent and may not decide on a new agent for another two to three weeks.
"I'm changing my representation," Anderson said.
"I'll have a new one in place in two to three weeks. And then I'll sit down with my new agent and we'll  look at it."


In America;Going Nowhere Fast
A two-year study of fast-food-restaurant employees in Harlem and Oakland, Calif., has found that young people from the inner city benefit substantially from the work, despite the low wages, but there usually is no "next tier" of employment to which they can climb by using the skills they have learned or honed in the restaurants.
This absence of employment at the next step up, according to two professors of anthropology who conducted the study, makes it extremely difficult for the inner-city youngsters, who are not well educated, to work their way out of poverty.


AIDS Patients Losing Money For Drugs
Low-income people with the AIDS virus will no longer get state money to pay for most painkillers, antibiotics, vitamins and psychotropic drugs, the New York State Department of Health said yesterday.
Starting next year, the state will stop paying for about 70 percent of the drugs used by more than 10,000 uninsured and underinsured people receiving medication and home health care under its H.I.V.
Uninsured Care Programs.


Banco di Napoli Gets Government Help
The Bank of Italy said yesterday that it had arranged a $1.6 billion loan from a group of banks and a government entity to support a restructuring at the  unprofitable Banco di Napoli S.p.A.
The Italian central bank said in a statement that 11 banks will lend 1.5 trillion lire and Cassa Depositi e Prestiti, a Government lending vehicle, another 1 trillion lire.
The central bank said in a  statement that Banco di Napoli had committed itself "to a vast restructuring aimed at the cleaning up and relaunching of the bank." Although it is not among  Italy's top banks, Banco di Napoli is politically important because it is the largest south of Rome.
(Bloomberg Business News)


It May Have Been Ottawa, but on This Night Islanders Can Savor a Victory
With a .250 winning percentage, the Islanders came into tonight's game with the 25th-best record in the 26-team National Hockey League.
At .295, the Ottawa  Senators were ranked No. 23.
In a game worthy of both teams and both records, before 8,167 enablers, the Islanders survived a late Senator surge and escaped with a 5-3 victory.


Cleaning Up Carting Together
Garbage removal has been a scandal in New York almost since the city "privatized" commercial carting more than four decades ago.
Costs are wildly out of line -- perhaps three times as steep as in Chicago or Los Angeles.
The owners of 23 carting companies and their trade organizations are under indictment for extortion and restraint of trade.
Yesterday the city's political and law enforcement leaders joined to call for a new commission that would regulate and license the city's carters.
It was a good and rare day for New York, in which Mayor Rudolph Giuliani showed an unusual willingness to share the podium with political rivals like Public Advocate Mark Green and City Council Speaker Peter Vallone.
Manhattan District Attorney Robert Morgenthau was another welcome participant, expressing an uncharacteristic willingness to share some of his turf.


New Chief for Law Center
The Education Law Center, the group that initiated a 13-year court fight to make New Jersey's school-financing system more equitable, will have a new executive director starting Jan. 1.
David G. Sciarra, a lawyer who has specialized in housing, homeless and welfare issues at both Legal Services of New Jersey and the Public Advocate's office, takes the place of Marilyn J. Morheuser, who died of cancer Oct. 22.


Rotating Work Shifts May Hurt Women's Hearts
Working rotating shifts may be hazardous to women's hearts, a study suggests.
The study, which was reported in Friday's issue of Circulation, the journal of the American Heart Association, found that female nurses who worked irregular shifts for more than six years were up to 70 percent more likely than co-workers to suffer heart attacks.


Assembly Passes 3 Measures
The Assembly had a busy day yesterday.
It passed a bill that would make prison mandatory for drunken drivers who cause deaths.
It approved a measure that would allow schools to develop programs on the dangers of compulsive gambling.


Limited Use of Breast Cancer Drug Urged
The National Cancer Institute recommended today that doctors limit use of the drug tamoxifen in the treatment of breast cancer to no more than five years.
A study showed there was no benefit from longer use.
The Federal agency said it would send the recommendation to 22,000 cancer doctors.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Elusive Twists in Muller Saga
Don Maloney, the general manager of the Islanders, wasn't here tonight for the game with the Senators, but he has been on the road.
He was in St.
Louis on  Wednesday night, scouting the game between the Blues and the Canadiens.
Maloney  is trying to trade Kirk Muller, who was sent home almost three weeks ago.
Tonight, the Blues were in Winnipeg, and the Jets said Maloney was at the game.
If Maloney tries to trade Muller to the Blues, who would Maloney want from Mike Keenan's team -- Brett Hull or Dale Hawerchuk?
They are high-salaried veterans and Keenan has been told to trim his payroll.


Owners' Proposal Could Tax Payrolls
The owners' new payroll-tax proposal appears to be aimed at ultimately reducing player payrolls to no more than 50 percent of club revenues, the precise point where the owners began the lengthy and contentious dispute with the players a year and a half ago.
Negotiators for both sides have declined to disclose or discuss the proposal  since the owners presented it to the players Nov. 15.
Donald Fehr, the players'  labor leader, and Randy Levine, the clubs' new chief labor executive, refused again today to talk about it.


Man With Rifle Arrested Near the White House


ACCUSTAFF HAS AGREED TO PURCHASE GW CONSULTING
Accustaff Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to buy GW Consulting of San  Francisco.
Terms were not disclosed.
Accustaff's stock rose $2.50 a share, to $32.50, in Nasdaq trading yesterday.
Accustaff of Jacksonville, Fla., said GW, a provider of temporary personnel in Northern California, had an estimated $43 million in revenues for the 12 months ended Oct. 31.
Accustaff, also in the temporary-help business, had earnings of $5.3 million, or 92 cents a share, on revenues of $185.5 million, for the nine months ended Oct. 1.
(Dow Jones)


Facing Up to Abortion And Reproductive Fact
To the Editor:
It is heartening to see someone who once opposed abortion now realize, after  her painful experience in pregnancy and courageous testimony to Congress, that women should have the right to abortion (Op-Ed, Nov. 29).
But to hear that she called the fetus "my little girl, Katherine Grace" points up the need for a further realization that at conception, an unborn fetus does not become a human  being.


Magellan Fund Sold Technology Shares
October was a tumultuous month for technology stocks.
So investors in the Fidelity Magellan fund, at $53 billion in assets the country's largest mutual fund, may have taken comfort when they read in the fund's semiannual report, mailed to them in November, that the fund manager, Jeffrey N. Vinik, continued to favor the stocks of several semiconductor companies.
What Magellan shareholders were not told, however, was that even before the report was mailed, Mr.
Vinik had changed his view on some of those stocks and had begun to sell their shares.


TRUBUNE IS SUED BY LEARNING COMPANY
The Learning Company said yesterday that it had sued the Tribune Company, accusing it of violating securities laws as a "strategic partner" of Softkey International Inc.
The move comes a day after Tribune agreed to invest $150 million in Softkey if Softkey is successful in its hostile bid for the Learning  Company.
Softkey also agreed to acquire Compton's New Media Inc. from Tribune for stock valued at $106.5 million.
The lawsuit, filed in a Federal district court in California, contends that Tribune failed to disclose to the Securities  and Exchange Commission its participation in Softkey's bid.
The lawsuit also contends that Tribune improperly disclosed confidential information about the Learning Company to Softkey.
Tribune representatives could not be reached for comment.
(Reuters)


Lobbying, in the Sunlight
The House of Representatives closed a productive month of political reform this week by approving valuable legislation that will illuminate the dealings of Washington's powerful influence industry.
The measure -- the first overhaul of the nation's lobbying registration system in almost 50 years -- will require lobbyists to file semiannual reports disclosing their clients, the money they are paid and their target issues.
The measure has now been approved by both chambers, bidding goodbye to the present ineffective rules under which only a small percentage of lobbyists actually bother to register, and those who do reveal little about their activities.


CHRONICLE
KAREN AKERS, the cabaret singer, is about to turn her marriage into a bicoastal one.
The two coasts happen to be on different continents -- and one is on the Atlantic and one on the Mediterranean.
Ms.
Akers's husband of two years, KEVIN POWER, was recently appointed as the  managing director of the Global Telesytems Group, a telecommunications company in Monaco.
The couple are planning to live nearby, and Ms.
Akers will also maintain her homes in New York and Washington.


Corrections
Because of a production error, the front-page portion of an article in Business Day yesterday about a United States warning to China on the pirating of computer software, music and movies was omitted in some copies, and the first portion of an article about investment fraud, which also appeared elsewhere in the section, was printed in its place.
Readers wishing copies of the correct page may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or telephone (212) 556-1992.


Purchasers Say Economy Slows
Manufacturing activity slowed for the fourth consecutive month in November, a survey of corporate purchasing managers showed yesterday, providing the latest and perhaps clearest sign yet that the economy was weakening.
The report by the National Association of Purchasing Management pointed to widespread weakness in manufacturing.
There was marginal improvement in new orders and a rise in new export orders.


7th House Democrat Switches to G.O.P.
Representative Jimmy Hayes of Louisiana today become the seventh Congressional Democrat to switch parties since Republicans won control of Congress in 1994.
Mr.
Hayes, first elected from the Seventh District in 1986, said he no longer felt welcome in the Democratic Party.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Signs of the Future From Some Young Players Irene Diamond Concert Alice Tully Hall


Commuter Bus Lines and City Reach Pact With Drivers
The Giuliani administration and seven government-subsidized commuter bus lines reached an agreement with more than 2,000 drivers and mechanics late Thursday that would end their wage parity with their Transit Authority counterparts.
Under the tentative agreement, the drivers for the private bus lines, which operate out of Queens, Brooklyn and the Bronx, would receive a 7.2 percent wage increase over three years.
Transit Authority drivers have a 10.4 percent increase in their current three-year contract.


Catholic Church Must Remain True to Itself
To the Editor:
Thomas C. Fox, in "Can the Pope Be Wrong?" (Op-Ed, Nov. 25), misstates the real issue between "progressives" and "conservatives" in the Roman Catholic Church.
The conflict arises not from disagreements between an elderly Pope and "the wider society," but between Peter and "the world."


INSIDE
An Exit Plan for Bosnia


Rangers' Fast Start Overcomes Colorado
Quick pace. End-to-end action. Offense, offense and more offense.
That is supposed to be the Colorado Avalanche's game.


No Headline
A world record for a mailbox!" -- CHRISTOPHER BURGE, auctioneer, selling Frank Sinatra's for $13,800. [24:3.]


Bridge
In 1990 the American Contract Bridge League introduced a Player of the Year title, awarded to the person winning the most master points in major championships in a calendar year.
Past winners are Bob Hamman, twice, Zia Mahmood, Jeff Meckstroth and Michael Rosenberg.
In 1995, for the first time, there was a tie.
The winners, Fred Stewart of Andes, N.Y., and Steve Weinstein of Glen Ridge, N.J., a partnership for 16 years, won the Open Board-a-Match Team title at the Fall Nationals in Atlanta last week, and then second place in the prestigious Reisinger Board-a-Match Teams.


20 Arrested In Credit Scam In California
More than 20 people have been arrested in connection with two vast credit card scams that the authorities said enlisted Vietnamese immigrants with gambling debts to bilk banks and stores out of millions of dollars.
Raids on Thursday shut down two rings operating out of the Little Saigon district in Orange County, said James E. Bauer, special agent in charge of the Secret Service's Los Angeles region.


As Executions Increase, Appeals Go to the Public
For most of his 17 years on Arizona's death row, Paris Hoyt Carriger has been little known outside the state.
But even as a Federal appeals court yesterday issued a stay of his Dec. 6 execution, his supporters continued mounting a communications blitz trying to save a man they are convinced is innocent.
Prominent legal scholars, recruited to his cause, are calling for a new trial.
Ministers are being urged to sermonize about his fate, while television and newspaper journalists are being deluged with requests that they examine the  facts of the case.


CHRONICLE
After a divisive two-year battle, the Oklahoma Regents for Higher Education voted yesterday to name an endowed professorship at the University of Oklahoma College of Law in honor of Prof.
ANITA F. HILL.
By a vote of 5 to 3, the regents agreed to match $250,000 in private funds to set up the Anita Faye Hill Professorship of Law at the school, in Norman, Okla.
Professor Hill has been on the faculty there since 1986 and now teaches first-year contracts and a course called Racism and the Law.


Herschel H. Hobbs, 88, Southern Baptist Leader
Dr.
Herschel Harold Hobbs, a former president of the Southern Baptist Convention and chairman of the committee that wrote the latest statement of church doctrine, died on Tuesday at Baptist Hospital in Oklahoma City.
He was 88 and lived in Oklahoma City.
Dr.
Hobbs, one of his church's leading theologians, was the author of many books, including an autobiography published two years ago.
In it he stated that  he was first and foremost a pastor and would remain one if he had 10,000 lives to live.


Magma Copper Stock Soars 29% on Huge Takeover Bid
The Magma Copper Company's stock price soared more than 29 percent yesterday, after the company received a surprise $1.8 billion takeover bid from the Broken  Hill Proprietary Company of Australia.
Although Broken Hill's $28-a-share offer, plus the assumption of $600 million in debt, must still be approved by Magma's board, securities analysts said yesterday that they did not expect it would be topped by a rival bid.


Apartheid-Era Minister Is Linked to Zulu Gangs
A former Defense Minister was charged with murder today in a landmark indictment that alleges collusion between the apartheid-era security forces and  President Nelson Mandela's chief rival, the Zulu leader Mangosuthu G. Buthelezi.
The former official, Gen.
Magnus Malan, and 19 others were charged in 13 murders committed in 1987 by members of a Zulu paramilitary unit.


Coleman May Renew Demand For Trade
Derrick Coleman is a Philadelphia 76er -- for now.
But he is expected to request another trade because joining the Sixers does not fulfill his desire to  play for a contender.
Coleman and his agent, Harold MacDonald, will meet shortly with John Lucas, Philadelphia's coach and general manager, to discuss Coleman's future.
Perhaps Lucas and Harold Katz, the 76ers' owner, can convince Coleman that Philadelphia  should become his permanent home.
But the odds are against it.


Some Spring-Like Checks In December
The Devils seem to be regaining their championship form.
After going six games without a victory, they registered their second consecutive triumph tonight with a 5-1 victory over the Tampa Bay Lightning at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Although the Devils' play over all was uneven at times, the team exhibited the type of tight checking and solid defense that enabled it to win the Stanley  Cup last season.


Husband Of Nominee Questioned In Fraud Case
Federal authorities are examining whether the surgical group that employed the husband of the United States Attorney in Newark submitted false medical insurance claims to the Government, law enforcement officials said today.
The criminal inquiry involves the former medical practice of Mark Hochberg, the husband of Faith S. Hochberg, the Clinton Administration's top prosecutor in New Jersey.
The investigation comes at a politically vulnerable moment for Ms.
Hochberg, who on Monday was nominated by President Clinton to a Federal judgeship.


Miami Takes Its Punishment Sooner, Rather Than Later
As other teams among the college football elite anticipate their place in the bowl-game lineup this weekend, the University of Miami was granted an unusual wish yesterday -- a New Year's Day with nowhere to go.
In a remarkably swift completion of the National Collegiate Athletic Association punitive process, Miami's three-year probation -- including a one-year ban from bowl games -- will take effect in time for the Hurricanes to pay their penalty immediately and rebuild a program that has tumbled from dynasty to disgrace.
Miami, which had appeared headed for a meeting with Notre Dame in the Orange  Bowl, will not play in any bowl game this season as a result of major violations that took place over a period of nearly a decade, when Dennis Erickson and Jimmy Johnson served as head coaches.
By dealing with the bowl-game part of the penalty so quickly, Miami has given Butch Davis, the first-year coach, his best  chance to rebuild the program despite the potentially crippling loss of 24 scholarships over the next two years, nearly half the normal maximum.


Stolen Statues Sold for Scrap
Pan and the Dancing Goat, two bronze statues sculpted in the 1920's by Albert Laessle and stolen this week from a park that honors Walt Whitman, were found yesterday at a junkyard where they had been sold for scrap metal, The Associated Press reported.
The amount paid by the junk dealer for the 4-foot-tall statues was not disclosed.
No arrests had been made, the police said.


4 Guilty of Distributing H.I.V.-Infected Blood
A German court today found three company officials and a laboratory technician guilty of distributing inadequately tested blood products that infected at least three people with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
Two of the three have died, prosecutors said.
The case, in Koblenz, arose from disclosures two years ago that plasma tainted with H.I.V. had been distributed to scores of hospitals.
The negligence  charges relate to 71,302 batches of plasma distributed to more than 50 hospitals.


Phar-Mor Founder Gets Long Sentence
The co-founder of Phar-Mor Inc., Michael I. Monus, was sentenced today to nearly 20 years in prison for fraud.
Federal District Judge George White said he wished he could have imposed a shorter term but that Federal sentencing guidelines made Mr.
Monus's minimum sentence 235 months, a $1 million fine and five years of probation.


Golden Venture Refugees on Hunger Strike in California to ProtestDetention
At a spartan county jail on the outskirts of this farming community, a group  of 22 illegal Chinese immigrants, some of them survivors of the shipwreck of the Golden Venture off New York, say they have gone on a hunger strike to protest their detention for more than two years and the Government's plans to deport them.
The protesting refugees are all women; most of those who did not come to the  United States aboard the Golden Venture, a smuggling vessel that ran aground off the coast of Queens on June 6, 1993, were arrested in Southern California.
All have been held in various prisons and detention centers awaiting the outcome of  their asylum appeals.


Verdict on the Bush Passport Scandal
A court-appointed special prosecutor has concluded that Bush Administration officials like James Baker, the White House chief of staff, and Lawrence Eagleburger, the acting Secretary of State, did not commit a crime in 1992 when  the Administration searched for dirt on Bill Clinton.
The prosecutor, Joseph diGenova, said the two men, along with others, "did things that were stupid, dumb and partisan." But Mr. diGenova might also have noted that these acts, though not criminal, constituted unsavory political behavior.
In an election fight, the White House tried to accelerate a State Department search of Mr.
Clinton's passport files.
They hoped to confirm a rumor that Mr.
Clinton was once so desperate to dodge the draft that he considered renouncing his citizenship.
Mr. diGenova has pronounced the Clinton rumor to be false and absolved all Bush officials of criminal behavior.
He even said they deserved an apology for being so thoroughly investigated.
Yet his report describes a clear inclination within the Bush team to see if Government records could be used to damage the opposing candidate.


Rifkin, in Brooklyn, Admits Three More Murders
Joel Rifkin, the confessed serial killer who is already serving at least 75 years in prison for killing three women, pleaded guilty to three more murders yesterday in Criminal Court in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Rifkin, 36, of East Meadow, L.I., told the authorities following his arrest for a minor traffic violation in the summer of 1993 that he had killed at least 17 women.
The body of his final victim, Tiffany Bresciani, 22, of Manhattan, was found in the back of his pickup truck.


Bruins' Mullen to Miss 8-10 Weeks
Boston Bruins forward JOE MULLEN will have surgery on a herniated disk in his neck and miss 8 to 10 weeks, the team announced yesterday.
Mullen, 38, has three goals and four assists in 20 games this season. (AP)


METRO DIGEST
PRESSURE TO CLOSE CHILD WELFARE CASES Even as the death of 6-year-old Elisa Izquierdo has prompted a new investigation of New York City's Child Welfare Administration, budget cuts appear to be compounding its chronic problems.
The agency is applying unprecedented pressure  on its beleaguered caseworkers to close children's cases as quickly as possible  -- even by a budget-driven formula. [Page 1.]


Unilever Acquisition
Unilever, the British-Dutch food and consumer products company, said yesterday that it would buy the Hazeline skin-care and soap business from Glaxo-Wellcome P.L.C. for L95 million ($146 million) in cash.
The deal gives Unilever a broader presence in Asia, where Hazeline has the bulk of its sales.
More than 50 percent of Hazeline's sales are in China, which is the largest market for its Snow facial moisturizing cream.
(AP)


Fingerprint System Can't Be Foolproof
To the Editor:
In your Nov. 25 news article on New York's fingerprint system, the person running the system is quoted as saying that it can tell more than 99 percent of  the time whether or not a suspect has an arrest record.
The programming error reported in your article led to a crime victim's death.


Milestone in the Civil Rights Movement


Heisman Tropy Invitations Extended to 5
Iowa State's TROY DAVIS, the first sophomore in major college football to rush for more than 2,000 yards, was one of five candidates invited yesterday to  the Heisman Trophy ceremonies in New York next Saturday night.
He will join Ohio State running back EDDIE GEORGE, Nebraska quarterback TOMMIE FRAZIER, Florida quarterback DANNY WUERFFEL and Northwestern running back DARNELL AUTRY for the presentation at the Downtown Athletic Club. (AP)


Tobacco Business Merger Is Planned
Compagnie Financiere Richemont A.G. of Switzerland said yesterday that it would merge its Rothmans International tobacco business with that of Rembrandt Group Ltd. of South Africa to cut costs and aid expansion in emerging markets in Asia, Eastern Europe and Africa.
The merger, which reunites operations that split up seven years ago, will create a company with about L3 billion ($4.6 billion) in annual sales.
That bolsters Rothmans' No. 4 ranking behind Philip Morris, B.A.T.
Industries and RJR Nabisco.
Richemont also said its first-half earnings through Sept. 30 had increased 32 percent but warned second-half growth would not be as brisk because of cigarette price wars and a squeeze on profit margins for luxury goods.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Journal;Gates Goes Public
If you're Bill Gates, the wealthiest man in America, you don't have to settle for merely one publicity blitz a year like every other mogul -- you can help yourself to two.
Though it seems like only yesterday that the logo for Windows 95, the latest  software product from Microsoft, was as ubiquitous as O. J., now Mr.
Gates's face itself is everywhere -- in an Annie Leibovitz photograph on his new book, "The Road Ahead," which is elbowing Colin Powell and Howard Stern out of prime superstore display space, and on "Nightline," "Today" and the David Letterman show, where Mr.
Gates, wearing a lab jacket, served as stooge in a sketch about  a Rube Goldbergesque "quiz machine."


Journal of the Plague Years: Litany of Names at City Hall
Their voices could barely be heard, because the city would not let them turn  on the microphones until dawn.
Their faces could barely be seen, because there were no streetlights in the forgotten sliver of park.
But to the small cadre of concerned people who took turns at a podium near City Hall in the earliest, most desolate hours of yesterday morning, these conditions were not so much obstacles as metaphors.
Silence and invisibility represented familiar enemies in their long, sorrowful battle against AIDS.


ACCORD REACHED FOR LIMITING SMUT ON THE INTERNET
Bowing to a seemingly unstoppable push in Congress to keep sexual material off the Internet, a coalition of commercial on-line services and some civil liberties groups agreed today to accept a number of restrictions they had opposed a few months ago.
The move comes just a few days before a House-Senate conference committee is  expected to debate a measure that would impose fines of up to $100,000 and prison sentences on people who knowingly transmit pornography or material deemed "filthy," "lewd" or "indecent."


Maxwell Thurman, 64, General Who Led '89 Panama Invasion
Gen.
Maxwell Thurman, who led the 1989 invasion of Panama and was a principal architect of the all-volunteer United States Army, died today at Walter Reed Army Medical Center.
He was 64.
General Thurman had been found to have leukemia in 1990.


Court Rejects Sculptors' Case
Three New York artists seem to have lost their battle to prevent the dismantling and removal of their sculpture from a former Macy's warehouse in Long Island City.
Yesterday, in a unanimous decision, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit reversed a lower court and ruled that the sculpture is not protected by the Visual Artists' Rights Act because it is a work made for hire.
The case is the first legal test of the artists' rights law, which took effect in June 1991.
An amendment to Federal copyright law, the act is intended  to protect certain categories of visual art commissioned or completed after June 1991 from intentional "distortion, mutilation or other modification" that would  harm an artist's honor or reputation and to prevent the destruction of works "of recognized stature."


Jack Oliphant, 71, Right-Wing Bomber
Jack Maxwell Oliphant, a white supremacist who spent four years in prison for a right-wing bombing plot, died on Saturday.
He was 71.
Mr.
Oliphant was an early organizer of the paramilitary movement in Arizona.
In 1987, he was convicted with two members of the Arizona Patriots organization for plotting the robbery of an armored truck carrying money from several casinos in Laughlin, Nev.
The cash was intended to help finance Mr.
Oliphant's white-supremacist compound at his ranch outside Kingman.


STRIKE TO PROTEST GOVERNMENT CUTS WIDENS IN FRANCE
France's embattled Government struggled today with a powerful challenge to its economic austerity program as postal, electric utility and airport workers joined tens of thousands of striking transport employees in protests that have immobilized much of the country.
The worst labor unrest in a decade began a week ago with a walkout by train,  subway and bus workers over proposed welfare cuts.
The shutdown has forced millions of people to walk, bicycle, hitchhike and even roller skate to work.


Dublin Greets Distant Relative of the Old Sod
Tens of thousands of flag-waving Dubliners waited and shivered for three hours today to cheer President Clinton for having the good luck to have Irish roots and for bringing lasting peace closer in Northern Ireland, just 60 miles up the Belfast road.


G.M. SALES OFF AS A CHRYSLER REPORTS A RECORD NOVEMBER
The General Motors Corporation reported today that its sales in November had  declined about 3.8 percent from a year earlier as the No. 1 auto maker felt lingering effects from a monthlong strike that shut down its major car hauler.
Meanwhile, the Chrysler Corporation reported a record November, with sales up 5.3 percent from last year, proving that hot trucks and price cuts on cars can create showroom traffic.
Among other major auto makers issuing American sales reports today, Honda and Toyota also showed increases, while Nissan, Mazda and Mitsubishi posted declines.


Mourning Enjoys the Reunion
Heat 108, Hornets 101


Swooning (and Bidding) for Something of Sinatra's
The shoehorn sold. The Wyeth didn't.
In the fanciest of shmancy garage sales, which brought international art collectors together with the most fervent of nostalgia buffs yesterday, Christie's, the Park Avenue auction house, helped Frank Sinatra and his wife, Barbara, dispense with many of the items that once decorated their Rancho Mirage, Calif., house, which they sold earlier this year.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A View of Bartok As Composer and Pianist Todd Crow, pianist Miller Theater


Terrorism Bill Plan May Break Deadlock
In a bid to salvage a stalled antiterrorism bill, the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee has agreed to the demands of conservative Republicans to remove proposals expanding the Government's wiretapping authority.
President Clinton pushed the legislation as a response to the Oklahoma City bombing last April.
A version passed the Senate in June, 91 to 8.
But in the House, liberal Democrats and conservative Republicans have delayed the measure,  saying they are concerned that it may erode civil liberties.


Volunteers at the Top
To the Editor:
Volunteerism to address critical community needs includes a range of activities from direct service to management assistance and trusteeship.


Congressional Memo;2 Sides in Budget Talks Take the Road to Nowhere
The budget negotiations this week between Congress and the White House were a complete bust.
For three days in a row, lawmakers and Administration officials met around a  table in a conference room in the Capitol, closed the doors, accomplished absolutely nothing and came out and accused each other of refusing to negotiate  in good faith.
Then, on Thursday afternoon, they adjourned until next week.


2 Mortgage Rates Down
Thirty-year fixed-rate mortgages averaged 7.33 percent this week, down from 7.35 percent last week, according to a national survey by the Federal Home Loan  Mortgage Corporation.
The rate was the lowest since Feb. 24, 1994, when the average was 7.32 percent.


A Quiet Auditor Leaves Yeshiva a Fortune
ANNE SCHEIBER lived quietly in her rent-stabilized studio apartment on West 56th Street that was bereft of luxuries: paint was peeling, the furniture was old and dust covered the bookcases.
She walked everywhere, often in the same black coat and matronly hat.
Ben Clark, her lawyer, said she never had a sweetheart and seldom went out, except to visit her broker.
She had left the Internal Revenue Service in 1944, investing her $5,000 savings in the stock market with the same studiousness she  had applied to auditing tax returns.


CISCO BUYING A 4.4% STAKE IN OBJECTIVE SYSTEMS
Cisco Systems Inc. said yesterday that it had bought a 4.4 percent stake in Objective Systems Integrators Inc., a software company whose stock had a spectacular rise its first day of trading yesterday.
Cisco, the biggest maker of computer network equipment, said the companies would develop software to help manage complex computer networks of telecommunications companies.
Cisco, based in San Jose, Calif., bought 1.3 million shares of Objective Systems at the initial public offering price of $19 a share.
Objective Systems writes Netexpert, a family of computer programs that help engineers control the flow of information through telecommunications networks.
(Bloomberg Business News)


The Burmese Charade
Four months after her release from house arrest, the Burmese opposition leader and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Daw Aung San Suu Kyi is again confounding  her tormentors.
The ruling junta in Myanmar, formerly Burma, detained Mrs.
Aung  San Suu Kyi for nearly six years as punishment for leading a pro-democracy party.
Her party went on to win elections in 1990.
But voiding the vote proved a debacle for the junta, which calls itself the State Law and Order Restoration Council, or Slorc.
Censured internationally and isolated in its region, the junta presides over a crumbling economy and a disaffected people.
Having ended her house arrest, the junta would have earned applause if it opened negotiations with Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi's National League for Democracy,  as she urged.
Instead, contending that it wanted to forge "an enduring state constitution," the junta sought her participation in a stage-managed convention  that was to draft a new charter assuring its permanent dominance.


Apple Prices Cut for Holidays
Apple Computer Inc. cut its recommended prices for six desktop computers by an average of 15 percent today, aiming for more sales during the busiest shopping season of the year.
The cuts ranged from 8 percent to 25 percent, with the deepest cuts on the oldest models.
Two Power Macintosh 7200 models, which have been on sale just since August, were cut 8 percent to 11 percent.


Can Ann Taylor Dust Itself Off?;A Reatailer Is Paying a High Price For a Big Detour in Strategy
One day, Ann Taylor decided to be a flirt.
It nearly cost the retailer its business.
Just a year ago, the chain had a formula that worked like a charm: sensibly fashionable clothes for working women.
Sales were growing at a pace almost unheard of in women's apparel.
Women walked into the stores in droves, emerging  with their arms full of white blouses and straight skirts.
Sally Frame Kasaks, who left the Ann Taylor Stores Corporation in 1985 after  serving as chief executive for two years and returned to that post in 1992 to pull it from near-ruin, was viewed as a hero.


INMAC SHARES CLIMB SHARPLY ON ACQUISITION DEAL
The stock of the Inmac Corporation, a catalogue retailer of computer networking products, rose sharply yesterday after it was announced that the company would be acquired by Micro Warehouse Inc. for $126 million.
Late Thursday, the companies announced that Micro Warehouse would issue 2.67 million  new shares to Inmac shareholders to buy the company.
The deal is worth about $11.30 for each of the 11.14 million Inmac shares outstanding.
Inmac's stock was up $1.375 a share, at $11.125, in Nasdaq trading yesterday and Micro Warehouse was up $1.25 a share at $48.25.
Micro Warehouse sells software and hardware for personal computers though catalogues.
(AP)


What Housing Policy?
To the Editor:
Re your Nov. 26 news article on a new housing policy by New York City intended to help landlords: How can a property owner survive if tenants can refuse to pay rent for years while some bureaucrat struggles with elementary math?
How can a property owner pay his or her bills when rents are regulated to  a level below the cost of providing services?


3 German Banks Take Interhotel Stakes
Deutsche Bank A.G. signed an agreement yesterday with Depfa-Bank A.G. and Deutsche Bau- und Bodenbank for the three banks to take a majority stake in the  debt-laden Interhotel Group.
Under the agreement, Deutsche Bank and Depfa-Bank will become the main shareholders in the hotel chain, which includes some of eastern Germany's prime hotel properties and will take over its management.
The three main creditor banks are becoming shareholders in the hotel company by converting about 1.4 billion marks ($966 million) in loans to the company into equity.
As a result, Deutsche Bank has a 45.5 percent stake in Interhotel.
Depfa-Bank has 32.5 percent, and Deutsche Bau- und Bodenbank holds 4.4 percent.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Child Abuse: Theory vs. Reality
New York City has some of the strongest child welfare laws in the nation.
But as the prolonged abuse and brutal slaying of 6-year-old Elisa Izquierdo attests, the gap between what is on the books and what happens in reality can be enormous.
New York's child welfare laws go well beyond Federal requirements, and are among the most comprehensive in the country.
The state must maintain a round-the-clock system for receiving reports of suspected neglect or abuse.
Investigation of a report must begin within 24 hours and must include either face-to-face or telephone contact with the child.
A written preliminary report is to be filed within seven days.
The final investigation, to be completed within 60 days, includes face-to-face interviews with the child and other family members, a visit to the home and the gathering of information from police, schools and hospitals.


Pataki Cuts Off Money for Projects Cuomo Approved, Saying They Don'tMeet Rules
The Pataki administration announced today that it has pulled back financing from 177 economic development projects costing $24 million that had been approved under the Cuomo administration.
Several of the projects were favored programs of Democratic legislators.


Britain Reopens Cable Investigation
The British Office of Fair Trading has reopened an investigation into complaints from cable TV companies that British Sky Broadcasting Group P.L.C. is hindering competition in cable and other British TV services.
An earlier investigation by the office was dropped in March after B Sky B, owned 40 percent by the News Corporation, signed a series of undertakings intended to alleviate anti-competitive fears.
Analysts said the new inquiry meant B Sky B was likely to be investigated by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission, Britain's antitrust body.
At issue is the dominance of the British cable and satellite-TV market by B  Sky B and its program supply and pricing policies.
It serves five million homes  in Britain and Ireland.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Global Warming Trends Should Spur Us to Act, Not Delay
To the Editor:
Your otherwise admirable Nov. 28 front-page article on how the United States  is failing to meet its stated goal of reducing carbon dioxide emissions to 1990  levels by 2000 downplays the extent of scientific concern about the threats posed by unchecked global warming.


F.B.I. Revisits Earthly Theft of Moon Rock
The hunt for a moon rock that vanished more than 20 years ago took a new twist yesterday when Federal authorities -- tipped off by a postal inspector with a long memory -- seized a chunk of gray and white volcanic matter a day before it was to be sold at a Manhattan auction house.
But the true identity of the rock in question remained as murky yesterday as  the disappearance of the lunar sample in 1970.


Washington Feels Lucky After Seizures
Three weeks after suffering a seizure from a brain tumor, DWAYNE (PEARL) WASHINGTON is still marveling over his fortune during his misfortune.


Johnson Wins 2d Straight Owens Award
MICHAEL JOHNSON, America's sprinting star, claimed the Jesse Owens Award last night as the nation's outstanding track and field performer for the second consecutive year.
Johnson, joining JACKIE JOYNER-KERSEE as the only winners of the award in consecutive years, received the honor at a banquet on the next-to-last night of  the USA Track and Field convention.


Jeffrey Lynn, 89, Actor in Leading-Man Roles
Jeffrey Lynn, who played the handsome leading man in a string of Warner Brothers films in the 1930's and 40's, died on Nov. 24 at St.
Joseph's Hospital  in Burbank, Calif., his daughter, Letitia Lynn, said on Thursday.
He was 89.
Mr.
Lynn made his debut in the 1938 film "Four Daughters," with John Garfield and Claude Rains, and went on to appear in such films as "Yes, My Darling Daughter" and "The Roaring Twenties," a 1939 hit that starred Humphrey Bogart and James Cagney.


Healthcare Groups Forge 'Partnership'
In one of its biggest recent deals, the Columbia-HCA Healthcare Corporation,  the for-profit hospital chain, said yesterday that the big nonprofit Sharp Healthcare System, based in San Diego, had agreed to put together a 50-50 "partnership." The arrangement would add 4 hospitals with 1,263 licensed beds to the 320 hospitals operated by Columbia, which is based in Nashville.
The amount  paid by Columbia was not disclosed.
"It is a very attractive transaction, a major move into Southern California  for Columbia," said Margo Vignola, a health care analyst with Merrill Lynch Securities.


Army Children Express Their Doubts
When President Clinton visits this United States Army base on Saturday, his intention, in part, will be to stiffen the resolve of soldiers scheduled to form the first wave of American troops into Bosnia.
But that probably won't make him too popular with the seventh grade at the American school here, where the question is not just whether Americans have any  business in Bosnia at all, but what happens to those they leave behind?


Louis Malle Recalled, At His Funeral in Paris
Film stars, family members, friends and fans of Louis Malle crowded into St.
Sulpice Church on the Left Bank today for the funeral of the film director.
The 63-year-old Mr.
Malle, whose films included "Murmur of the Heart," "Atlantic City" and "Au Revoir les Enfants, " died of complications from lymphoma last week at his home in Beverly Hills, Calif.
He was buried at the Pere Lachaise Cemetery in northeastern Paris.
He was diagnosed with cancer of the lymph nodes in August.


Behind the Masks: Salinas Expose Stuns Mexico
Rubber masks in the likeness of the former President, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, with overgrown ears and squinting eyes, are bringing brisk sales to street vendors on the Mexican capital's main boulevard.
Sales of the mocking masks soared last week after disclosures that Mr.
Salinas's older brother, Raul, had salted away at least $84 million under false  names in foreign bank accounts.
Raul's wife, Paulina Castanon, was jailed in Switzerland in a narcotics money laundering investigation when she tried to withdraw money from the accounts.


Name of Killer, 15, Is Revealed
The teen-age boy who admitted to suffocating Shanelle Davis, 3, in 1994 for "making too much noise" and hiding her body in the basement of an apartment building was publicly identified for the first time yesterday at his sentencing.
The Essex County Prosecutor, Clifford J. Minor, said the killer was  Deon Webb, 15, who was sentenced to 18 years in prison.
The killer could only be identified after sentencing.


Saudi King Hospitalized; Test Results 'Reassuring'
King Fahd has been hospitalized, but the Court said on Thursday that it was for a routine checkup that produced "reassuring" results.
The Court did not say what kinds of tests he had, but the official Saudi Press Agency said the King was "healthy and well."


Rutgers Faculty Seeks Peace
The New Brunswick Faculty Council of Rutgers University voted yesterday to create two committees to try to work out differences between professors and the  university president, Francis L. Lawrence.
Meeting at Rutgers' Busch campus, the council designated one committee to meet monthly with Mr.
Lawrence to discuss faculty concerns, and another to investigate perceived problems with the administration.
If the committees cannot resolve differences, a third group will report by March on the logistics of holding a faculty referendum on Mr.
Lawrence's leadership, the council decided.


Tap Dancer Arrested On Drug Charges
Savion Glover, the 22-year-old tap dancer acclaimed for his performances in "Jelly's Last Jam," "Black and Blue," "The Tap Dance Kid" and the new Joseph Papp Public Theater revue "Bring in da Noise, Bring in da Funk," was arrested on Thursday and accused of driving under the influence of marijuana.
He was also charged with criminal possession of a controlled substance after  bags of marijuana were found in his socks, the police said.


N.Y.R.A. Stops Its Signal And Gets Deal With OTB
The New York Racing Association pulled the plug, as threatened, on its daily  television program of races from Aqueduct that had been made available to the home-betting customers of the New York City Offtrack Betting Corporation yesterday -- but for only 13 minutes.
Then a last-minute agreement was reached, guaranteeing that OTB will pay $3 million to $4 million a year more to the racing association for a variety of sites that receive the televised races, so the N.Y.R.A. promptly restored the program to home viewers.


O. Roy Chalk, 88, Entrepreneur With Diverse Holdings, Is Dead
O.
Roy Chalk, an entrepreneur whose interests included real estate, airlines, bus companies, newspapers and a rail line that hauled bananas in Central America, died yesterday at New York Hospital.
He was 88.
Mr.
Chalk, who had homes in Manhattan, Washington and Palm Beach, Fla., died  of cancer, according to his family.


Dakin B. Ferris, 69, Financial Services Innovator
Dakin B. Ferris, a retired executive who helped Merrill Lynch &amp; Co. expand outside the stock brokerage business, died Thursday at his home in Atlanta after a long illness.
He was 69.
During the late 1970's and early 1980's, Mr.
Ferris was in charge of Merrill  Lynch's expansion into real estate and insurance.
He was also part of a group that developed and managed the highly successful and innovative cash management  account that allowed Merrill Lynch customers to write checks against an account  that included a credit card, a line of credit and their securities holdings.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about a Federal pollution complaint against the General Motors Corporation misstated the formula for the $45 million settlement.
The company is to pay an $11 million civil fine.
It will also spend $8.75 million on compensatory programs to reduce air pollution from other sources, a figure that could vary depending on the effectiveness of the company's recall of about 470,000 cars.
The remaining cost, estimated to be at least $25 million, is for recalling the cars and repairing the problem.


Transactions
Baseball


Kvaerner's Amec Stake
Kvaerner A.S., a Norwegian shipbuilder whose offer for the British construction company Amec was spurned earlier this week, said yesterday that it  had increased its stake in the company to 18.1 percent.
Kvaerner had a stake of  less than 12 percent on Monday, when it offered L375 million ($575 million) for  the construction company in an effort to expand its oil and gas offshore platform building operations.
Amec rejected the offer and described Kvaerner's 100-pence-a-share bid as "wholly inadequate."
(Bloomberg Business News)


Singapore Sentences Leeson to 6 1/2 Years in Prison
A Singapore court sentenced Nicholas W. Leeson today to six and a half years  in prison for illegally covering up trading losses that led to the collapse of Barings P.L.C.
Despite a plea bargain under which Mr.
Leeson pleaded guilty to two criminal  charges against him, Judge Richard Magnus ordered near the maximum possible sentence of eight years.


Helmets for Young Skaters
Children under age 14 will be required to wear safety helmets while in-line skating starting in January under legislation signed today by Gov.
George E. Pataki.
New York is the first state in the nation to adopt the helmet law for skating.
The law will also require skate manufacturers to put warning labels on skates urging their users to wear protective gear and to equip skates with a stopping device.


Sampras Shows Grittiness at Davis Cup Finals
By Pete Sampras's recollection, it was the first time in his life he did not  shake an opponent's hand after a match.
He had an excellent excuse.


Argentina Questions 12 In Blast at Jewish Center
The Justice Department said today that it had detained 12 people for questioning, including three soldiers, in connection with the 1994 bombing of a  Jewish community center that killed 86 people.
In the past year, the Government has detained dozens of people in connection  with the bombing, but all were released.
Today's roundup was the first to include soldiers.


Italy's Stet to Update Russian Phone System
Italy's giant telecommunications group, Stet, which struggles at times to get its own phones up to snuff, was given the chance today to overhaul Russia's crumbling phone system.
It made the winning bid to buy 25 percent of the Russian state phone company Svyazinvest for $639 million.
Stet, or Societa Finanziaria Telefonica, beat out a competing group made up of France Telecom, Germany's Deutsche Telekom and a Russian unit of U S West.
Besides the purchase price, Stet agreed to invest at least 3.5 trillion rubles,  or $764 million, to upgrade Svyazinvest's phone system over the next two years.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.


Appeals Court Removes Judge in Oklahoma Bombing Case
A Federal appeals court panel today removed Judge Wayne Alley from the Oklahoma City bombing case, ruling that "a reasonable person, knowing all the relevant facts, would harbor doubts about the judge's impartiality."
Judge Stephanie Seymour, the chief judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit in Denver, will now select a new trial judge from  Federal judges available in the six states in the Tenth Circuit.
Lawyers for both the prosecution and the defense said tonight that they thought the appointment would be made quickly.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LILLY INDUSTRIESLilly Industries INC., Indianapolis, a maker of industrial coating and specialty chemical products, swapped its American Finishes refinish  coating unit for the mirror coating business of PPG Industries Inc., Pittsburgh.


Sutton and Niekro Head Hall Ballot
PHIL NIEKRO and DON SUTTON, 300-game winners who have previously fallen short in Hall of Fame voting, headed the list of eligible players on ballots mailed yesterday.
Niekro finished second in the last balloting with 286 votes, well short of the required 345.
Sutton was third with 264 votes, and TONY PEREZ, who is also on this year's ballot, had 259.


Senate Hearing Homes In On First Lady's Credibility
Republicans on the Senate Whitewater committee today attacked the credibility of Hillary Rodham Clinton, contending that she had repeatedly misrepresented the extent of legal work she performed for an Arkansas savings and loan association  that failed in 1989 at a cost of more than $60 million to taxpayers.
The savings and loan, Madison Guaranty, is at the center of several Federal investigations, including one by the Whitewater independent counsel.
Madison was owned and operated during the 1980's by the Clintons' partner in the Whitewater  land venture, and for the last two years investigators have been examining whether Whitewater or one of Bill Clinton's campaigns for governor of Arkansas received any improper payments from the institution.


New Fine Leveled Against Oakley
Charles Oakley's bill for disturbing the peace is growing.
Rod Thorn, the National Basketball Association's director of operations, yesterday fined Oakley $7,500 for his actions during a melee in Wednesday's Knicks-Hornets game.


Indians Approach Sellout for Season
The Cleveland Indians closed in today on selling out their 1996 home schedule.
By tonight, there were an estimated 12,700 single-game tickets remaining for next season, the Indians said.


Flag to Honor Peacekeepers
A flag bearing the insignia of all branches of the military is being hoisted  above City Hall in a tribute to United States troops bound for the peacekeeping  mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mayor Anthony Russo said yesterday.
The Mayor said the flag would go up within days and would remain up until the troops return.


State Reports 26,606 AIDS Cases
New Jersey ranked fifth nationwide in the number of AIDS cases reported during the first half of 1995.
But doctors at Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital, marking Worlds AIDS Day yesterday, said that the epidemic appears to be waning in the United States.
Statistics from the State Department of Health show that 26,606 AIDS cases were reported as of June 30.
Essex County had the highest number, 8,031 cases, followed by Hudson County, with 4,252, and Passaic  County, with 2,259.


Behind Rail Talks, Bitter Years Of Inequality for Track Workers
For the track workers whose walkout shut down part of the Metro-North Commuter Railroad yesterday, the dispute with the railroad is less about current negotiations than about what they see as a long history of getting poorer treatment than other workers.
This week, their union has tried all-night negotiations, a partial strike Tuesday and a walkout yesterday that closed the northern Harlem Line for less than four hours [page 26].
Through it all, track workers have cited decades-old  grievances over having less sick leave and vacation time than other employees.


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day on Nov. 15, about an announcement by  the Engelhard Corporation that a new automobile pollution-reduction system was less effective than originally projected, overstated the reaction of Wall Street analysts.
Only one analyst withdrew a recommendation to buy shares of the company.


Nets Win Their First On the Road
Physically, the Nets will have a different look when their newly acquired 7-foot-6-inch center Shawn Bradley arrives next week.
What Coach Butch Beard hopes does not change is the type of gutsy, determined effort the Nets displayed tonight in getting their first road victory of the season.
After blowing a 17-point fourth-quarter lead and finding themselves in overtime, the Nets conjured up enough resilience to beat the Boston Celtics, 131-123, in the Fleet Center.
It was the Nets' first road triumph in nine starts.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Bond Market Rally Sends Rates to Two-Year Low A bond market rally sent interest rates falling sharply, and the yield on the Treasury's 30-year bond dropped to 6.08 percent, its lowest point since Nov. 2,  1993, from 6.13 percent.
Expectations grew that the Federal Reserve would lower  short-term interest rates soon after a report showed that manufacturing activity slowed in November for the fourth straight month.
The report by the National Association of Purchasing Management provide perhaps the clearest sign yet that  the economy is weakening. [Page 38.]


Seeming So Placid but Really So Obsessed
Everything but the Girl has a dance-club hit, "Missing": a coup for a group whose members barely move onstage.
Contemplation, not action, is the mode of this English duo, whose songs cloak obsession and yearning behind a placid surface.
At the Supper Club on Thursday night, Tracey Thorn crooned in a thoughtful deadpan, gazing calmly at the audience; Ben Watt, the group's songwriter, concentrated on his guitar or keyboard.
Backing them up, Martin Ditcham, on drums, kept his motions measured; only Danny Thompson visibly labored to play purring lines on his bass fiddle.
When "Missing" began, with its insistent synthesizer bass line, Ms.
Thorn did undulate slightly to the beat.


A Day Without Art


43 Premieres for One Work
The history of music is filled with accounts of exciting new works that received highly successful premieres only to languish thereafter.
In helping a new composition catch on, it's those second, third and fourth performances by other artists that are often more influential than the premiere.
But these days  it's hard enough to get a major new work performed even once.
Not so a new sonata for alto saxophone and piano by John Harbison.
Tomorrow,  in an event without known precedent, Mr.
Harbison's sonata will receive 43 performances by 43 different teams of saxophonists and pianists in 43 venues in  the United States and 9 other countries, including the Netherlands, France, Switzerland, Cyprus and Singapore.


Prudential Unit May Be Sold
The Prudential Insurance Company of America is close to selling most of its $80 billion mortgage processing business to the Norwest Corporation for about $800 million, people familiar with the talks said today.
Norwest, based in Minneapolis, and Prudential, based in Newark, are about a  week away from a deal, and the $800 million price might change, these people said.


At the Pentagon, An Afternoon Off
The Pentagon was left high and dry today.
An engineering foul-up cut off all water pressure to the Pentagon, which as the world's largest office building uses two million gallons of water a day.
The shutdown rendered the building's 280 toilets unworkable and prompted officials to give the 24,000 workers the afternoon off.


Department for the Aging Loses Age-Bias Lawsuit
A Federal jury yesterday found the New York City Department for the Aging guilty of age discrimination, awarding $1 million in a civil suit to a woman who was dismissed by the agency at age 61 and replaced by a younger worker.
The woman, Dr.
Joyce Stratton, worked for the agency for 21 years, helping elderly people apply for food stamps and other benefits.
She was dismissed in 1991.


Clinton's Peace Strategy;President Hopes to Do Well With Voters By Doing Good on the International Stage
On the evidence of a rousingly successful three-day visit to Britain and Ireland this week, Bill Clinton has finally defined a role for himself in foreign policy that he finds congenial: Peacemaker in Chief.
Dwight D. Eisenhower won the Presidency in 1952 with his promise to "go to Korea" to try to end the war there, and Richard M. Nixon won in 1968 after speaking of a "secret plan" for achieving peace in Vietnam.
Mr.
Clinton apparently hopes to apply a new, more ambitious twist to that old formula:


CINCINNATI MICROWAVE SHARES SLIDE AS MUCH AS 33%
Shares of Cincinnati Microwave fell as much as 33 percent yesterday after the company said that John Noland, chief operating officer, was resigning, effective immediately.
Mr.
Noland left to pursue other business interests, the company said.
It did not elaborate.
Mr.
Noland and other executives have been named in four shareholder lawsuits filed against the company, a maker of wireless communication devices, in the last two months, according to a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Company officials could not be reached for comment.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Parade Bars Gay Church, Stirring Key West
Organizers of an annual Christmas parade in Key West, whose population has long included a large number of homosexuals, have taken the city by surprise, and angered much of it, by barring from the pageant a predominantly gay church.
The interdenominational parade, more than a decade old, draws about 400 marchers from 25 churches and religious organizations throughout the Florida Keys.
It is sponsored by the Lower Keys Ministerial Association, whose member organizations make their home in the Keys' southernmost third.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


As Papandreou Weakens, Prospects for His Successor as Greek Leader GetCloudier
With Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou confined to a hospital bed, Greek politics have receded behind a respectful shroud, mindful of the power still held by the ailing 76-year-old leader whose life now depends on machines.
All signs indicate that a succession battle is already under way, as official medical bulletins paint an ever-gloomier picture of Mr.
Papandreou's condition.


Catholic Church Must Remain True to Itself;Women and Priesthood
To the Editor:
Thomas C. Fox (Op-Ed, Nov. 25) sounds like Hitler in his soon-to-be overrun Berlin bunker musing that his own army can still win the war.


Senator Hatfield's Farewell
Senator Mark O. Hatfield, a liberal Republican whose vote in March blocked the balanced-budget amendment, will retire next year.
Page 6.


Ethics Panel Chief Is Linked To Group in Gingrich Inquiry
Representative Nancy L. Johnson, the Connecticut Republican who is chairwoman of the House ethics panel that is charged with investigating a complaint against Speaker Newt Gingrich, acknowledged today that on at least four occasions she helped the political action committee that is at the heart of the investigation.
Ms.
Johnson was listed in a document of the political group, known as Gopac,  as a leading recruiter of candidates that the organization would support in 1992.
The same document also listed another Republican on the committee, Representative Jim Bunning of Kentucky, as a recruiter.


Hospice and Medicare
To the Editor:
Jack D. Gordon (letter, Nov. 29) asserts that I don't think Medicare covers hospice care.
The rules on Medicare funding of hospice care are in my "Death With Dignity" chapter in the Families USA 1995 handbook, "Health Care Choices for Today's Consumer," which notes: "When a Medicare-eligible patient receives care from a Medicare-approved hospice, Medicare pays almost the entire cost for  all services and supplies."


KMART HAS DECIDED NOT TO SELL CANADIAN OPERATIONS
The Kmart Corporation said yesterday that it had decided not to sell its Canadian operations and would continue to operate 127 stores in Canada.
Kmart, the second-largest retailer in the United States, said some possible buyers had  expressed interest.
The company, a discount retailer based in Troy, Mich., said  it was going to focus on raising sales and financial performance at the Canadian stores.
The troubled company said on Tuesday that its Canadian division had paid off $85 million in short-term borrowings, which prompted some experts to predict that a sale of the division was near.
(Reuters)


British Court Supports Bankers Trust in Derivatives Case
Providing a measure of vindication to the beleaguered Bankers Trust New York  Corporation, a British judge yesterday ordered an Indonesian company to pay $69  million it owed the bank from interest rate bets gone awry.
The company, PT Dharmala Sakti Sejahtera, argued that it should not have had  to make good on its losses because Bankers Trust did not properly disclose the risk of the transactions.


Snider Gets Probation and a Fine in Tax Scheme
Suggesting he had made the biggest error of his career, Duke Snider, the former star center fielder of the Brooklyn Dodgers, was sentenced yesterday to two years' probation and fined $5,000 for evading taxes on income from signing autographs and participating in sports memorabilia shows.
"We're in the world of choice, and I made the wrong choice," the 69-year-old  Snider said outside Federal District Court in Brooklyn, after he was sentenced by a judge who recalled that his own generation had idolized Snider.


HFS FORMS VENTURE WITH INSIGNIA FINANCIAL GROUP
HFS Inc., the world's largest hotel and real estate brokerage franchiser, said yesterday that it had formed a venture with Insignia Financial Group Inc. to provide various services to the tenants and others associated with Insignia,  a manager of apartment properties.
As part of the agreement, HFS said it would buy about 500,000 shares, representing about 4 percent of the stock of Insignia, the nation's largest apartment manager.
Insignia's stock was up $4.125, or 13 percent, to $34, on the New York Stock Exchange.
The stock of HFS, which owns the Century 21 chain of realtors, was up $1.875, at $71.125 yesterday.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Sports of The Times;An Equal Exchange of Limitations
SOMEWHERE down the Jersey Turnpike, Harold Katz, owner of the Philadelphia 76ers, is saying: "Thank goodness for the New Jersey Nets. Thank goodness for Willis Reed."
Two years ago, Katz had this dream, this vision.
He saw Shawn Bradley, a 7-foot-6-inch center, as the answer to the 76ers' prayers.
Bradley would restore the 76ers to their glory days of yore.
Drafted him No. 2 over all.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 22 about a dispute in Bedford, N.Y., over two women's charges that the public school system was spreading Satanism quoted a parent, David Menken, incompletely.
In saying the dispute belonged in Orange County, he  was referring to Orange County, Calif., not Orange County, N.Y.


Grocer Charged With Hitting Boy
A grocer who allegedly struck an 8-year-old boy with a baseball bat after the boy's father complained about a leaking carton of milk was charged with aggravated assault and possession of a weapon, the A.P. reported.
The boy was treated at a hospital and released.
The grocer, Musaddiq Shuja, 37, was freed on $1,000 bail.


Job Action by Teamsters Hits Upper Harlem Line
For the second time this week, the union representing track workers disrupted the morning rush for several thousand Metro-North commuters and deepened the anxiety among others about the reliability of their ride to work.
The break in the routines of 70,000 morning commuters came when 15 members of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, flashing picket signs, stationed themselves at the gates of the Brewster North train yard at 4:30 A.M.
For almost four hours, they choked off access to the trains that pick up passengers at the  17 Harlem Line stations between Dover Plains and North White Plains.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Nov. 17 with an article about a management shake-up at Time Warner Inc.  referred incorrectly to one of the company's magazines, This Old House.
It survives; its former unit, Time Publishing Ventures, has been disbanded.


Speed Limit Will Not Exceed 55
Not so fast, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman said yesterday.
Though President Clinton signed a bill earlier in the week eliminating the 55-mile-an-hour national speed limit, the Governor said that New Jersey's top speed limit will remain at 55.
"We have the most congested roads, we're a corridor state, we have the highest auto insurance rate in the nation right now," the Governor pointed out.


Stocks Mixed as Dow Is Up; Technology Issues Weaken
Stocks were mixed yesterday, as the blue chips resumed their ascent, while technology issues weakened.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 12.64 points, to 5,087.13, and the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index increased 1.61 points, to 606.98.
But the Nasdaq composite index, rich in technology stocks, declined 3.89 points, to 1,055.31.


Crude Oil Prices Rise on Reports Saudi King Was Hospitalized
Crude oil prices rose on the New York Mercantile Exchange yesterday after reports that the King of Saudi Arabia was hospitalized prompted speculation about a possible shift in oil policy by the kingdom, the world's largest oil producer.
On other markets, natural gas and heating oil prices rose, while copper prices fell.
The Commodity Research Bureau index of 21 commodities slipped 0.16  point, to 241.68.


Change at Barclays
Barclays P.L.C. said yesterday that its financial services division would be  absorbed into the main group and that the division's managing director, Ken Bignall, would leave the company.
Barclays, the British banking company, said Barclays Financial Services had been operating as a separate business and earned a profit of L123 million ($188 million) in the 1994 fiscal year.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Dollar Falls vs. Mark and Yen, But Gains on Franc and Pound
The dollar retreated against the German mark and Japanese yen yesterday but strengthened vs. other European currencies in slow foreign-exchange dealings.
In late New York trading, the dollar was quoted at 101.25 Japanese yen, down  from 102.15 on Thursday, and at 1.4460 German marks, down from 1.4470.


Division of Mostar Is Ended


Nelson Knocks Out Ruelas
Gabriel Ruelas, fighting for the first time since he fatally injured Jimmy Garcia in the ring, was knocked out by Azumah Nelson in the fifth round of a World Boxing Council super featherweight title match tonight.
Nelson, 37, knocked down Ruelas, 25, in the opening round, then put him down  again in the fourth.
Ruelas barely made it up that time and was unable to defend himself in the early moments of the fifth.
Referee Marty Denkin stopped it at 1  minute 20 seconds of the round.


Oregon's Hatfield to Retire After 5 Terms in Senate
Senator Mark O. Hatfield, one of the last of a breed of liberal Republicans and an Oregon political institution for nearly half a century, said today that he would retire from the Senate when his fifth term ended next year.
The announcement, which was expected, means that the Senate Appropriations Committee will no longer be run by a man who is at odds with the direction of most of his party's major initiatives.
Most recently, Mr.
Hatfield, 73, infuriated younger Republicans by casting the deciding vote against a balanced-budget amendment, citing its threat to social programs among some of the reasons for his vote.


Key Bosnia Question: Where Are Exits?
The Administration has spent a lot of time this week explaining how and why American troops should go to Bosnia, but the question still on many lawmakers' minds is under what conditions the troops will leave.
Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, has lent his support to President Clinton's plan to send troops to Bosnia, even though his main concern is that the Administration has not specified how the United States and its allies will know when their peacekeeping mission has succeeded and what happens if it has not.


Boggs May Shop Around If Yankees Remain Silent
The Yankees have no guarantee that they will sign either of their premiere free-agent pitchers, David Cone and Jack McDowell, they haven't acquired the power-hitting first baseman they want and need and they certainly don't know if  they can sign either of the good available free-agent second basemen, Roberto Alomar and Craig Biggio.
But the one sure thing they have they are treating so cavalierly they could lose him.


Aristide Plans to Marry A Former Speechwriter
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide acknowledged today that he plans to marry.
"I can't say no to you," Mr.
Aristide said at a news conference when asked about widespread rumors that he may marry.
"As far as the date is concerned, I don't have one yet."


New Delhi Journal;Another Rushdie Novel, Another Bitter Epilogue
For Anuj Malhotra, a bookseller in this capital's affluent Khan Market district, the publication here this summer of Salman Rushdie's latest novel, "The Moor's Last Sigh," promised to be the literary event of the year.
Mr.
Rushdie has been a best seller in India, where he was born and lived until his family left Bombay for England 30 years ago.
With his sales running into tens of thousands of copies, he has held his own with writers of more obviously popular genres like Jackie Collins, Barbara Taylor Bradford and India's own novelist of sex and romance, Shobha De.


Guevara Never Lost Castro's Respect in Revolutionary Struggle
To the Editor:
"The Revised Che Guevara" (Week in Review, Nov. 26) attempts to demonstrate a division that supposedly existed between Guevara and Fidel Castro.


Toshiba's New Plant
The Toshiba Corporation., a leading Japanese industrial electronics concern,  announced yesterday that it would build a new factory in northern Japan to produce microprocessors and computer memory modules.
Toshiba said it would invest around 130 billion yen ($1.3 billion) in the next three years and begin production at the new factory by March 1998.
Monthly production capacity will reach 30,000 wafers, Toshiba said.
(AP)


Police See Connection in 3 Brooklyn Rapes
There is evidence that a serial rapist is stalking victims in a Brooklyn neighborhood, where three women have been attacked at playgrounds since August,  the police said yesterday.
In each of the assaults in the Clinton Hill section, the man approached his victim from behind, then forced her into a playground, where the rape occurred.
In two of the cases, the women were threatened with a knife.


Budget Bargainer for Clinton Reaches a Defining Moment
When Washington's theatrics make financial markets shudder and grand political issues become reduced to baffling budgetese, this is Leon E. Panetta's moment.
Across 16 years as a Congressman from the Monterey coast of California, Mr.
Panetta has had a hand in virtually every deficit-cutting effort of the past decade in Washington.


2 Young Jets Find Some Good Fortune in Losing Season
Adrian Murrell walks the way he runs -- quickly.
But he stopped at Aaron Glenn's locker today and rubbed the little defender's shaved head as if for luck.
For a change, some of it has come their way.
Murrell and Glenn, young, highly regarded Jets, have finally achieved the statistical accomplishment that defines their position.
Now all they have to do  is generate it again, perhaps against the Rams on Sunday to prove it was no fluke.


AST TO TRIM 530 MANUFACTURING JOBS IN HONG KONG
AST Research Inc. said yesterday that it would cut 530 manufacturing jobs in  Hong Kong as part of a streamlining of its operations there.
AST, a maker of personal computers, said more PC's would now be made at plants in China, because Hong Kong had become too expensive.
The company said its Hong Kong sites would focus on higher-skill jobs, like technical services.
The company said its earnings for the current quarter would be reduced by $20 million as a result of making the changes.
(Dow Jones)


NATO Picks Spanish Foreign Minister for Secretary General
NATO chose the Spanish Foreign Minister today as its next secretary general,  ending six weeks of wrangling in which the allies publicly quarreled over two other leading candidates.


2 Big Setbacks Dealt to Merrill Municipal Unit
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company suffered stinging blows on both coasts yesterday in two important developments in municipal finance.
In Orange County, Calif., Merrill Lynch failed to prevail in a legal maneuver that could have severely blunted a lawsuit against it.
And in New York City, officials announced that they were temporarily limiting Merrill Lynch's ability  to profit from city bond underwritings in response to the firm's involvement in a municipal finance scandal in Massachusetts.


This Time, the Giants Don't Let a Close One Slip Away
There is something to be said about working, and winning, in a short week.
For Dan Reeves, it means not being second-guessed and spending less time on the  hot seat.
A day after the Giants beat the Cardinals, 10-6, in Arizona, Reeves seemed relieved that today's press conference wasn't dominated by questions regarding his future as coach or whether fans' reaction influences his play calling.


COLUMBIA INTERNATIONAL TO SELL CABLE SYSTEMS
Columbia International Inc., a cable company in Greenwich, Conn., said yesterday that it had agreed to sell all of its cable systems, with 277,000 subscribers, to three companies: Tele-Communications Inc., Jones Intercable Inc. and Continental Cablevision Inc.
The price was around $580 million, according to a person close to the transaction.
Columbia, a closely held company, plans to distribute some of the cash to its investors and make new investments in the media industry.
Tele-Communications is buying systems with 150,000 subscribers in Oregon, Washington and Nevada.
Jones Intercable is buying a 50,000-subscriber system in Prince William County, Va.
Continental Cable is picking up 77,000 subscribers in Ann Arbor and Brighton, Mich.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Packwood to Be Consultant
Former Senator Bob Packwood, who resigned in the face of ethics charges of sexual and official misconduct, plans to start a political consulting business on Capitol Hill.
"I'm going to look for clients and advise them on legislation and how they ought to lobby Congress," Mr.
Packwood, an Oregon Republican, said today.
"I'm going to give them advice based on a quarter-century of experience."


CLASSICAL MUSIC
From Ravel's Gypsy Frenzy To Chausson's Quiet Intensity Nadja Salerno-Sonnenberg Carnegie Hall


RAYCHEM ANNOUNCES REVAMPING AND PAYROLL CUTS
The Raychem Corporation, a telecommunications equipment and industrial products maker, announced a corporate revamping and job cuts that include senior management positions.
The revamping will result in a $7 million charge, partly for executive severance payments, in the October-December quarter.
The changes are aimed at streamlining senior management and simplifying the company's structure, Raychem said.
Raychem's stock jumped $3.25, or 6 percent, to $55.25, on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday.
The Chemelex division, which has already cut about 80 positions, will be combined with the Ulratec division.
The head of Ultratec is leaving the company.
(Dow Jones)


Grace Weighs Alternatives To a Spinoff
W.
R.
Grace &amp; Company said yesterday that it was considering alternatives to  its previously announced plans to spin off National Medical Care, its highly profitable kidney dialysis business, into a separate company.
One alternative, according to a major shareholder of Grace, would be to merge National Medical Care into a part of Baxter International, a longtime competitor of National Medical.
Another possibility, he said, was some combination involving National Medical, Baxter, Gambro A.G. of Switzerland and Fresenius of  Germany.
All four companies are in the business of kidney dialysis, a treatment  that cleans the blood of people who would otherwise die from kidney failure.


Rally Takes Long Bond's Yield to 2-Year Low
Prices of Treasury securities rose yesterday for the third consecutive session as expectations grew that the Federal Reserve would soon reduce short-term interest rates.
The current rally has lowered the yield of the 30-year bond to a two-year low.
Among the factors behind yesterday's spurt of buying was a report of weak manufacturing activity last month, released by the National Association of Purchasing Management, and comments by a Federal Reserve official who sees the economy slowing.


A Question of Blood and AIDS;Infected Youth Sues Doctor Over '84 Transfusion
The blood transfusion took place on May 23, 1984, during surgery to correct a congenital heart defect.
The patient, Joey DiPaolo, was 4 years old.
He got four units of red blood cells, up to seven units of frozen plasma and five units of platelets.
He also got H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
Today, Joey DiPaolo, who was given a year and a half to live after contracting AIDS, is 16.
A slight boy who stands 5 feet 1 and weighs 98 pounds,  he is coping with the fact of being a teen-ager, like any other junior at Tottenville High School on Staten Island.
But Joey must take a score of pills each day.


Police Promotion Case Dismissed
A Superior Court judge dismissed a complaint yesterday by Police Capt.
Anthony Leggieri alleging that Chief Charles (Ken) Zisa, then a captain, and his brother, Mayor John Zisa, conspired to deny him the chief's job.
"The pleading does not allege any kind of facts that would be actionable," said Susan Ludwigson, the law clerk for Judge Marguerite T. Simon.
The decision does not prevent Captain Leggieri from filing a new complaint or from taking his case to  the State Civil Service Commission.
JOE SHARKEY


Caseworkers Pressured to Close Children's Files
In all the ways that matter for children dependent on the city for protection, Elisa Izquierdo suffered a death foretold.
Warnings of danger came not only from people who knew her personally, but from those who knew and criticized the system that failed her.
Yet even as Elisa's death has prompted a new investigation of that system, budget cuts appear to be compounding its chronic problems.
The Child Welfare Administration is putting unprecedented pressure on its beleaguered caseworkers  to close children's cases as quickly as possible -- even by a budget-driven formula.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-5


DANCE
A Medley of Emotions, A Potpourri of Movements Susan Osberg Dia Center for the Arts in SoHo


Beliefs
Until about a year ago, the Scopes trial was the best-known trial in American history." With that observation about the 1925 "Monkey Trial" in Dayton, Tenn., in which John T. Scopes, a high school teacher, agreed to test Tennessee's new law against teaching the theory of human evolution, Ronald L. Numbers, professor of the history of science and medicine at the University of Wisconsin, began the symposium "Religion and Public Life: 70 Years After the Scopes Trial."
The symposium was last month at Vanderbilt University in Nashville.
As it turned out, the discussion suggested that society has not come very far from the issues raised at the Scopes trial: the place of evolution and creationism in the classroom; the lines between church and state; the professional responsibility of educators and the democratic rights of parents and citizens in devising curriculums, and much more.


What Jobim Knew: Small Is Beautiful
It is a happy coincidence that the painting of Johannes Vermeer is being celebrated in Washington while musicians in New York pay tribute to the art of Antonio Carlos Jobim.
Presented to us are two great arts that dare to be small.
Both represent the casual moment ennobled.
Both speak plainly and yet retreat from the touch, with soft whispering textures, enigmatic and seductive.
Vermeer's modest scenes of domesticity are at the National Gallery.
Jobim's music was remembered at Carnegie Hall on Thursday, nearly a year after his death in New York at the age of 67.
The core of this event was an assembly of Brazilian musicians and singers.
Outsiders who felt his influence filled out the program, some more welcome than others.


Mayor's Pick For Market Omitted Data
The Laro Maintenance Corporation, the company that the Giuliani administration installed at the Fulton Fish Market to replace six others suspected of having Mafia connections, provided false information about its past in its application to the city for an exclusive license.
When company officials applied for the job of unloading fish shipments at the market, they were asked whether Laro had ever been investigated for violating Federal law or had ever faced Federal administrative charges.
In a series of sworn documents submitted to the city in September, the officials answered no.


How to Strengthen Historical Society;Break It Up
To the Editor:
Every time the New-York Historical Society redefines its mission, New York shrinks a little.
We have learned of the unimportance to New York of ships on the Hudson, of a copy of the Declaration of Independence printed in Philadelphia and of the first significant gallery of old master paintings in America.


Bookshelf
FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN.
Collected by Neil Philip.
Illustrated by Isabelle Brent.
Viking. $19.99. (All ages) A pretty, gilt-edged edition with fanciful full-page color illustrations that set off a dozen favorite stories from the Danish master.


Ex-Seoul Leader Arrested
A former President of South Korea, Chun Doo Hwan, was arrested early today, a day after he refused to submit to questioning over the 1980 killings of a pro-democracy protesters in Kwangju.
Mr.
Chun was arrested in his rural hometown, Hapchon.
Supporters scuffled briefly with huge numbers of policemen who surrounded his home as the warrant was served.


How to Get a Job, Even One That Suits Your Psyche
THE reason adults are always asking children what they want to be when they grow up, the comedian Paula Poundstone says, is that they're looking for ideas.
Of course, most of us don't have what it takes to become, say, a really great dentist-queen (to cite the dual-career plan of a 5-year-old I once knew).
But in a survey conducted a few years ago, about 45 percent of American employees said they would change jobs if they could.


BENEFITS
Dr.
Gore, the Vice President TODAY -- Vice President Al Gore and Sumner M. Redstone, the chairman of Viacom International, will speak at Yeshiva University's annual Hanukkah Dinner and Convocation.
The Vice President will receive an honorary Doctor of Laws degree at the event, which will begin at 4:30 P.M. at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Tickets, $500, at the door.
Information: (212) 960-0870.
Children's Holiday Party MONDAY -- The Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street, will  hold its annual holiday party for children from 2 to 5 P.M.
Young guests can create a puppet, decorate a cupcake or make a snowflake.
There will also be storytelling, games and appearances by Santa and Mrs.
Claus and and Babar the Elephant.
Tickets, $45, from (212) 534-1672, extension 254.


THE CAMPAIGN TO DEMONIZE SHEILA BURKE
If Bob Dole drops Sheila Burke, he'll lose my support and vote.
As a former aide to two conservative senators, I always found her up front, helpful and a person of her word.
A pox on the Paul Weyrichs and their motley network of conservative idiots.
A. J. MONTGOMERY Medford, Ore.


J. Frank Burke Candy Executive, 92
J.
Frank Burke, who was president of Fanny Farmer Candy Shops Inc. for about  18 years, died on Tuesday at his home here.
He was 92.
Mr.
Burke was born in Toronto and worked for Fanny Farmer for 50 years, beginning as a stock clerk in Rochester.
He became president in 1955.


Finding Lost Pensions
Due a pension, but your old employer has gone out of business and you don't know where to go to collect your money?
The Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, a Federal agency, has created an office to help workers trace their pensions.
By law, a pension plan that terminates is required to make only one attempt to get in touch with workers.
The new office will make a continuing effort to assist them, and their spouses or other beneficiaries, in finding plans that have been closed or taken over by the agency.


Divya Gupta and Pankaj Gupta
I GREW up in this country but as I was growing up I wanted one thing in life, and that was an arranged marriage," Pankaj Gupta, 29, said. "I really adore and  respect Indian culture and I believe in the arranged marriage concept."
On Nov. 24, he entered an arranged marriage with Dr.
Divya Gupta, 25. (While  they share the same last name, they are not related.) Mr.
Gupta, described by friends as jolly and compassionate, grew up in Manhasset, L.I.; Dr.
Gupta, from  New Delhi, combines gregariousness and grace, her friends say.


SOME ENCHATED EVENING CLOTHES
Just in case you meet a stranger.


Lawyers Here, Lawyers There
Should not the word "lawyers" have been used instead of the word "Republicans" in "Republicans in Nassau Poised to Run Legislature" [Nov. 4].
Also, the word "ruin" may also replace the word "run."


Well-Made Surfaces And the Conflicts Lurking Beneath Them
THE SOUTH BEACH SECTION OF Miami Beach is a place of celebrated surfaces: tans, resort wear, aging Art Deco hotels spiffed up with fresh pastel paint.
But surfaces don't preclude substance.
Say the words South Beach, and the mind is off and running along a chain of associations: models, mindlessness, Eurotrash, thong bathing suits, sex, old folks, young folks, J. D. Salinger's "Perfect Day for Bananafish." Rich women draped with mink idling in the air- conditioned chill of the Eden Roc Hotel while lissome bodies bake on the beach.
One could go on.
And at the Wolfsonian, a new museum of design that opened three weeks ago in Miami Beach, they do go on.
Not about brunettes and bikinis,  pleasing as those things may be, especially in sultry combination, but about the meanings that lurk beneath the surface of things.
The mission of this specialized, philosophically focused museum is to plumb the ideological depths of decorative objects.
The fact that the Wolfsonian is two blocks from the beach should blind nobody to the seriousness and originality of the undertaking.
This  is the "Manchurian Candidate" of museums, a place where plates, carpets and wallpaper are displayed as either the tools or the symptoms of brainwashing.


Dawn M. Daly, Edward H. Walsh
Dawn Marie Daly, the daughter of Carolyn Gallardo of Coral Springs, Fla., and Thomas Daly of Long Beach, L.I., was married yesterday to Edward Hampton Walsh,  a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Walsh Jr. of Malverne, L.I.
The Very Rev.
Robert V. Wilshire officiated at the Episcopal Cathedral of the Incarnation in Garden City, L.I.
Msgr.
Charles M. Kavanagh, the vicar for development for the Archdiocese of New York, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Walsh, 27, is the coordinator of community education at Joseph E. Seagram &amp; Sons in New York.
She graduated from the University of Georgia and is  studying for a master's degree in elementary education at Columbia University.
Her father retired as a sixth-grade teacher at the Salk Middle School in Levittown, L.I.
Mrs.
Walsh is also a stepdaughter of Rosemary Daly and Manuel Gallardo, who is Seagram's vice president for the southern region of Latin America.


A Noteworthy Collection
This selection of paperbacks is from the New &amp; Noteworthy column since the 1995  summer reading issue.


Kissing Bandit' of Queens Is Arrested
Detectives called him the Kissing Bandit, and on Friday he was arrested and charged with a string of robberies in northeastern Queens, the police said yesterday.
Of the bandit's seven armed robberies, which occurred between Oct. 13 and Nov. 24, it was the fourth one that captured the most attention and won a nickname for the suspect, Laron Tarver, 20, of 167-15 109th Road in Jamaica, Queens.


Lumpectomy Wins BackingIn 3 Reports
Three reports on breast cancer have confirmed earlier findings that for small tumors detected at an early stage of the disease, less extensive surgery followed by radiation is as effective as removing the entire breast.
The less extensive surgery entails cutting out the cancer and small amounts of adjacent tissue in a procedure known as a lumpectomy.
The new reports, in the current issue of The New England Journal of Medicine, include an audit of a trial of breast cancer treatment in which a Canadian doctor admittedly falsified some records.
The audit was conducted by the National Cancer Institute, the Government agency that paid for the flawed study, one of a series known as the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project, conducted by the University of Pittsburgh.


Sing a Song of Spices, Cinnamon for Sure
COOKS are no doubt going through their recipe file boxes about now to refresh memories about the family's favorite cakes, cookies and other holiday treats.
Where would the celebrations be without the many spice flavorings, not the least of which is cinnamon?
Some might say that this spice somewhat dominates the season, in mulled wine, cider, eggnog and any number of apple-based dishes.
So the time has come to pay humble tribute to an often-unsung plant, the cinnamon tree, without which many celebrations could be rather dull.


Overbooking
To the Editor: Travelers to Russia using Finnair, as well as its tour affiliate Finnway, should be warned of its bumping practices.
We recently went to St.
Petersburg to see the Hermitage exhibition.
Just before leaving New York, we were told that the Helsinki-St.
Petersburg flight was overbooked, and were offered an Aeroflot flight.
Worried about Aeroflot's safety and having already agreed to fly out early because of another overbooking, we refused, saying we'd rather cancel.
We were assured that we would not be bumped in Helsinki.


His Career Path Is Plotted: Mostly Up
DMITRI HVOROSTOVSKY was the one singer I didn't mind losing to," said the young Welsh baritone Bryn Terfel of the 1989 Cardiff Voice of the World Competition in Wales.
Matthew Epstein, a former director of the Welsh National Opera, was one of the judges there.
"I was sitting next to Elisabeth Soderstrom," he said.
"When Dmitri Hvorostovsky walked on the stage and sang the recitative and aria 'Ombre  mai fu,' from Handel's 'Serse,' she began to put exclamation points on her paper -- quite a long list of them. She just kept making exclamation points as he sang."


Barges in France
To the Editor: We enjoyed Warren Hoge's account of his self-drive barge trip  in Burgundy, "In France, a Boat of One's Own" (Oct. 8).
It was a realistic account of this wonderful way to experience France.
As Mr.
Hoge points out, traversing the locks is an eye-opening experience --  one for which he was apparently not adequately prepared.
As a United States representative for many barge operators, including the one Mr.
Hoge used, Crown  Blue Line, we spend time educating our clients in advance.
Because we have traveled the areas extensively, we can provide knowledge about cruising areas and the variety of boats available, as well as general travel information.
For this service we charge only the quoted rates.


Anne's Mountain Range
Anne Desjardins was always fascinated with nature, withexotic countries and locales.
Growing up in Montreal, in a family that traveled extensively, she pored over National Geographic magazines the way the other young girls devoured  Nancy Drew.
Each new vista changed her.
In fact, "transformative" is one of Desjardins's favorite words.
To the 44-year-old chef and co-owner of L'Eau a la  Bouche in the Laurentian Mountains in Canada, transformative is the highest compliment she can bestow.
But she is much too modest to take credit for transforming her nation's cooking, even if others say she is to Canada what Alice Waters is to California.
"Keep in mind that when I opened in 1979, fresh broccoli was a radical concept," she says wryly, "and very few chefs thought beyond steak, meat pies and trout."


Designer Genes
Doctors announced here today the momentous results of an experimental procedure performed on three patients with defective "style genes." The treatment has proved "successful beyond our wildest dreams," said Dr.
Ernest Arbiter, who headed the team of physicians and scientists at the National Institute for Corrective Elegance (NICE).
Two men and a woman were chosen to participate in the study on the basis of what was diagnosed as a congenital inability to put together an outfit.
Researchers removed some of the subjects' red blood cells, inserted a healthy style gene, then injected the altered cells back into their veins; the procedure was repeated 12 times over 20 months.


At Community Boards, Cutting From the Top Down
Surrounded by piles of phone messages, cartons of complaints and a sea of mail, Rita Lee shrugged last week as yet another telephone rang off the hook.
As district manager of Community Board 2 in Greenwich Village, SoHo and Little Italy, Ms.
Lee, 64, has been mired in secretarial work since the Giuliani administration slashed the budgets of all 59 community boards last year by 18 percent.
The office that once struggled to get by with seven workers is down to  three, so Ms.
Lee spends evenings and weekends at her desk.


Be Wary of Mulching Plants Too Early
Though temperatures have dipped, chances are the ground hasn't frozen in the  New York area, so don't mulch perennials and newly planted shrubs and trees until it does.
Remember, the mulch is supposed to keep the ground frozen in case a warm spell comes along and then a cold spell.
Cycles of thawing and freezing can heave those plants right out of the ground.


Clair McCollough, 92, Executive Who Repaired TV's Reputation
Clair R. McCollough, a radio and television executive who helped set industry standards as a longtime officer of the National Association of Broadcasters, died on Thursday in a nursing home in Lancaster, Pa.
He was 92 and lived in Lancaster.
Mr.
McCollough retired in 1974 after a 44-year broadcasting career.
His bases were WGAL-TV of Lancaster, which he helped establish in 1949 as one of the country's earliest television outlets, the old Steinman Stations chain in Pennsylvania and Delaware and Cable TV Associates of Lancaster.


A Candied Delicacy From Italy For the Holidays
IN Siena, Italy, they have been making panforte since the Middle Ages.
The name means "strong bread" in Italian, but this traditional Christmas delicacy is almost like a candy, consisting of glazed fruits, nuts, honey and spices.
The crusaders carried it with them on their expeditions because it lasted so well (and it must have provided the perfect pick-me-up for altercations with infidels).
During the holiday season, brightly colored boxes of panforte imported from  Italy appear in food stores, and they make great gifts.
But I have never had a better panforte than the one that Maida Heatter, the author of many books on baking and desserts, sent me one year, along with the recipe.
It was one of the  most delicious cakes I have ever eaten: dense and rich, made with candied oranges and lemons, almonds and hazelnuts, held together in a chocolate-honey dough.
It is the sort of cake you find yourself going into the kitchen in the middle of the night to nibble, so it doesn't last long.


When Cash Is Not Enough
FOR over a year I have lived without a credit card.
I count the months -- 16  now -- like a former pack-a-day smoker.
Since the summer of 1994, when my Visa was declared "inactive" and then canceled altogether because I'd been regularly  irregular in making payments, I have subsisted on cash and checks alone.
My credit privation has shown me a world somewhat homelier and more treacherous than the one depicted in the glossy magazines and travel brochures.
Conventional wisdom says that travel is the one aspect of modern life for which a credit card is indispensable -- but during the past year I have left conventional wisdom at home, and taken half a dozen trips with little more than  the money in my pocket.
Along the way I have become good at this tightrope-walk  approach to travel, discovering its drawbacks but also its charms.


At the Casinos
What's happening onstage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place


Showing Europe That U.S. Still Cares
One goal of President Clinton's trip to Western Europe is to dispel a growing anxiety that America is losing interest in its long-time trading partner and ally.
With the fall of Communism, and vast new markets in Asia and Latin America beckoning, Washington has focused away from Western Europe.
Politically, Americans and their lawmakers are looking inward.


Agency Is Defended
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani defended the city's Child Welfare Administration for pressing caseworkers to close cases as quickly as possible, saying the use of budget-driven formulas to keep caseloads down was merely an attempt to clear  a backlog caused by years of inefficient management.


THE CAMPAIGN TO DEMONIZE SHEILA BURKE
Burke may, as Paul Weyrich and others fantasize, personally hold some moderate views.
The article makes it clear, however, that she, like her boss, sees no need to let personally held views hinder the furtherance of her career.
No wonder her son is a Yankees fan, poor kid.
TIM SHEILS Bolinas, Calif.


Bridgeport's Dog Track: Other Views
Until the recent advertising and publicity of the new dog track in Bridgeport ("A Dog Track to Help Revive Bridgeport," Nov. 12), I didn't know that Connecticut had this blight, this barbaric, pitiful "sport." Oh, you've burst my bubble.
I've always felt Connecticut was a more rarified place; a better state to live in than New York.
It's ironic that by trying to make money with dog racing, money will more likely be lost.
I, myself, will not spend one red cent in the state of Connecticut until dog racing is abolished.
No more of your wonderful restaurants, well-stocked stores or easy-to-reach weekend get-aways.


Test of Stregnth


For Villanova, Small Men Come Up Big
With Villanova's two big men serving one-game suspensions for fighting in a game last week, St.
John's had an outside chance of taking down the No. 3-ranked Wildcats at the duPont Pavilion here tonight in the Big East Conference opener for both teams.
For the upset to happen, though, Wildcat guards Kerry Kittles and Alvin Williams would also have had to go stone cold.


Alliance for Equality Is a Broad-Based Group
As a student at Horace Greeley High School in Chappaqua and treasurer of Alliance for Equality, I would like to clarify some of the information in the article "Facing the Agony of Being Different" in the Westchester Weekly on Nov.  5.
The two high school groups mentioned, from Chappaqua and New Rochelle, are not groups for gay teen-agers.
They are not support or social groups, such as the Loft or Center Lane.
Alliance for Equality is made up of students and teachers dedicated to educating the community and creating a tolerant and accepting environment.
A student does not need to be gay to join the group.
The sexual orientation of our members is not an issue.
The only issue is doing everything we can to make our school and our community a better place for gay teen-agers.


Seton Hall Sinks in Miami
With an 8-point run, Seton Hall took a 56-53 lead tonight against Miami with  less than 10 minutes left in the game.
Then the Pirates went cold, eventually losing by 80-70 before 3,190 fans at Miami Arena.


Here, the Music Is Only Part of the Picture
STEVE REICH TOOK HIS time finding his way to music theater, and, indeed, the  medium would seem decidedly unsuited to his compositional style, which for so many years was concerned mainly with the evolution of rhythm and texture.
But Mr.
Reich's work has always developed methodically, and not surprisingly  his first theatrical effort, "The Cave" (1993), seems a logical extension of his explorations since the early 1980's.
Its roots in his previous music were clear at the work's premiere and are even clearer in a new recording (Nonesuch 79327-2; two CD's), where the music must stand on its own without the production's important visual component.


On AIDS Awareness Day, State Educates Teen-Agers
The numbers are startling.
New Jersey, where the number of AIDS cases is growing faster than in most states, ranks first in the percentage of women who have tested positive for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, and third in the percentage of children infected.
Of the 27,945 AIDS cases reported in the state  as of the end of September, 4,299 were among 20-to-29-year-olds, and 313 teenagers have AIDS or have tested H.I.V.-positive.
Because of these numbers, the state Health Department observed World AIDS Day on Friday with a day of learning for New Jersey high-schoolers.
About 800 students from all backgrounds attended an all-day session at the New Brunswick Hyatt Regency Hotel to learn how to teach their classmates about AIDS and how to prevent it.
In midweek, there was a waiting list of 200.


Dreams Draw Many To the PGA's Q School
This is how it is with the Qualifying School, that annual nightmarish, nerve-racking, nauseating 90-hole tournament for playing privileges on the PGA Tour.
Men throw up in the bushes.


A MANIFESTO OF SORTS FOR A BLACK FEMINIST MOVEMENT
Much praise to Kristal Brent Zook for "A Manifesto of Sorts for a Black Feminist Movement" (Nov. 12).
Upon reading her article I heard the echo of my own voice calling beyond the  wilderness.
Zook's discourse brought back for me the legacy of the feminist author Maria Miller-Stewart.
Stewart spoke to issues of black male responsibility, the same issues Louis Farrakhan presents as newly defined.
Perhaps if men, both African-American and European-American, had listened to her voice 167 years ago, the Million Man March would not have been a necessity.


Defending Harlem: Residents Weigh In
To the Editor:
As an African-American who has lived in Harlem for 10 years (I moved to New York from Ohio to attend business school at Columbia University), I read Lisa Anderson's report of her year in Harlem with interest, dismay and anger ("Harlem on Her Mind," Nov. 19).
Not until the last three paragraphs of a page-and-a-half story does she concede that some of her negative reactions could be due to herself rather than the community.


Habitats: Thornwood, N.Y.;Fixing Up a 255-Year-Old Westchester Farmhouse
THE PRIANOS moved in at Thanksgiving time a year ago and have had sheetrock dust in their hair ever since.
"Everyone told us not to move in until we'd finished renovating," said Timothy Priano, with a sardonic chuckle.
"But the minute we turned our back, something went wrong. You have to be here, and check every nook and cranny."


For Young Smokers, a New Risk: the Law
THE FLEMINGTON Borough Council was about to vote on an ordinance that would let the police collar anyone under 18 for having a cigarette in public.
But there was no discernible opposition among the kids hanging out after school on Main Street last Monday afternoon.


Foreign Islamic Fighters in Bosnia Pose a Potential Threat for G.I.'s
On a bleak, wind-swept hilltop, bearded Arab soldiers, many in the traditional black garb of Afghan fighters, stomped their feet to ward off the bitter chill, shifted their automatic rifles and cursed the impending arrival of American soldiers.
"The American tanks do not frighten us," said a fighter, standing under a black flag covered with white Arabic script.
"We came here to die in the service of Islam. This is our duty. No infidel force will tell us how to live or what to do. This is a Muslim country, which must be defended by Muslims. We are 400 men  here, and we all pray we will one day be martyrs."


BUSINESS BEST SELLERS
HARD COVER


Chiefs Stating Case As A.F.C.'s Best Team
The Kansas City Chiefs have a chance to clinch the American Football Conference West title this afternoon against the Raiders at Oakland and put some distance between themselves and other A.F.C. teams in the race for the Super Bowl.
The Chiefs (10-2) have the best record in the A.F.C. and a two-game advantage over the conference's other top teams.
If they can maintain that edge through the end of the regular season, they will have home field throughout the playoffs.
In recent years, home-field advantage has been the pass key to the Super Bowl.


Deficit Partnership
Like rival clans locked in some ancient feud, Democrats and Republicans have  now been arguing for so many years over the budget deficit that the origins of the dispute have gradually been forgotten.
Democrats in Congress have repeated for years the mantra that President Reagan pushed the deficit out of control by cutting taxes while raising military spending.
Republicans have recited just as regularly the view that Democrats voted for ever larger deficits during their 40 years of control in the House.


Pilots' Protest Not Effective, Fedex Says
The week-old labor dispute between Federal Express and its pilots' union has  not caused any major disruptions of service, company officials said today, but union officials contended that their members' refusal to accept overtime work was hurting the company at its busiest time of year.


Defending Harlem: Residents Weigh In
To the Editor:
As an African-American who has lived in Harlem for 10 years (I moved to New York from Ohio to attend business school at Columbia University), I read Lisa Anderson's report of her year in Harlem with interest, dismay and anger ("Harlem on Her Mind," Nov. 19).
Not until the last three paragraphs of a page-and-a-half story does she concede that some of her negative reactions could be due to herself rather than the community.


Wrong Town On Torch Run
Townspeople were elated when they learned last summer of plans to honor Jim Thorpe by running the Olympic torch through his birthplace.
But the thrill evaporated when the Olympic committee named the wrong town -- a place the sports legend really only visited.
Instead of Prague or the nearby Sac and Fox Indian reservation, the 1996 Olympic torch will pass through Yale, 40 miles to the north.


Broad Poll Of the Public On Politica
Stroking a tabby kitten as she sat at the glass-topped kitchen table in her mobile home, Veda, a 55-year-old homemaker, participated in what these days is a staple of American politics: a public opinion poll.
By turns serious, ribald and sometimes disdainful of the choices offered, she answered questions on subjects as varied as her political affiliation, how often she prays and whether Americans should always consider their country's interests first, or whether they should consider the interests of other countries.


A Salute for a Comrade


THE CAMPAIGN TO DEMONIZE SHEILA BURKE
The massive apparatus so well documented in your sidebar "The Attack Machine" has moved beyond being a disconnected array of ideologues whom one might find even humorous.
The movement has developed into a frightening, semiorganized, goal-oriented, multilimbed organization that is feeding on the efforts of its members to outdo one another in fomenting hatred of all who may disagree with them.
JACK B. HANKS Austin, Tex.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
MINIATURE HORSES


Leon McQuay, 45, Ex-Giants Player
Leon McQuay, a former New York Giants running back who played in the Canadian, National and United States Football Leagues, died on Wednesday in Tampa, Fla.
He was 45.
The cause of death apparently was a heart attack, said his mother, Margarete  McQuay.
She said her son, an ordained minister, was bothered for several years with health problems related to high blood pressure and blood sugar.


Anxiety 101: Taking Test To Attend Stuyvesant
The sidewalk alongside Stuyvesant High School was a study in perpetual fidgeting yesterday morning, an agitated gathering of thousands of teen-agers, their emotions running high, buffeted by a frigid, early morning wind.
Not many seemed to be thinking about the cold.
Here was a once-in-a-lifetime  chance, or so many of the waiting youngsters thought: the entrance examination for elite Stuyvesant.
The scene in lower Manhattan, near Battery Park, was quintessentially New York: a vast, multicolored, multiethnic assemblage shot through with hope and worry.


Clinton Rallies Edgy Troops for Bosnia
President Clinton today somberly rallied the American soldiers who will form  the vanguard of the NATO peacekeeping force in the Balkans, praising them as "heroes for peace," and the White House said he would order the first several hundred United States ground troops into Bosnia by early next week.
"For three years I refused to send our American forces into Bosnia where they could have been pulled into war," Mr.
Clinton told several thousand men and women of the First Armored Division at Smith Army Barracks in the wooded German  hills here.
"But I do want you to go there on a mission of peace. After speaking to your commanders and looking at all of you and listening to you, there is not  a doubt in my mind that this task force is ready to roll."


Cuba Libre
Graham Green's wry tale of an accidental British spy, OUR MAN IN HAVANA fared nicely on film (1960), as Carol Reed deftly guided a game cast in pre-Castro Cuba.
The best element is the bristling feud between the stubborn agent (Alec Guinnes) and the scathing police chief (Ernie Kovacs) drawn to his pretty daughter (Jill Bennett).
Havana adds steamy flavoring; the Floridita Cafe (a Hemingway hangout), a country club, the bawdy Shanghai Theater.
Maureen O'Hara, Burl Ives and Ralph Richardson score.
So does Noel Coward, natty even in the heat - THUR. at 8 P.M., THUR.-FRI. at 1 A.M. and FRI. at 1 P.M. on BRV.
HOWARD THOMPSON


A Move to Can the Homeless
The hot topic these days in the region known locally as Juniper Valley has been the increase in the number of men and women who spend their days foraging for redeemable deposit bottles and cans.
They are decried by most residents as little more than petty thieves and trespassers who must be driven from the neighborhood.
"People talk about rights for the homeless, but they are the ones breaking the law," said Robert Holden, a vice president of the Juniper Park Civic Association, a group that represents parts of Maspeth, Middle Village and South  Elmhurst.


Largest Grower in Northeast Has 1.5 Million Poinsettias Ready
SEVEN circular rows of poinsettias converge to form the a Christmas tree at the indoor entrance of a large complex of greenhouses on eastern Long Island.
Like red-uniformed sentinels the plants preside over the winter holidays.
In several buildings of the company, Kurt Weiss Florist Inc. in Center Moriches, rows of plants with brilliant red, creamy white or water-color pink bracts stood ready for shipment to flower shops, garden centers and supermarkets along the East Coast and as far west as Ohio.


DUSTY RIDES AGAIN
I read your profile of Dusty Springfield and 30 years melted away from my life.
I first heard her when I was an impressionable 14-year-old music student and, sensing something special in her singing, began collecting every record.
I  even learned the intricacies of foreign-currency exchange, the quicker to get each new release.
You have to remember what most female pop vocalists were like then -- witless, boy-crazy teen-agers -- in persona, if not in fact.
But here was a woman -- witty, complicated, independent, capable of combining emotions of vulnerability and a strong sexual pride.
I've met many other women who have shared my fierce affection for her voice and her uncanny ability to imbue a song with the sense of a real person inside it.


The Political Dance of Calvin Butts
BACK in October, when most of New York was turning its back on President Fidel Castro during the United Nations' 50th anniversary festivities, the Rev.
Calvin O. Butts 3d opened the doors of his Abyssinian Baptist Church to the Cuban revolutionary, giving him a rare platform and an enthusiastic audience of  1,300 people.
But perhaps far more revealing of the minister's political leanings was a moment a few months before, when the church's economic arm, the Abyssinian Development Corporation, hosted a "Day of Commitment" to generate corporate funds for Harlem.
The guest list read like that of a Republican fund-raiser: Gov.
George E. Pataki; Mayor Giuliani; the Economic Development Commissioner, Charles A. Gargano, Time Warner's president, Richard Parsons.


Commercial Property: Retail;Stores Direct Their Feet to the Sunny Side Street
TWO years ago, with great trepidation, Hilary Lloyd, a Kinko's franchisee, opened his first Kinko's copying service store at 16 East 52d Street.
Every instinct told him he should be on a major thoroughfare.
Problem was, he was priced out of the market on Avenue of the Americas, upper Third Avenue and other heavily trafficked streets.
He needn't have worried.
The store, which gets huge orders from surrounding office towers, is among the most successful in the national Kinko's chain.


GET OFF MY BACK
I guess the few remaining fur wearers are a lonely bunch, which may explain why Joyce Wadler has taken to conversing with her mink coat (Style: "Get Off My  Back," Oct. 29).
Come on, Joyce, get the fur off your back and you'll soon have  lots of new friends.
Everybody's doing it.
Supermodels like Naomi Campbell, Cindy Crawford, Claudia Schiffer, Elle MacPherson and Kate Moss now refuse to model fur.
And consumers are refusing to buy it.


Stop That Sucking Sound: U.S. Tells China to End Piracy
There was barely a ripple in Washington when China arrested its most famous dissident, Wei Jingsheng, two weeks ago.
But last week one of China's abuses finally got a rise out of the Administration: its flagrant neglect of a major trade agreement signed in February that committed Beijing to close factories churning out pirated American compact disks, CD-ROM software and movies.
With great fanfare, Chinese  officials had shut seven of the 29 offending factories, which produce more than  a billion dollars in goods annually.


Easier Voter Registration Hasn't Raised Participation
In the 11 months since the National Voter Registration Act -- popularly known as the "Motor Voter Law" -- went into effect, Americans have been signing up at  driving permit bureaus and other Government service offices at the rate of more  than a million a month, better than twice the usual rate.
But will people who register while routinely getting a driving permit or visiting a welfare office turn out on Election Day?


NEWS SUMMARY


Get Police Off the Traffic Beat
ALMOST as soon as he became the city's police commissioner, William J. Bratton began pushing for a consolidation of all police-like functions under the Police Department, and that included the work of the Department of Transportation traffic agents.
You might think that, as a former commissioner of transportation, I would have my doubts about such a move.
In fact, I agree that most law enforcement belongs under police control.
But there is a better and less expensive way of accomplishing the same objective.


ON THE TOWNS


Frustration in the Hockey Heartland
Dave Allison, the new coach of the Ottawa Senators, conducts full-throttle practices.
He yells encouragement and criticism at players, sometimes inches from their ears.
A few roll their eyes and stifle smiles when he shouts, "This is not terminal!"
This, after all, is a team that won one game during November, a team that missed the playoffs in its first three seasons, a team that sometimes draws around 8,000 customers to its 10,575-seat Civic Center.


In Cuba, a Tax On Capitalism
IT was Jan. 1, 1959, when Fidel Castro seized power and initiated Cuba's transformation into a Marxist-Leninist state.
But when the 37th anniversary of the Cuban Revolution rolls around next month, it will be accompanied by the restoration of a staple of capitalism -- the personal income tax.
In an official statement of this officially classless nation, the Ministry of Finance and Prices said last week that the tax would "permit a just redistribution of income to finance social programs that benefit all the population, with a greater contribution from those who have a superior economic  capability."


Congress Votes to Reform How Lobbyists Do Business
The 421-to-0 vote in the House last week, following July's 98-to-0 Senate vote, made it look easy to pass the bill requiring thousands of lobbyists to register and tell what they were being paid to do, on what issue and by whom.
In fact, Congress was voting to amend, for the first time, a 1946 lobbying law generally regarded as a sham.
There have been proposals to toughen it for most of the last 50 years.


Tabletop Drama: The Theater District
BECCO ** (212) 397-7597; 355 West 46th Street; $(c) all major credit cards


Sinatra on the Jukebox, Empanadas in the Shoe Store


WORLD-CLASS SHOPPING: New York;On Madison Avenue, Pearls Are Also Overheard
ONE of my favorite moments during three recent and extremely pleasurable afternoons shopping on Madison Avenue came near 66th Street, at Bernardaud, a store specializing in Limoges porcelain and an absorbing clientele.
"Hi," said a customer in tassel loafers and a Gucci bag, placing a swatch of  gold and burgundy on the counter.
"This is my fabric. I have a white marble floor. And I'm looking for an everyday set of dishes."


Saturday in the Park With Dad


Report Says Nevadan Will Leave Congress
A newspaper is reporting that Representative Barbara F. Vucanovich, Republican of Nevada, has decided not to seek re-election to an eighth term in 1996, but her chief Congressional aide says she has not made a final decision.
The Las Vegas Review-Journal reported today that Mrs.
Vucanovich had told her staff of the decision on Thursday and planned to made a public announcement on Tuesday.


ON THE TOWNS
Music


Winter Tours Explore India and Nepal
Hindu temples, the Taj Mahal and the "pink city" of Jaipur are among the sites featured on two winter tours to India and Nepal early next year.
Cox &amp; Kings is offering a 20-day Royal India and Nepal tour departing from Kennedy International Airport on Feb. 19.
The tour begins in New Delhi, where visitors will explore the city via bicycle rickshaw and attend Polo Cup matches.
Other highlights include a private dinner in the palace of a maharajah; an elephant ride through Royal Chitwan Game Reserve, where tigers and rhinoceroses roam; a tour of the Taj Mahal; a visit to Jaipur and a cruise down  the Ganges River at sunset.
The cost of the tour is $6,700 based on double occupancy, plus $1,335 a person for round-trip economy class air fare on Air-India.
Included in the cost are all domestic flights, all meals and sightseeing.
For more information: (212) 935-3935 or (800) 999-1758.


Islanders Heard the Chanting, Now Don Maloney Is Gone
Don Maloney learned of his fate during a long-distance telephone call early Friday morning.
That was when Ralph Palleschi, the chief operating officer of the New York Islanders, informed Maloney that he had been relieved of his general manager duties.


France Slows to a Crawl
In a country that likes to claim to be the cradle of revolution, the sight of strikers marching or youths taking on riot police looks familiar enough.
But the anti-Government movement that has shaken France over the past 10 days is anything but revolutionary: civil service workers are fighting to prevent change.
With public transportation already paralyzed in all major cities, the strike  has now begun spreading to the Government-owned gas, electricity, postal and airline industries where workers fear their benefits will be sacrificed to cut huge deficits in the Government budget and the social security system.


Uniform, Gun, Car . . . and No Paycheck
Barry Schoenfeld wanted to become a volunteer firefighter, but at 48, he was  too old.
So he became a volunteer sheriff instead.
Now Mr.
Schoenfeld, who spends his days managing portfolios for Paine Webber  in Morristown, spends several nights a month cruising the streets of Newark, confiscating guns, stopping cars with fake plates and helping citizens in need.
Or he might direct traffic at a parade in his hometown, North Caldwell, or guard the Pope or the prime minister of Portugal.


A MANIFESTO OF SORTS FOR A BLACK FEMINIST MOVEMENT
Zook's article on black feminism misses the point for many black women like me.
I model my behavior and formulate my opinions based on women like my mother  and grandmother who were working, cooking and educating their daughters to make  informed choices about careers, colleges and yes, men!
Ida B. Wells and Mary Church Terrell are heroes of mine because they both charted new territory in spite of the sexism and racism they faced.
Likewise, I  suffer more abuse due to my race than my sex and believe it is difficult at best to have to constantly justify my actions based on thinking like a woman or thinking like a black.


PHOTOGRAPHY
IN years past, the publication of a book devoted to a major photographer was  a singular event, often a cause for rejoicing.
Now these events seem to come in  threes, one of them invariably being a biography, the latest step on the path to enshrining photographers within the pantheon of 20th-century art.
This season the honors go to Walker Evans ("Walker Evans: Incognito," "Walker Evans: The Getty Museum Collection" and "Walker Evans: A Biography," by Belinda Rathbone) and Alfred Stieglitz ("Alfred Stieglitz at Lake George," Richard Whelan's "Alfred Stieglitz: A Biography" and the Getty Museum's chapbook-style "In Focus: Alfred Stieglitz").
While these titles fit into the category of safe bets, there are publishers who are willing to take chances on photography titles with less predictable appeal.
For example, documentary grit is momentarily back in fashion, with three strong contenders: "Dirty Windows," by Merry Alpern, "Raised by Wolves," by Jim  Goldberg, and "Tokyo, Love," by Nan Goldin and Nobuyoshi Araki (all published by Scalo/Distributed Art Publishers).
None offers much in the way of holiday cheer, but they all carry other emotional charges.
So do many of the titles discussed below, some of which are interesting precisely because they are off the beaten track of photography publishing.


THE CAMPAIGN TO DEMONIZE SHEILA BURKE
Jason DeParle's article about Bob Dole's Sheila Burke leaves one with a plea  -- make it a cry of desperation -- for a candidate worthy of such a chief of staff ("Sheila Burke Is the Militant Feminist Commie Peacenik Who's Telling Bob  Dole What to Think," Nov. 12).
Her candor alone gets this vote.
Then there is her obvious ability.
DAVID GOTTLIEB Scarsdale, N.Y.


County Employs New Approach to Preserving the Environment
THE shallow waters gleamed yellow and gold with a dappled blanket of submerged leaves as a brisk breeze signaled the hemlocks that winter was near.
The pristine wetland, in a ravine deep within Ward Pound Ridge Reservation here, was tranquil one recent autumn morning.
But the swampy site, edged by forest and an outcropping of rocks, is giving conservationists new hope for long-term protection of the environment in the county.
This northern Westchester ravine is home to 15 species of amphibians, in contrast with the one or two species found in areas south of Route 287.
The site is the focus of a project sponsored by Federated Conservationists of Westchester County called Habitat Protection for Biodiversity, a combined effort of scientists and ordinary citizens, which reflects a changing attitude among environmentalists.


Surfing in December: More Sites, and a Correction
The list of World Wide Web sites grows by the day.
Last Sunday, the News and  Topics page offered a selection of government sites in New Jersey; because of a  production error, it gave an incorrect address for Montclair.
Here is a corrected list, with more sites.
Readers may let the New Jersey section know of  others by E-mail to JerseyNYT
STATE DEPARTMENTT OF INSURANCE http://www.naic.org/nj/njhomepg.html STATE BUDGET http://www-ns.rutgers.edu/nj/ STATE LEGISLATORS http://www.rutgers.edu/others/ legislators.html CITY OF TRENTON http://www.prodworks.com/trenton/ locgov.htm BOROUGH OF PRINCETON http://www.princetonol.com/gov/ borough.html CITY OF HOBOKEN http://www.stevens-tech.edu/hobokenx/ hobokenx.html CITY OF MONTCLAIR http://www.interactive.net/upper BERGEN COUNTY http://www.bergen.gov


Henry S. Dyer, 88; Test Expert Studied Role of the S.A.T.
Henry S. Dyer, an educator who played a major role in forming the Educational Testing Service in Lawrence Township, N.J., and helped adjust the Scholastic Aptitude Test, died on Monday at the Medical Center at Princeton, N.J.
A Princeton resident since 1952, he was 88.
He was also a pioneering expert in psychometrics, the measurement of mental processes through psychological tests.


Socialites And Other Species
UPTOWN -- Michael Novacek, the young provost at the American Museum of Natural History, is a paleontologist who works in the Gobi desert.
On Nov. 30, he was far from his usual digs.
"I usually deal with dinosaur society," Dr.
Novacek said during cocktails at  the museum's annual ball, where the downstairs lobby was a crush of New York society.
"But dinosaurs did gather in big groups like this, and we think there was a social hierarchy and that they had social cues. Also, a lot of them had hood ornaments, plates and sculpted frills that may have had a social purpose. You could compare those things to evening gowns, fancy suits and other status symbols, I guess."


Bachelors Vie To Be Delight To Irish Eyes
On the Saturday evening after Thanksgiving, between swigs of Budweiser and rounds of a card game called 25, 13 Irishmen in tuxedos boldly declared themselves the most wanted men in town.
Wanted, they hoped, by the hundreds of screaming women who paid $15 each to watch them strut their stuff in the Bachelor of New York contest that night.
In a preliminary of a sort of "Mr. Ireland" contest, the men were judged for  poise, personality and intelligence in front of howling spectators.
They were vying for a chance to represent New York among 13 competitors in Ireland's Bachelor of the Year contest, nationally televised in Ireland from Mullingar, County Westmeath, with a prize of 1,000 Irish pounds ($1,580) and a year of promoting the Emerald Isle. (The New York event, now in its third year, is sponsored by Irish bars and businesses and raises money for Project Children, which sends underprivileged Irish children around the world during the summer.)


Corrections
An article on Nov. 5 about Manchester, England, misstated the size ranking of Greater Manchester.
It has Britain's third-largest urban population; the West Midlands, encompassing the City of Birmingham, has the second-largest.


David Briggs, 51, Neil Young Producer
David Briggs, a record producer best known for his 26-year association with the rock artist Neil Young, died on Nov. 25 at his home in San Francisco.
He was 51.
The cause was lung cancer, said Joel Bernstein, Mr. Young's archivist.


Museum Magic
PIET MONDRIAN, now playing at New York's Museum of Modern Art, spent a lifetime straining to strip the art of painting to its starkest essence, purifying shapes and colors and training our eyes to acquire a whole new sensibility.
Like all great artists in every medium, he progressively created his own language, which most of us can only gradually learn to understand.
The best way to understand a new visual vocabulary is to watch it grow, as in the samples I've brought from the Mondrian show to this page and the next.
They  mark some turning points in Mondrian's style, from a realistic church in 1914 to that church in abstract, on to a dance of only lines, lines then joined by color squares, which then become a canvas of tiles from which Mondrian gradually pulled a grid of groutings.
Even then, once fluent in his language of grids, Mondrian waited until 1932 before he split a horizontal line into parallel bars, and another decade before giving his lines color, a turn that near the end of his life in New York led to the luminous "Broadway Boogie-Woogie."


Salving The Lingering Sting of Death
THE pain of losing a loved one doesn't cease with the funeral service or the  end of the mourning period.
Yet society expects the newly bereaved to return to  customary routines with little acknowledgment or recognition that grief can continue to affect the survivors for months afterward.
To address that need, the Bereavement Center of Westchester recently opened here in collaboration with the Jansen Memorial Hospice, a division of the Home Nursing Association of Westchester, and the Junior League of Bronxville.


For Stay-Home Teachers, Convention Was No Slide
To the Editor:
Joe Sharkey is to be praised for debunking the teacher convention myths propagated by 101.5 FM, New Jersey talk radio ("2 Days of Frolic? Not for These  Teachers," Jersey column, Nov. 19).
The vast majority of teachers attend the convention for professional reasons, not for carousing and cheating the taxpayers.


How to Strengthen Historical Society
To the Editor:
Alas, despite valiant and somewhat successful efforts on the part of energetic new management, despite the swift and helpful response of both New York City and State, the New-York Historical Society again finds itself at the edge of the abyss (arts pages, Nov. 29).


Student Apartment
To the Editor:
Why am I sitting in my middle-class, Cobble Hill living room on a Sunday morning reading about a Yuppie kid who never worked a day in his life ["A Student Apartment, With Views of the Hudson," Nov. 12], who has been given every cultural and financial advantage known to man by his parents, including a million-dollar condo overlooking Central Park, complete with grand piano and voice instructors?
Could it be you guys emulate this golden-diaper boy?


Bank Mergers: A Response To Government's Incentives
To the Editor:
In "Bank Mergers Skip Along, Right Past the Customers" (Viewpoint, Nov. 12),  Ralph Nader describes accurately the rapid consolidation occurring in banking.
A result has been a sharp decline in the number of banks and a sharp increase in the average size of the survivors.
He also cites my research with Stan Graham, and I thank him.
However, Mr.
Nader is a bit off the mark in some of his commentary.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
CROWN HEIGHTS Historical Holiday Fun Especially for Children


Sightings of John Doe No. 2: In Blast Case, Mystery No. 1
Seven months after Timothy J. McVeigh and Terry L. Nichols were arrested in the bombing of the Oklahoma City Federal Building, the prosecution's case against the two former Army friends is still haunted by the ghost of a mysterious third suspect who has never been found or identified.
In the days and weeks after a bomb shattered the building, killing 168 people, the shadowy figure that the authorities described then as John Doe No. 2 became the most hunted man in America, his features depicted in composite sketches circulated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


More Mexicans Seek Asylum
Ana Maria Guillen, a former leader of the opposition Democratic Revolutionary Party in the Mexican border city of Matamoros, says that she and her colleagues  were regularly detained by the police there, beaten and threatened with "disappearance" for their activities.
Last week she was granted political asylum, the 55th Mexican citizen to receive asylum in the United States in the past 14 months, after years in which  all such applications were routinely denied.


A QUESTION FOR: Frances Partridge
Q: Is the film successful in portraying what you and the other group members valued most in your relationships?
A: The film, of course, is not gospel.
The whole effect was of a Bloomsbury that was jumping into bed the whole time, which wasn't really true -- a good deal less than people do nowadays.
That they didn't mind criticizing each other made  people think otherwise, but they were very devoted to each other, and friendship was a great ruling thing.
I think that they were rather hedonistic in that they thought happiness was important.
And talk.
Talk was the thing that all Bloomsbury people loved.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: December 3, 1995
Weeks This
On Week  List Fiction


Weary of Political Noise, a Senator Sees a Peaceful Farm in Her Future
The final art of elective politics is to go cold turkey, leave the scene behind and head home to an ordinary life.
"To Kansas," says Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum, her smile as serene and honest as anything ever is in the Capitol.
"It's important for anybody in politics to be able to go home," the Republican Senator advises in the terse, tidy way that has been her oratorical trademark in the political career she never expected.
It will last three terms in Washington and not a minute more.
She intends to leave in a year and go live  in a small, white farmhouse in the middle of Kansas where there are cows and no  C-Span Congressional debates flickering endlessly in life's foreground.


Alexandra Gillespie, John A. Porges
Marian Alexandra Gillespie, the advertising manager at Calvin Klein Inc. in New York, was married last evening to John Alexander Porges, an associate at Togut, Segal &amp; Segal, a New York law firm.
Rabbi David Posner performed the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El.
Mrs.
Porges, 28, is known as Alexandra.
She graduated from Southern Methodist University.
She is a daughter of Barbara H. Cantwell of San Antonio and the late James R. Gillespie, who was a criminal defense lawyer there.
Her mother is the director of Attitudinal Healing in El Paso, a support group for families of patients with catastrophic diseases.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L. Wings Rout Canadiens


Multiplication Tables (Five Times the Fun)
A handful of parties, a gathering of guests, from Nancy Reagan to Archbishop  Tutu, Nov. 27 to 30.


Its Name Restored, a Hotel Rides the Tourism Wave
TIME seems to bring change to hotels more regularly than to most forms of commercial property.
To maintain quality, renovation work has to be undertaken constantly.
But the ownership of the property, and the character of its use, often changes as well.
In the case of what is now formally known as the Hotel Pennsylvania, in Manhattan, the changes extend also to the name.
It was built in 1919 as the Hotel Pennsylvania by the Pennsylvania Railroad, whose late-lamented station faced it across Seventh Avenue between 32d and 33d Streets.
It became the Statler in 1949 when the Statler Company bought it.
Five years later, Conrad Hilton bought all 17 Statler hotels, and renamed it the Statler Hilton.


Money Woes: BID in a Bind
The East Brooklyn Business Improvement District is different from the 32 other districts that have sprung up around the city over the last 18 years, levying an assessment in return for extra services like security and sanitation.
It is the city's only industrial improvement district, designed to help factories instead of retailers, and the only service it provides is security.
Now the East Brooklyn district is about to gain another distinction: It will  become the first district to have its request to raise its assessment denied by  the City Council, according to Herbert E. Berman, chairman of the finance committee.


Strike at Caterpillar May Be Nearing End
A 17-month-old strike against Caterpillar Inc. will end next week regardless  of how union members vote this weekend on a new contract offer, sources among the workers said today.
Officials of the United Automobile Workers union are telling workers that they will be sent back to work next week, said the sources, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.


Does Stony Brook See Nature's Harmony?
I can see that battle lines are forming in the Village of Head of the Harbor.
After reading "Big Political Fights in Tiny Pastoral Town," [Oct. 29], I now see that our surroundings -- and the objects so near and dear to us -- have a powerful influence on our lives.
Stony Brook Harbor was not aware of the politics of power or the power of politics.
Their residents want a relaxed way of living.
They want to keep their  purer environmental situation.
It takes courage to progress in the right direction and to keep a balance between respect for tradition and the necessities of the community.


Shell Game in Nigeria
Royal Dutch/Shell, the world's largest oil company, suggests that it is merely a benign bystander to the tyrannical rule of Nigeria.
After the indefensible execution of Ken Saro-Wiwa and eight other members of the minority  Ogoni tribe, Shell's position is untenable.
If the company is determined to remain in Nigeria, it must use its considerable influence there to restrain the  Government.
Since the hanging of Mr.
Saro-Wiwa and the other Ogoni dissidents last month, Shell has proceeded with plans to build a $4 billion natural gas project in partnership with Nigeria's ruling generals.
As protests swelled, Shell, normally reticent, replied with a flurry of press releases and paid advertisements.
Shell insists that it pleaded quietly for the dissidents' lives and that pulling out of the gas project would punish all Nigerians.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
CROWN HEIGHTS Historical Holiday Fun Especially for Children


Roland L. Dobrushin, 66, Dies; A Top Russian Mathematician
Roland L. Dobrushin, a Russian mathematician who was an expert on probability theory and a foreign associate of the National Academy of Sciences in the United States, died on Nov. 12 in Moscow, where he taught at Moscow State University.
He was 66.
The British daily The Independent reported his death last week.


THE CAMPAIGN TO DEMONIZE SHEILA BURKE
I find it interesting that Burke is impressed most with Senator Dole's "nonideological, deal-cutting streak." Isn't that what the news media (and Republicans) have been belittling President Clinton about for three years?
ALLAN NASH Walnut Creek, Calif.


F.Y.I.
Justice on a Bridge


Pharmacies In a Struggle For Survival
JEFFREY MESSINA, a pharmacist in Groton, dispenses a measure of health-saving advice with each prescription.
Mr.
Messina, owner of Fort Hill Pharmacy, warns his customers about dangerous drug interactions, reminds them to take certain medications on a full stomach and points out possible side effects.
But pharmacists like Mr.
Messina, who know their customers by their first names, are becoming as rare as the grocer on the corner.
Small, independent pharmacists in Connecticut say their businesses are being  undermined by the restrictions of managed-care health insurance.
The practices they claim are unfair include reimbursement for drugs that is below wholesale cost, closed or restricted networks that require patients to use only certain pharmacies, coverage that is restricted to an approved list of drugs, increased  use of mail order drug outlets and discrimination in pricing.
Two thousand independent pharmacies in the United States -- 40 a week -- went out of business last year, according to the National Association of Retail Druggists.
Assuming each pharmacy served 2,000 patients, 4 million people lost their local druggist.
"If these insurance company practices continue, the association expects the rate of pharmacy closings to increase," Mr.
Messina said.


THE CAMPAIGN TO DEMONIZE SHEILA BURKE
I served as Midwest director of Senator Dole's 1988 Presidential campaign.
In this position, I had repeated contact and dealings with Sheila Burke, and I consistently found her to be honest, concerned with Senator Dole's political and legislative agenda and most important, very talented.
Today I count myself as a committed supporter of the Presidential campaign of America's most effective conservative, Senator Bob Dole.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
For Stepping Out in Town, Some Footsteps to Follow


For the Good Old Boys, Getting a (Second) Life at 60
LIFE no longer begins at 40, if indeed it ever did.
Try 60 instead.
That's when some athletes in Fairfield County begin a second life in sports.
They are the Good Old Boys, an association of retired, or at least semi-retired, men who have found that competing in a friendly fashion in tennis  and platform tennis has given them a new lease on life.


Correction
A listing of World Wide Web sites in News and Topics last Sunday misstated the Internet address for the City of Montclair.
The address is: http://www.interactive.net/upper An expanded list appears today on page 6.


Rise in Cigarette Tax Planned To Finance Care for the Poor
Facing a Dec. 31 deadline to replenish a state fund for hospital care of the  poor, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman and the Legislature's Republican leadership have agreed to raise some of the money by increasing the cigarette tax by as much as 25 cents a pack.
The Republican lawmakers, who control the Legislature, had put off action on  the issue during the election season.
But while increasing the cigarette tax is  not expected to create a public furor, the Republicans hope to limit any political damage by enlisting Democrats with the argument that the hospitals most in need of the state money are in Democratic districts.


Through the Eyes of Allen Abel
As a Canadian foreign correspondent, Allen Abel has reported from dozens of countries.
Three years ago he went back to his native turf, Brooklyn, to write a book about the 10.5 miles of Flatbush Avenue.
The finished product, "Flatbush Ody-ssey" (McClelland &amp; Stewart, 1995), is equal parts travelogue, nostalgia trip and family memoir.
He talked as he walked last week from Junior's restaurant to Nostrand Avenue.
His opinions, he admits, are sometimes tinged with the ain't-what-it-used-to-be edge of a man who, after many adventures, returns home  to find that home has changed as much as he has.
MICHAEL COOPER


In the Region: Connecticut;Factory-Outlet Centers Double Up on the Sound
CHARTER OAK PARTNERS expects that its $30 million Westbrook Factory Stores in this Long Island Sound community will have its best sales during the summer tourist season.
But they haven't been disappointed with sales since the project opened off Interstate 95 three weeks ago.


China's Buddha Complex
The choosing of divine leaders is seldom left to atheists.
In Tibetan Buddhism, finding the highest spiritual incarnations is a matter of the highest  spiritual importance, involving years-long monastic search parties, elaborate batteries of tests given to every prospective lama, the careful study of dreams and portents, and, finally, the imprimatur of the Dalai Lama himself.
It  is neither a beauty pageant nor a lottery.
So when the Chinese Government declared on Wednesday that it had found the new Panchen Lama -- Tibetan Buddhism's second-highest religious authority -- by  a drawing of lots, it was more than the latest slippery gambit in China's 45-year occupation.
It marked a worrying escalation in the extent to which Beijing seems ready to mock and even appropriate everything that is sacred to Tibetans.


Student, 25, Kills Lawyer Of Ex-Wife
A graduate student shot his former wife's lawyer to death and wounded a police officer in a confrontation on Thursday night in the city's financial district, then killed himself as officers closed in on him, the authorities said.
The police said the lawyer, William F. Kahn, approached Officer Donald Lee about 8 P.M. and told him that he was being bothered by another man.
When Officer Lee went with Mr.
Kahn to investigate, they met the gunman, John T. Lin, 25, who opened fire, the police said.


A Misconception About Indians
In response to the art review by William Zimmer of the exhibition "Legacies:  Contemporary Art by Native American Women" at the Castle Gallery at the College  of New Rochelle, I was initially heartened by his seemingly cognizant critique ["Light and Heat From American Indian Women," Sept. 25].
He seemed to understand the issues that we artists were commenting upon and presented them in a way that would intrigue an audience interested in knowing what the fuss was all about regarding Native Americans and land concerns, self-identity, sovereignty, racism and stereotypes.


Saving Science as Budgets Are Cut
In a memorable scene from the movie "Apollo 13," a space official dumps replicas of every item aboard the crippled spacecraft onto a table and orders the gathered scientists and engineers to figure out how to combine the debris into a workable exhaust system.
They do.
Solving complex, unanticipated problems is what America's scientific community does uniquely well.
Last week a panel of the National Research Council, a private group that advises Congress, proposed sensible ways to preserve the nation's scientific acuity in the face of steep projected declines in research budgets.


Perhaps 'Racing Demon' Is Too Comfortable
YOU WILL BE COMFORTABLE watching David Hare's "Racing Demon"; comfortably alert, comfortably stimulated -- intellectually and dramatically; comfortably concerned with an Important Issue of the Day: the role of the church and of Christianity in society; the ruthless political maneuvers and machinations and the battles for power and domination that go on inside the church.
Of course, it's the Church of England.
"Racing Demon," set in Britain, is one of three plays that David Hare has written that analyze, criticize and dramatize social and political institutions.
I wish there were a market for plays that take this approach to American institutions.
Here, "Racing Demon" would most likely be an extended piece of new journalism or an HBO movie linked to some kind of page one sexual scandal.
If we were as willing to dramatize the workings of religion as we are those of law, crime and medicine, it might even be a weekly television drama.


A Way Out For Victims Of Battering
From the time she was pregnant with their first child in 1986, Terri Nucito was abused by her husband, Paul.
He pushed her and hit her, refused to let her leave the house alone, refused, she says, even to let her go to church because he was afraid she'd have an affair with the minister.
One night in January 1994, according to court papers, he held her captive at  knifepoint for 13 hours, grinding out lighted cigarettes on her tongue and forcing her to perform oral sex while repeatedly promising to kill her and burn  down their Egg Harbor Township trailer with the children inside.
And then, last  month, she vanished.


Martinez Eager To Know '96 Team
Fifteen minutes away from Tino Martinez's home in Tampa, Fla., the Yankees were in their minor league complex today trying to complete a trade that would bring the power-hitting first baseman from the Seattle Mariners for Russ Davis and Sterling Hitchcock.
If the affable Martinez could have done so, he would have eavesdropped on the meeting because the persistent speculation has made him antsy.
Martinez spent the opening five minutes of a conversation with a reporter today searching for the latest slivers of information involving his future.


In an Airplane, Sharing Germs
ON September 5, Dr.
I.
Kelman Cohen boarded a plane in Milan, expecting a routine flight back to the United States.
But what he saw shocked and dismayed him.
The plane was packed with Bosnian refugees.
They were dirty and looked ill, so he could not help wondering if they were diseased.
After all, he was going to be sitting with these people for hours, and although he sympathized with their plight, he wanted to remain healthy.
"What do you do with a group of people who need to be sanitized?" he asked.
Dr.
Cohen, who is chief of plastic surgery at the University of Virginia, said he was torn between feelings of anxiety and compassion for these obviously suffering passengers.
But for him -- and countless other airline passengers -- the health issue remains.
How safe is it to travel on an airplane with people who appear ill?
And how can the airlines protect passengers from other passengers who are sick?
Airlines say they are taking precautions, up to a point.
But, they say, the ultimate answer is personal responsibility.
People who are ill should not travel.


The T Word
ALONG Horace J. Bryant Jr.
Drive, they call it the T word.
The T stands for tunnel: a proposed four-lane tunnel that would turn this pleasant suburban street, named for one of Atlantic City's first black city commissioners, into an underground thoroughfare linking the Atlantic City Expressway, the new convention center and the casino-hotels of the marina district -- notably, the huge Mirage Resorts complex that the Las Vegas entrepreneur Steven Wynn wants to open in 1997.
Talk about the tunnel anywhere else in town, and reactions are mixed: skepticism that such an engineering wonder could be built on a barrier island made entirely of sand, relief at the prospect that stifling traffic jams may be  alleviated, hope for new construction and more jobs.
But on Bryant Drive, the T  word is a fighting word.


Ex-C.I.A. Agent Suspected in Italian Ring
A former C.I.A. agent was arrested today in connection with a money-laundering investigation, the Italian police said.
Roger D'Onofrio, 72, a retired agent of the United States Central Intelligence Agency with dual American and Italian citizenship, was arrested at home in Solopaca, near Naples.


Haitian Ex-Paramilitary Leader Confirms C.I.A. Relationship
The former leader of Haiti's most feared right-wing paramilitary group has confirmed that he was a paid agent of the Central Intelligence Agency from 1991  to 1994.
The former paramilitary leader, Emmanuel Constant, now jailed in a Maryland detention center on immigration charges, said published reports linking him to the C.I.A. were true.
He made his admission in a videotaped interview to be broadcast on Sunday on the CBS News program "60 Minutes," which provided transcripts to other news organizations.


THE CAMPAIGN TO DEMONIZE SHEILA BURKE
Apparently, Burke's son shares the same sentiments toward his mother that some of her adversaries do. ("I hate you," he replied after his mother broke her longstanding promise to take him to a Yankees game.)


Residential Resales
MANHATTAN


Bridgeport's Dog Track: Other Views
In the article "A Dog Track to Help Revive Bridgeport," Shoreline Star manager James F. Gartland asserts that the "activists are disseminating information from 20 years ago" and that accusations of mistreatment of greyhounds are "not accurate now."
The dog racing industry stands to gain the most from a public kept ignorant of the issues.
We continue to support the belief that it is in the public's best interest to know the facts.


Nets Rally To Top Cavs
With only eight available men, who possessed tired legs following Friday night's overtime victory at Boston, the Nets looked like they were cooked tonight when they trailed the Cleveland Cavaliers by 15 points at halftime.
But the Nets (7-8) remained unbeaten at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, thanks to a  determined second-half comeback.
Clutch free throws by Chris Childs and Jayson Williams earned the Nets a 79-78 victory.


Going by Bus
To the Editor: I read with interest Dean Nelson's article about bus travel ("Looking for America, Greyhound Style," Sept. 17) as I had just arrived home from a trip to Los Angeles by bus.
I agree that the "long, slow route" has many charms: meeting all sorts of people, seeing the United States pass by at close hand, even the personalities of the drivers.
What came as a shock was the attitude of Greyhound when it came  to information; I found the travel bureau of the old U.S.S.R. to be more forthcoming.
I traveled with the Ameripass.
Before leaving the only information I could get was the cost: nothing on permissible routes, travel times, schedules, etc.
And almost none of the Greyhound stations across the country had arrival or departure times posted or schedules available.
When I asked if there was a map for use with the pass, similar to the Eurorail map, I was told that for $1.50 I  could buy a general map of all Greyhound and associated routes.
I later met a Japanese tourist in Utah who had such an Ameripass map -- in German!


THE RADICAL CENTER OR THE MODERATE MIDDLE?
COLIN POWELL'S DECISION NOT TO SEEK THE PRESIDENCY HAS left an opening for the emergence of a new leader or a new party in the center of the political system.
Whether or not there is an independent or a third-party challenge, the Democratic and Republican Presidential nominees in 1996 will have to court centrist voters who are repelled both by traditional liberalism and radical conservatism.
This is the conventional wisdom.
It is half right.
A substantial number of Americans (as much as a third of the electorate, in some polls) are indeed alienated by a two-party system that tends to present only two options -- conservative Republican or liberal Democrat.
But the growing number of disaffected voters do not form a cohesive bloc with a shared viewpoint that might serve as the basis for a third party.
On the contrary, alienated voters tend to divide into two distinct and incompatible camps: the moderate middle and the radical center.


COOKING
LATELY, I've been eating the best biscotti I've ever tasted, bowls of them.
These elongated Italian cookies are dry, so dry and brittle, in fact, that they  shatter in the mouth with the texture of pulverized rocks.
Their appeal is completely mysterious.
But my willpower is gone nevertheless.
And for this loss of control I have Maida Heatter to thank.
Somewhere en route to her latest book, MAIDA HEATTER'S BRAND-NEW BOOK OF GREAT COOKIES (Random House, $25), this ebullient cook got carried away in a biscotti bacchanal -- three with chocolate, one with ginger, another with raisins and sour cherries, and a few others besides.
Biscotti achieve their perversely pleasing texture because, like zwieback, which she also includes, they are baked twice, once in loaf form and then again after they have been sliced.


Who Pays Capital Gains Taxes?
Investors are hoping that President Clinton and the Congress will agree to lower the capital gains tax rate.
But many rich investors couldn't care less.
They have found perfectly legal ways to take their profits without paying a nickel in capital gains taxes.
No one knows just how much money is saved through such tax strategies.
But it almost certainly is huge and growing.
In 1993, the last year for which figures were available, taxpayers reported less in capital gains than they had in 1985,  when stock prices were far lower.
Why?
Chances are that there are not fewer gains being taken, just more taxes being avoided.


NEW JERSEY VOICES


Eli Morris Spark, 88, Professor of Law
Eli Morris Spark, an expert in arbitration and comparative law who retired as a professor of law at the Catholic University of America in Washington in 1972,  died on Nov. 9 in his Washington home.
He was 88.
Professor Spark joined the Catholic University faculty in 1955.
He was born in New York City and graduated Phi Beta Kappa from City College.
He taught Latin and Spanish at the college, and received a law degree from Fordham University.


In an Experimental Project, Glitches Are to Be Expected
To the Editor:
Your article "Fuel for the Fleet: Should It Be Diesel or Something Else?" (Road and Rail, Oct. 22) left the impression that the project to equip some New  Jersey Transit buses with natural gas engines had serious quality problems and that its sponsors were not pursuing it as aggressively as transit agencies in other states.


Butterflies in December


Does Stony Brook See Nature's Harmony?
I can see that battle lines are forming in the Village of Head of the Harbor.
After reading "Big Political Fights in Tiny Pastoral Town," [Oct. 29], I now see that our surroundings -- and the objects so near and dear to us -- have a powerful influence on our lives.
Stony Brook Harbor was not aware of the politics of power or the power of politics.
Their residents want a relaxed way of living.
They want to keep their  purer environmental situation.
It takes courage to progress in the right direction and to keep a balance between respect for tradition and the necessities of the community.


Learning French
To the Editor: I agree with Ann Pringle Harris that one of the best -- and most enjoyable -- ways to learn French is through an immersion program ("Learning French the French Way," Oct. 15).
Readers interested in experiencing both an educational and residential immersion away from the bustle of Paris may want to investigate the Centre Linguistique pour Etrangers in Tours.
On a recent four-week stay, I found my classes similar in style to those Ms.
Harris took: engaging and inventive teaching with enthusiastic teachers and a maximum of seven students.
To augment my classroom learning, I chose the center's option of living with a local family.


Honesty, Eloquence: Louis Malle
WE FILM MAKERS DON'T WORK FOR posterity," Louis Malle said a few years ago. "We create with celluloid and chemical pigments that don't last very long.
They  fade away.
Maybe that's why people can recall precise images -- think of Brooke Shields  carried on a litter in "Pretty Baby," as a 12-year-old being ceremonially sold into prostitution, or Susan Sarandon languorously rubbing lemons over her arms in "Atlantic City" -- without recognizing that they are from Louis Malle films.
Other directors flourished on flash, dazzle and special effects.
Malle, with supreme self-confidence, cultivated a style whose trademark qualities -- grace,  subtlety, intelligence -- refused to call attention to themselves.


In Airline Stocks, Shorter Flights Have Fewer Bumps
HERE is a handy rule for long-term investors thinking of buying airline stocks: Don't.
Of course, it may be awfully tempting to ignore that rule these days.
After all, since March, shares in the UAL Corporation, the parent of United Airlines,  have more than doubled, to $208.75.
Shares in Northwest Airlines, which not too long ago was threatening bankruptcy, have also more than doubled, to $50.375, since March.
And Continental's shares have risen fourfold, to $39.50, in the same period.


Dorothy McCabe, Sean Daly Brew
Dorothy Marie McCabe, a daughter of Lynn and Charles McCabe of New Rochelle,  N.Y., was married there yesterday to Sean Daly Brew, a son of Kathleen and George Brew of Toms River, N.J.
The Rev.
James Teague performed the Roman Catholic ceremony in the chapel at Iona College, from which the couple graduated.
Ms.
McCabe, 23, is keeping her name.
She is an account executive at WRGX-FM,  a radio station in Hawthorne, N.Y.
Her father is an executive vice president of the Chemical Banking Corporation in New York.
Her mother is a nurse in the alcohol and drug dependency unit of St.
Agnes Hospital in White Plains.


THE CAMPAIGN TO DEMONIZE SHEILA BURKE
Kudos to Jason DeParle for his sensible account.
He carefully demonstrates the plight of Sheila Burke (and others like her): if you are thoughtful, hard-working, intelligent and a woman, you have little place in the New Conservatism.
JOHN P. SHIELDS Amherst, Mass.


Green Acres Mall As a Good Neighbor
Mall Irks Green Acres, Now Mill Brook" [Nov. 5] had two inconsistencies. (1) Your headline suggests that the Green Acres Mall "irks" a neighborhood, when in  fact the neighborhood simply wanted to have its own identity. The president of the Mill Brook Civic Association said as much in the article: "The Green Acres Mall is addressing its problems and doing a great job. . . .
But we want our own identity." Does that sound like the head of an irked neighborhood?
The second inconsistency stems from a contention that the mere mention of Green Acres Mall "conjures up images of commerce, congestion and crime." Again, this does not accurately reflect the true situation.
Yes, the Green Acres Mall has had some isolated incidents of trouble in the past couple of years.
But when you weigh those numbers against the sheer volume of people who go through the Green Acres Mall each and every day you get a true appreciation for the extraordinary efforts extended by Green Acres Mall management.


Dysfunction Wears Out Its Welcome
JUST LIKE JUNE CLEAVER OR Jim Anderson, today's sitcom moms and dads know what's best for their families.
Of course, they may not know where their families came from.
John Hemingway, the hero of "The John Larroquette Show," is  a recovering alcoholic who has a teen-age son he abandoned as a baby and a grown daughter (by a different mother) who he didn't know existed until last year.
The children know nothing about each other, so one day Tony asks Rachel out for coffee and Dad exclaims in sitcom horror, "Oh, my God, my son has a date -- with my daughter!" Sure, the old son-dating-daughter gag; that was always the part where Danny Thomas would spit out his coffee, right?
Meanwhile, behind the white picket fences of "Roseanne" and "Grace Under Fire" live two of the most popular families on television, reflecting what the typical American household is all about: alcoholism, spousal abuse, unemployment, abortion, abandoned children, children put up for adoption, drug abuse, impotence, clinical depression, infidelity, divorce and single parenthood.
And that's just in the family, never mind the neighbors.
There is something strange going on when the Simpsons are the best-adjusted family around.


Kym Birchess, Brian McGillicuddy
Kym Julia Birchess, the daughter of Francis A. Kowalski of Toms River, N.J.,  and the late Helene Birchess Kowalski, was married yesterday to Brian Munro McGillicuddy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. McGillicuddy of Rye, N.Y.
Patricia K. Brooks, a justice of the peace in New Canaan, Conn., officiated there at the  Roger Sherman Inn.
Mrs.
McGillicuddy, who used her mother's maiden name, is an operating room nurse at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital.
She graduated from Lehigh University and the Beth Israel School of Nursing.
Her father retired as a foreman at Tapley-Rutter, a printing company in Moonachie, N.J.


Four of a Kind
EMINENT GEORGIANS The Lives of King George V, Elizabeth Bowen, St.
John Philby, &amp; Nancy Astor.
By John Halperin.
Illustrated. 242 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $29.95.
JOHN HALPERIN, the author of a biography of Jane Austen and now of "Eminent Georgians," is an honest man.
"Does an age shape the people who live in it," he  asks in his introduction, "or do the people who live in it shape an age? . . . The stories of our four eminent Georgians may help to answer these questions --  or they may not."


British Bondholders May Sue in Singapore Case
Bondholders of the British investment bank Barings P.L.C. said today that the trial and sentencing in Singapore of Nicholas W. Leeson had failed to get to the heart of the scandal and that they were considering their own legal action.
Mr.
Leeson was sentenced this morning to six and a half years in jail after reaching a plea bargain with the Singapore authorities in which he pleaded guilty to two charges of cheating.
Nine other charges were dropped.


Hailing Cabbies, Officially
A cabdriver who returns a purse containing $20,000 in jewelry -- and drives out of his way to deliver it -- deserves more than a nice tip, New York City's taxi regulators believe.
Amid a spate of bad news this year about cabbies -- those who overcharge, who drive with revoked licenses and even one last week who threatened to kill the Mayor -- the Taxi and Limousine Commission has started handing out awards to drivers who take the high road.
While upstanding cabbies were honored on occasion in the past, the commission chairman, Christopher R. Lynn, made the process formal when he took office in June.
Since then, awards have been presented at each monthly commission meeting.
So far 28 have been made, three for lifetime achievement, two for valor, seven for extraordinary service and 16 for distinguished service, anything from returning an errant wallet to being what one happy rider called "gracious and gentlemanly." The agency has also given five-star Safe Driver's Awards to 3,300 cabbies with perfect records for five years.
One difficulty with the awards, Mr.
Lynn said, is getting the drivers to attend the ceremonies: "They simply have to work too hard." Wherever the winners are, here are some of the commission's good words about them:
Eli Resnick -- "A cabdriver's cabdriver and New York City's Goodwill Ambasador." He is known as the Candy Man because of his habit of doling out sweets to passengers, passers-by and attendees at Taxi Commission meetings. (Lifetime Achievement Award)


Leningrad Was Here
PETERSBURG, CRUCIBLE OF CULTURAL REVOLUTION By Katerina Clark. 377 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. $39.95.
ST.
PETERSBURG A Cultural History.
By Solomon Volkov.
Translated by Antonina W. Bouis.
Illustrated. 598 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $30.


Man With Syringe Attacks Girl
A homeless man clutching a hypodermic needle lunged at a 6-year-old girl riding with her mother on a subway train in midtown Manhattan yesterday afternoon, the police said.
Officials said they were uncertain whether the needle had punctured the girl's skin or what substance, if any, the syringe might have contained.
Officials at Bellevue Hospital Center, where the girl was treated and released, told the police that they had found a mark indicating that the girl might have been pierced in the right thigh.
Laboratory tests were being conducted to determine whether the syringe contained anything, the police said.


Billion-Dollar Bets? Fidelity's Made Plenty
WITH $382 billion in assets, the mutual funds managed by Fidelity Investments obviously own big stakes in many of the largest publicly traded companies.
But just how many, and how big, might surprise even the most informed Fidelity shareholders.
According to documents filed this month with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Fidelity's mutual funds and trust accounts, as of Sept. 30, owned more than $1 billion of stock in 34 companies whose shares are traded on United  States exchanges.
Those holdings add up to more than $56 billion in invested capital, or nearly 15 percent of Fidelity's total mutual fund and trust assets.


Accenting Animal Magnetism
Fake leopard spots are king of the fashion jungle this fall.
The many distinctive cat patterns are the accent of coats and suits with face-framing collars, cuffs, pocket flaps and buttons.
For some people, black spots adorn shoes and boots, often strikingly worn with matching trousers.
Most of the animal markings are printed on synthetic fleece fabrics in patterns that encompass many of the cat species.
The rarest marking is that of the Somali leopard, with its small open circles (above and above right); the cheetah's solid black spots (bottom, far left and center), and the ocelot's elongated circle (left).
Some women are wearing vintage coats from the 1940's (above, woman on left), when fur trimmings were a signature look.


THE CAMPAIGN TO DEMONIZE SHEILA BURKE
For months, if not years, you have been attempting to demonize Bob Dole because he is a Republican.
You now want us to believe that you are deeply concerned by what is happening to one of his trusted aides?


Dr. John H. C. Ranson, 57, Dies; Leader in Pancreatic Research
Dr.
John H. C. Ranson, a surgeon at the New York University Medical Center who developed a widely used system for predicting the outcome of pancreatic disease, died on Thursday at the University of Arkansas Medical Center in Little Rock, where he had gone for treatment.
He was 57 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause of death was complications from a bone marrow transplant for myeloma, the New York University Medical Center said.


The Joy of Suffering
HORACE By George Sand.
Translated by Zack Rogow. 339 pp.
San Francisco: Mercury House.
Paper, $15.95.


Union Chief Is Charged In Harassment
The president of the union that represents the Department of Transportation's special traffic agents has been charged with aggravated harassment for threatening the department's commissioner for Brooklyn, the police said.
The union president, Robert Cassar, of Local 1182 of the Communications Workers of America, turned himself in Friday night at the 84th Precinct in downtown Brooklyn.
He was ordered to appear in Brooklyn Criminal Court on Jan. 3.


A Child Dies, and the System Tries to Hide;Everyone's Problem
To the Editor:
Re "What Happened to Elisa" (editorial, Nov. 29): By describing mothers who are addicts as "determined to kill their children" and child welfare workers as  "indifferent and incompetent," you take up the banner titled "Those People" and  continue the worthless discussion of how could a child known to the authorities  not be saved from torture by her or his parents.


Comeback By Kansas Trips Up U.C.L.A.
Kansas 85, U.C.L.A. 70


Joyce Oxman, Edward Misrahi
Joyce Ronit Oxman, the daughter of Eleanor Sebastian of New York and Gaston Oxman of Washington, is to be married today to Edward Solomon Misrahi, the son of Astrid and Henri Misrahi of Madrid.
Grand Rabbi Y. Benasuly of Madrid is to perform the ceremony at the Beth Yaacob Synagogue there.
The bride, 26, is an account associate at Coach, the leather goods company in New York.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is a regional adviser on information systems at the Pan American Health Organization in Washington.
Her mother is a senior funding officer at Unicef in New York.
The bride's stepfather, Charles R. Frank Jr., is an executive vice president of the General  Electric Capital Company in Stamford, Conn.


Easy Listening
To the Editor:
When John Updike reminded us, in his review of "The Stories of Vladimir Nabokov" (Oct. 29), that Nabokov may not be "an easy read," it kindled my memories of listening to him when he lectured at Cornell in the mid-1950's.
Whether correcting a translation ("Emma's head is not shaped like an egg; the skin of her face has the appearance of an eggshell"), soliciting chauffeuring help ("My son is playing soccer this weekend"), admonishing us to become rereaders or dissecting the European fiction that we studied, he was always an easy listen.


How Hollywood Did a Deal
BRETT BOTULA, the location manager, was asleep when the phone call came.
He couldn't believe it.
It was the morning of the first day of shooting.
He had spent months of careful diplomatic work, handing out money and small jobs, smoothing bruised feelings, laying the groundwork so that his movie, "Night Falls on Manhattan," could shoot a crucial scene on East 117th Street.
And here  was April Livieri, a resident of that block, telling him that an uprising was in the works.
The local residents had their payments from the film company, she told him, but who could cash the checks?
Few had bank accounts and the cashing place wouldn't even look at a California check.
The residents wanted action.
Imagine:  a Beverly Hills 90210 check in Harlem!


The Noise of the Blowers Doesn't Last Very Long
To the Editor:
Diane Jahnsen Glaser's essay "The Roar of the Leaves" (Soapbox, Nov. 19), a litany of complaints about the noise made by industrial lawn-care machines, fails to note that the noise is usually of very short duration: the landscapers  cannot afford to dawdle.


For Women, Schroeder Served as a Beacon
To the Editor:
I was shocked and saddened to see that Representative Pat Schroeder did not make the front page Nov. 30, the morning after her declaration of retirement from Congress.


Q. &amp; A.
Garage Fees in A Co-op


I Was a Victim of Data Base Mismanagement
THE 1990's have been touted in business as the decade of data base, or target, marketing.
Many companies, put off by the high costs and inefficiency of mass marketing, have turned to a more focused approach aimed at attracting the likeliest customers, targeting campaigns to them once they're in the fold and often structuring loyalty programs to reward them for their patronage.
The explosion of sophisticated computer software and highly refined data bases has been an essential handmaiden to this effort.
One would think, then, that credit-card companies, whose use of customer-acquisition and transaction-building mailings is second to none, would  be on top of their data base game.
But a recent experience involving both American Express and Mastercard revealed that, sadly, such is not the case.


The Lives of No. 714
THERE is nothing imposing or distinguished about the house at 714 11th Street.
Built in 1893, last sold in 1994 for $166,000.
Three stories (one to a family), of a weathered, tan-colored brick that seems to have collected 102 years' worth of grit.
No one has suggested that it be designated a landmark.
No one famous has ever lived there.
But its story is the story of those who have -- of Abel and Maritca Moran, Honduran immigrants, who bought it last year from Angel and Hilda Acebo, Cuban immigrants.
Of the Sisos, also Cuban, who sold it to the Acebos in 1978, and the Napolitanos, Italian-American, who lived there for 10 years and sold it to the Sisos in 1974.


Rail Union And M.T.A. to Resume Negotiations
Metro-North Commuter Railroad's track workers and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority will resume their talks today, the union representing the workers said last night.
But with no guarantee that the issue dividing the workers and management has been resolved, thousands of commuters still face the  prospect of gaps in train service tomorrow morning.
A single issue -- the timetable for introducing a new package of vacation benefits -- continued to separate Metro-North's parent agency, the Metropolitan  Transportation Authority, and the union, Local 808 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters.


A Web of Support Grows Weaker
Government efforts to shrink budgets have eroded the resources of private charities, charity officials say.
In New York City, many charities are devising  new ways to deliver the same services.
Albert M., right, a homeless man in Harlem who temporarily lost Home Relief benefits in a bureaucratic mix-up, is one of many New Yorkers who are increasingly turning to private charity as the welfare system is overhauled.
Article, page 49.


GALILEO, PHONE HOME
IT HAS BEEN CARRYING A GRUDGE SINCE THE WORLD began.
As the solar system was  forming and bits of universe scrambled for whatever mass they could snatch, Jupiter grabbed nearly but not quite enough to make it a star.
Condemned to play second fiddle in the music of the spheres, the largest of the planets must make  its dutiful circuit, once every 12 years, around the Sun.
Wrapped in clouds of ammonia ice and glowering through the light of sodium vapor, it drags along a necklace of planet-size moons and tantalizes astronomers with its own wildly changing complexion -- a Great Red Spot and giant White Ovals dappling its face  like makeup on a duchess.
The past few years have been particularly galling.
In July 1994, the comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 arrived, a string of fireballs that pounded Jupiter's atmosphere and invited the attentions of more telescopes than had ever focused on a single astronomical event.
Now, looming ever larger, comes a sort of giant  mechanical fly.
This week the Galileo spacecraft -- after six years and two and  a half billion miles of flight that followed more than a decade of design, construction and delay -- will arrive from Earth.


Corrections
A chart on Nov. 19 showing the cost of daily adult ski lift tickets referred  incorrectly to the premium charged on holidays, on weekends or both.
The premium applies to Telluride, Colo., and to Killington and Mount Snow, Vt.; it does not  apply to the other resorts listed.


Judith Lane Rand Novelist, 64
Judith Lane Rand, a novelist who also worked in radio and advertising, died on Nov. 21 at her home in Bridgehampton, N.Y.
She was 64.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, her family said.


Really Remote Control
THERE IS A HOT tub at 305 Maple Street in Ypsilanti, Mich., and perhaps you'd like a status report.
The water is a "nice and warm" 101 degrees the backup battery is delivering a safe 9.4 volts, and the cover is closed.
Over in the refrigerator, it's reportedly 35 degrees and dark, and the last can of soda is gone, but let's stick with the hot tub for a second.
Drifting along the information superhighway, we have reached a site on the World Wide Web belonging to a man named Paul Haas.
Web pages are, at best, imperfect mirrors of their creators, but it seems safe to surmise that Paul cares deeply for his hot tub.
He has run a 50-foot cable from the tub to his computer.
When someone like me, at home with my own computer, stumbles into Paul's node on the Internet, a signal runs down the cable, activating a set of sensors in the hot tub, and, as data come back, his computer is kind enough to translate the stream into English for the world to see.


Electronic Devices and Domestic Violence
IN the middle of the night, her estranged husband broke down the door, threatening her and her four children.
When she attempted to call for help, she  said he cut the phone wires.
Not even a court order of protection kept him away, and she lived in fear that someday he would make good on the threats he often uttered in a rage.
The woman's story, told on the condition of anonymity, is not unusual.
Nationally, there are 3.9 million women battered every year by husbands, ex-spouses and boyfriends, statistics show.
Law enforcement officials say they have not found a satisfactory way to deal with the problem.
Frustrated by the ineffectiveness of most legal tools, the county's District Attorney, Jeanine Pirro, recently called orders of protection, for example, "orders of illusion -- just pieces of paper."


ART
THE single greatest recent change in the literature of art is that the major  exhibition catalogue now sets the standard for the art book in general.
Forty years ago, there was virtually no such thing as an exhibition catalogue that would be treasured for a lifetime.
The immediate postwar years (1945-50) had many a great exhibition, from "The King's Pictures" in London to a number of them that marked the re-emergence of Paris, Venice and other cities as eminent centers of art.
But what were the catalogues?
Summary lists of names and titles.
Uncaptioned, unillustrated and wretchedly printed, they came apart in the hand.
Museum exhibitions like "Piet Mondrian," now at the Museum of Modern Art; "Constantin Brancusi," now at the Philadelphia Museum of Art, and "Nicolas Poussin" at the Royal Academy in London earlier this year speak for a new and better world, and one marked by collegial cooperation on a scale undreamed of before 1939.
The catalogues of those shows have an assured market both in Europe and in the United States.
The authors are spared the relative poverty that normally handicaps the independent scholar.
All doors (well, almost all) are open to them.
Publishers band together to do the beat possible job.


THE SINS OF THE GRANDFATHERS
Anyone watching television in Germany around May 8, 1995, would have experienced a startling illusion.
They're back!
Once again, and in endless succession, images of the Nazi processions passed before our eyes.
Once again the martial songs and militant speeches were broadcast.
Once again, and on every channel, the Allies liberated us.
On one of those days, my 6-year-old son called me over to the television set.
I recognized the uniformed man with the little mustache, stretching out a hand as if to fend off the jubilant crowd, his body jerking as he began his speech.
My son, too, seemed quite familiar with the speaker -- he seemed to love him.
"Look," he cried, slapping his knees in delight, "there's Charlie Chaplin!" But  the man on the screen was not the famous clown of "The Great Dictator." It was Adolf Hitler at the Nuremberg Party Congress.
The news of Charlie Chaplin's victory over Adolf Hitler in the minds of 6-year-olds is worth reporting.
Like children everywhere, German kids have grown up with Charlie Chaplin.
It is hard  to believe that Hitler will recover from the ridiculousness Chaplin revealed.


THE GUIDE
TOURS OF A MANSION


School-Bus Drivers Testing Exercises to Shape Up Eyes
Video exercises designed to relieve eyestrain for computer users could make New Jersey's roads safer.
The state Division of Highway Traffic Safety is about halfway through research to determine whether by conditioning eye muscles can improve driver safety.


Solomon Siegel, 80, Hospital Executive
Solomon L. Siegel, who served as the executive director of Kingsbrook Jewish  Medical Center in Brooklyn during a crucial period of its development, died Nov. 24 at the Manor Care nursing home in Boca Raton, Fla.
A former resident of Little Neck, Queens, he was 80.
He had suffered a series of strokes, his family said.


Jonathan Diesenhaus, Jill Lesser
Jill Ann Lesser, a daughter of Barbara and Seymour Lesser of New York, was married last evening to Jonathan Lee Diesenhaus, the son of Judith and Dr.
Herman Diesenhaus of Dunn Loring, Va.
Rabbi Robert Levine performed the ceremony at the Puck Building in New York.


Unstable Idea: Where to Put Police Horses
Since its creation in 1856, Central Park has been a battleground for special  interests fighting over its 843 acres.
Additions have ranged from the Metropolitan Museum of Art to the Casino nightclub, which flourished under Mayor Jimmy Walker.
Unrealized plans have included a roller coaster, a cathedral, a cemetery and a racetrack.
Now preservationists are alarmed over Police Commissioner William J. Bratton's plan for a centralized 40-stall stable for mounted officers patrolling northern Manhattan in order to reduce the trucking of horses there from around the city.
City officials say he has quietly pursued it for a year.
Mayor Giuliani is favorably inclined.


Jewish Convention Urges One-Faith Training for Children
In a resolution about religious schools, delegates from the nation's Reform Jewish congregations underlined the opposition of the generally liberal group to raising children of interfaith marriages in more than one religion.
The resolution, approved on Friday by the convention of the Union of American Hebrew Congregations, urged that Reform Jewish day schools and part-time school  programs restrict entrance to children not being schooled in another faith.


Bosnian Officials Say They Mistrust French Peacekeepers
Reflecting growing tension between the Bosnian Government and the French troops who patrol Sarajevo, Bosnian officials said today that the French forces  could not be depended on to police the Dayton peace accord and should be replaced by Americans once NATO arrives.
"We don't trust them and we think they will fail in implementing this agreement," said Hasan Muratovic, Minister for Relations with the United Nations.
"Therefore, we are asking NATO to change the deployment plan so they are not the only force here. We would like Americans and may ask the French to leave entirely."


A Family of Women, Each to Her Own Medium
THE group show in the Anne Reid Gallery at the Princeton Day School is dominated by Bernarda Bryson, and in a circuitous way, the solo at the Cameron Gallery not far away owes its existence to the 92-year-old artist.
When Ms.
Bryson left her native Ohio for New York City in 1933, her purpose was to interview Diego Rivera, but her fate was to meet his assistant, Ben Shahn, and to marry him two years later.
At that time, Shahn was in his prime not only as a muralist but also as an easel painter -- linear and elegant in style, but always political in outlook.
Ms.
Bryson became his assistant, notably on the mural for the public school in Roosevelt, Monmouth County, and together they traveled the country, documenting the effects of the Depression.


WORLD-CLASS SHOPPING: London;On Bond Street, Furled Umbrellas Met Eurostyle
ASPREY, the venerable store at the corner of New Bond Street and Grafton Street in London, is best known for its jewelry, and indeed is the official jeweler to the Queen, the Queen Mother and the Prince of Wales.
It is a store that is full of surprises, albeit expensive ones.
If you need a turquoise alligator suitcase, and have $23,000 to pay for one,  Asprey is the place to go.
Its own gun workshop can craft you a pair of double-trigger side-lock ejector shotguns with game-scene engravings for around  $116,000.
A box of 12 Christmas crackers to pop open at the dinner table, containing a variety of gifts such as earrings, silver collar stays and a crocodile-skin lighter box -- six with gifts for men, six with gifts for women -- can be had for $850.


Rangers and Verbeek on a Roll
Pat Verbeek continued his rise through the National Hockey League scoring table tonight with three goals and one assist in the Rangers' 4-2 victory over the Ottawa Senators.
Verbeek leads the Rangers in goals with 16 and in points with 35.
It was his  second hat trick of the season, and his 7-point weekend is likely to put him among the league's top 10 scorers.


Consult Polls. Choose Phrase. Repeat.
IT was sometime in late summer that President Clinton began talking almost incessantly about values.
"We have to think anew about what our basic values are, what kind of people we are," he told an elderly audience in Miami during a cross-country swing in September.


The View From the (Volunteer) Patrol Car
Some nights, a deputy sheriff's patrol shift is a whirlwind of danger and excitement.
Some nights, however, not much happens.
David Berkowitz, chief executive of Central Paper Company in Newark, director of the Essex County Deputy Sheriffs and a two-year veteran of the force, gripped the wheel of his Chevy Caprice with black-gloved hands last Tuesday, roaming the streets of Newark.


A MANIFESTO OF SORTS FOR A BLACK FEMINIST MOVEMENT
While much of Zook's article is insightful and important, I was disturbed by  her omissions.
Among them, her statement that Coretta Scott King, Betty Shabazz  and Myrlie Evers-Williams are venerated "solely on the basis of the men they married." In actuality, the death of her husband is what propelled each woman into action.
Each continues to fight, in her own way, for civil rights and against oppression.
I, too, am a black feminist who finds zero hero material in the likes of O.  J. Simpson and Mike Tyson.
But Zook's credibility waned for me when she was unable to mention anything positive about the Million Man March.
I shared her concerns regarding women's disinvitation to the march, so I went.
Only a present-day Scrooge would be incapable of seeing the beauty in that day.


Questions on a Child's Death
Why did Elisa Izquierdo have to die?
Advocates for children, social workers and public officials were second-guessing themselves last week as several investigations began into the system that failed to save the six-year-old New York City girl.
Her mother has been charged with the brutal murder.
Elisa was no stranger to the child welfare system.
Responding to signs of child abuse, social workers, teachers, the courts and relatives had intervened before.
Just what went wrong, and when, were still uncertain, since confidentiality laws imposed to protect privacy also provide deniability.
But caseworkers have reported that too often they were overburdened and under pressure to close cases quickly.
City officials said that of the 74 deaths related to child abuse or neglect last year, 25 were of children or families known to the Child Welfare Administration.


Andrea Meadow, Nevin Danziger
Andrea Lisa Meadow, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Myron J. Meadow of Larchmont,  N.Y., is to be married today to Nevin Dean Danziger, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond Danziger of North Palm Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Jeffrey Segelman is to perform  the ceremony at the Hampshire Country Club in Mamaroneck, N.Y.
The bride, 28, is an associate at the New York law firm of White &amp; Case.
She  graduated from Cornell University and received a law degree from New York University.
Her father is a senior associate at the New York law firm of Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges.
Her mother, Claire S. Meadow, is a lawyer in Larchmont.


The Brontes in Ireland
To the Editor:
I fear that Lydia Bronte (Letters, Oct. 29) has not read my book "The Brontes," or she would have known that I discuss and dismiss as myths the stories relating to the Irish ancestry of the Brontes.
The one she tells about Hugh Brunty and his adopted child, Welsh, does indeed have strong similarities to that of Heathcliff -- the reason being that it was first recorded nearly 50 years after "Wuthering Heights" was written.


A Sailor Finds His Angel
ANYONE watching Peter Hurley sailing his Laser dinghy sees an athlete in motion.
At 25, he is ranked No. 4 among North Americans who sail the 14-foot craft.
But in July, Caggie Simonelli, a 28-year-old designer for DKNY Essentials, saw something else as she watched him lean his 6-foot-2, 175-pound frame away from the mast, almost parallel to the water, as the boat cut swiftly  through Barnegat Bay off New Jersey.
She saw a model.


POSTINGS: 940,000-Square-Foot, $83 Million Agreement;Westchester Deal For L.I. Company
One of the last family-owned building enterprises in Westchester County has agreed to sell most of its office portfolio, representing about 940,000 square feet of space, to a Long Island-based real estate investment trust.
On Nov. 24, Halpern Enterprises, which owns over 1 million square feet of commercial and residential space, signed a contract to sell six buildings and a  majority stake in two others for $83 million.


Art Imitates Life Imitates Art. And Vice Versa.
TO create "Familias," a drama that opens Friday, performers of the Pepatian company ate, spent afternoons and attended family gatherings with eight South Bronx families over a period of 15 months -- intense, personal research that the troupe's directors, Merian Soto and Pepon Osorio, who are married, have used in  prior collaborations.
But in this case, the shoe was eventually placed on the other foot: members of three of the families began training with the company and will appear as extras in the show's six performances.


Appealing Good Looks and Lively Fare
CIAO BELLA, a newcomer in Albertson, has stunning good looks and exciting food.
Unfortunately at popular times it also has crowds, noise and confusion.
A  busy Saturday evening began with a lost reservation and reached a low point when our waitress delivered incorrect dessert menus.
Half were wine lists, and the others were obsolete dessert menus.
After a long wait and much discussion we finally received updated mimeographed sheets.
But even in the midst of false starts and wasted energy the staff is congenial and polite.
And at hectic and laidback times, the food is delightful.


A Steamy Plan for a New Fountain
It may not be in the same league as Old Faithful at Yellowstone National Park, but the city is about to get its first steam fountain.
Emitting steam vapor in winter and a cloud of mist in summer and brightened by special lights,  it will be the centerpiece of a renovated plaza a few steps east of Eighth Avenue from 33d to 34th Streets.
The site belongs to One Penn Plaza, an adjacent 57-story office tower.
The project is part of $85 million in improvements to the property, owned by Peter L. Malkin, Harry B. Helmsley and Met Life.
Completion is scheduled for the spring.


Virginia's Maverick Senator Facing a Disgruntled G.O.P.
Eight years ago, he spurned the Republican Party and voted against Robert H.  Bork for the Supreme Court.
Two years ago he refused to support the party nominee for lieutenant governor, Michael P. Farris, who lost, and in last year's Senate race, he supported an independent, rather than the Republican nominee, Oliver L. North.
Mr.
North lost, too.
To be sure, Senator John W. Warner of Virginia is no longer the favorite son  of many state Republicans.
But this year, as he gears up to run for a fourth term in 1996, antipathy toward him has reached new heights, threatening to fracture the state party and deliver the seat to a Democrat for the first time in 30 years.


Sports of The Times;Liability Insurance For Mascots
CARL SEIDEL, age 72, used to enjoy the Philadelphia Phillies' obstreperous mascot, the Phanatic, flopping around the ball park with his bulging midsection  and his W. C. Fields nose.
Seidel never expected to fall down and reinjure his post-surgical back during a close encounter of the furry kind with the road-company version of the Phanatic.


America's Grade on 20th Century European Wars: F
WHEN President Clinton bumped prime time shows last Monday night to talk about sending troops to a place called Bosnia, he assumed that many of his listeners did not know what he was talking about.
So he gave little reviews on geography ("Bosnia lies at the very heart of Europe"), current events ("For nearly four years a terrible war has torn Bosnia apart") and U.S.-European history ("Our people fought two world wars so that freedom could triumph over tyranny. After World War I we pulled back from the world, leaving a vacuum that was filled with the forces of hatred. After World War II we continued to lead the world.")


POSTINGS: Columbia Law Review Getting New Home;On a Narrow Lot, Legal Manuevers
Members of the Columbia Law Review and Morningside Heights Legal Services, a  student-run law clinic for poor families, may lose a bit of the rumpled informality of their current offices when they move into a new, 10-story building on the Columbia University campus early in 1997.
The Law Review and the Legal Services office now occupy walk-up space above a post office between 115th and 116th Streets on Amsterdam Avenue.
Construction of the new building, on a 25- by 100-foot lot at 410 West 116th  Street, is scheduled to begin within two months and to be completed by the end of 1996.
"Only in Tokyo or New York would you build an academic building on such a narrow space," said Lance Liebman, the dean of the Columbia School of Law.
The building, to be called William C. Warren Hall after a former dean of the school, will provide 18,500 square feet of space and cost $6.7 million.


Trifling With the Constitution
The religious right and its Republican allies in Congress, bent on amending the Constitution to redefine religious liberty, have now produced two mischievous constitutional amendments.
In any rational competition the winner would be neither proposal but the First Amendment, which forbids laws that establish religion or deny its free exercise.
Each of the sponsors, Representatives Henry Hyde of Illinois and Ernest Jim Istook of Oklahoma, says his amendment is superior to the other.
But to outsiders, the amendments seem equally broad, vague and dangerous.
Both would repeal half a century of Supreme Court rulings that have guarded the Founding Fathers' imperative to keep government out of religion and vice versa.
Both say  government may not deny benefits or otherwise discriminate against private citizens on account of religious expression.
Both could authorize coerced piety  in the schools and force governments to subsidize parochial schools.
Both also proceed from the same misguided assumption, that government invidiously discriminates against religion.


In a Surprise Recovery, Sampras Spurs U.S. Team
The supporter walked up to Richey Reneberg after the Davis Cup doubles match  Reneberg had been asked to sit out and said, "Sorry, Richey."
Reneberg laughed.


Texas Cliches Last Title As The S.W.C Ceases to Be
Ricky Williams scored two touchdowns against the nation's top defense and Texas snapped Texas A&amp;M's 31-game winning streak at home with a 16-6 victory that clinched the last Southwest Conference championship.
The Longhorns (10-1-1 over all, 7-0 S.W.C.) will play in either the Orange or the Sugar bowl, while the Aggies (8-3, 5-2) get meet Michigan on Dec. 29 in the  Alamo Bowl at San Antonio.
The final bowl lineups will be announced Sunday.


Suiting Up for America's High-Tech Future
ABOUT the only sound inside Intel's new factory here is a robotic whir, high  overhead, made by the tiny white cars of a miniature monorail.
They ferry a precious cargo of eight-inch silicon wafers.
Each is covered with a grid of nearly 300 thumbnail-sized semiconductor chips, and each chip is microscopically packed with millions of electronic gateways, or transistors.
Producing a state-of-the-art microprocessor is the Everest of modern manufacturing, and the Intel Corporation's new plant stands at the summit.
The futuristic factory, opened in September, makes the most sophisticated microprocessors that run today's personal computers: the Pentium chip, packed with 3.3 million transistors, and Intel's next-generation Pentium Pro, with 5.5  million transistors.


EDITORS' CHOICE
FOUR novels, a collection of stories, three biographies, a memoir, a freelance report on Eastern European politics and a volume of essays are the best books of 1995.
They were chosen by the nine editors of the Book Review from among 37 books originally nominated, during nine weeks of deliberation.
Three of the five authors of fiction here are veterans of the best books lists, having appeared several times during the last 27 years.
All the nonfiction writers are first-timers.
And two of them, an ambassador and a judge, are the first of their professions to be chosen.
Very odd, that, since judges and ambassadors spend so much of their lives writing.


THE PAIN GAME
I was startled at the reader response (Letters, Nov. 19) to Abigail Zuger's Hers column "The Pain Game" (Oct. 29).
As a physician, I take care of many patients with pain.
People have very individual responses to pain.
Dying patients who have metastatic bone cancer and the worst imaginable pain refuse narcotics because they do not wish to become "addicted," while other patients, with mild, temporary pain, need narcotics.
There is no way to quantify the severity of subjective pain, and it is a difficult job to treat pain appropriately.
These, however, were not the conflicts that Zuger was writing about.
She was writing about the patient who goes to a clinic with a definite drug-seeking agenda.
Hers was a patient who was suspected of selling his legally prescribed narcotics to survive, and she is justified in believing that both she and society are being abused in the process.
When confronted with these patients, most physicians will choose to err on the side of the pain and to dispense the narcotics.
But as Zuger points out, it isn't a good feeling.


Along Ginza Street, 'Just Looking' Is Safest
AS customers bearing overflowing shopping bags bustled through shop doors in  the twilight, Christmas decorations twinkling in the windows and the strains of  "Hark! the Herald Angels Sing" emanating from a music store, Ginza Street seemed like a fine place to buy some presents for friends.
So the other day I walked with my 3-year-old son, Gregory, down this famous street that cuts through the heart of commercial Tokyo and the soul of Japanese shopping.
I bought everything that I felt an impulse to buy, and I spent -- but no, I'm getting ahead of my story.
I live in Tokyo, but the visiting shopper would want to stay at the Hotel Seiyo on the East End of the Ginza.
The Seiyo is a small hotel with a luxurious  ambiance -- I stepped around a Rolls-Royce to enter the main door -- where the bathrooms have televisions and the suites have mini-saunas.
Rooms start at $480  a night; a top suite is $2,800 a night.
The Seiyo's lounge is also a cozy place  to rest after a shopping spree, and relatively speaking it's a bargain: a coffee is $12.


Huskies Can Win, If Not Dominate
The good news about the Connecticut women's basketball team is that Jennifer  Rizzotti, its 5-foot-5-inch all-America point guard, has her shooting eye back.
More good news is that Kara Wolters, its 6-foot-7-inch all-America center, is still almost impossible to stop in the deep post, even when she is in foul trouble.
The bad news is that UConn no longer dominates the backboards the way it did last year when it finished with a 35-0 record and won the national championship.
The good news outweighed the bad today as the Huskies beat North Carolina, 77-62, in the first round of the Central Fidelity Bank Invitational tournament at the University of Richmond's Robins Center.
A crowd of about 2,000 watched Alabama rout Richmond, 85-57, in the other first-round game.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/1996 Nissan Pathfinder;Leaving Bigger Tracks Along a Crowded Trail
NISSAN'S introductory literature says that the buyers of its 1996 Pathfinder, like the buyers of other sport-utility vehicles, will be interested in skiing, tennis, travel and gourmet foods.
It also expects them to be readers, and if that is true, the customers are going to be bemused by a dashboard that plays fast and loose with the English language.
For instance, there isn't room for a lot of description on the speed-control  button, so the elves in engineering simply hyphenated the control like this:


French Alpine Skiing: A Bumpy Ride
THOUGH a blizzard had turned mountain and sky into a seamless white scrim, a  few determined souls were skiing the Val d'Isere slopes one day last February.
I was one of them, not so much fearless as determined to get full value from a six-day lift pass.
Just a few yards downhill a whiteout enveloped the piste. (Piste is an essential word in the Haute-Savoie region of southeast France, where skiers boast of venturing off-piste.) I had no urge to go off-trail, but the parameters of this piste had vanished.
There was also no one around.
This would be good --  if visibility were not zero, if this were not a catwalk with a foot of heavy snow, if I did not have a desk job.


Seasonal Spices: How They Grow
COOKS are no doubt going through their recipe files about now to refresh their memories about the family's favorite cakes, cookies and other holiday treats.
Where would the celebrations be without the many spice flavorings, not the least of which is cinnamon?
Some might say this spice somewhat dominates the season, in mulled wine, cider, eggnog and any number of apple-based dishes.
So the time has come to pay humble tribute to an often unsung plant, the cinnamon tree, without which many celebrations could be rather dull.


Renewed Recognition for the Modernist Works of Walt Kuhn
WALT KUHN (1877-1949) was of the same generation as Edward Hopper and George  Bellows, but unlike them, he had one foot in the Modernist camp.
Indeed, as a moving spirit behind the Armory Show of 1913, he gets much of the credit for introducing Modernism into the American scene.
Not only that, his paintings show signs of influence from Picasso in his Classical period and Andre Derain.
Still, the artist has not had his share of the revisionist spotlight, and this alone makes his appearance in the Museum Gallery of the White Plains Public Library a matter of some importance.
The show, which comes courtesy of the Westchester collectors Shirley and Sidney Singer, consists of about 40 items --  more if the cluster of undated bird sculptures cut out of wood and playfully decorated is taken into account.
Ink drawings and small- to medium-size paintings make up the bulk of the selection, which begins in the teens and ends  in the mid-forties.


Finance Chief Is Appointed By Giuliani
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani named the city's Commissioner of Consumer Affairs,  Alfred C. Cerullo 3d, to be Commissioner of Finance yesterday, making his third  major appointment of the week in the areas of budget, finance and economic development.
Mr.
Cerullo replaces Joseph J. Lhota, whom the Mayor appointed as his new budget director on Wednesday.
Mr.
Lhota will be the Mayor's third budget director in two years, reflecting an unusual turnover in an administration whose core appointees have largely remained in place.


Snowed In, Driver Survives
A 71-year-old man survived two days trapped in a snowbound car as the temperature plunged below zero before two passers-by spotted him.
The motorist, Harvey Pauwels, was driving on Monday near his home east of Bay City when he lost control of his car on a snowy road and slid into a nine-foot ditch.
Additional snowfall and passing plows covered the car.


Paris Is Planning To Build a Third Airport
The French Government has announced plans to build a third international airport at a site yet to be selected and to add two runways at Roissy-Charles de Gaulle airport, 20 miles north of Paris.
Though the specific location of the new airport is undecided, the Government  said it would be 70 miles from Paris and linked to major cities by high-speed trains.
Orly, the second major airport serving Paris, is about 10 miles south of the city.


Workaholics Aren't the Only Ones Who Hate Vacations
WHEN Alan Greenspan testified before the Senate on Monday, it was as if the sheriff had said one of the best ways to rid the town of bank robbers was to threaten them with vacation.
Mr.
Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, and other bank regulators testified that they were planning tougher enforcement actions in the wake of the Daiwa Bank scandal, in which a New York-based trader for the Japanese bank secretly lost $1.1 billion from bond trading.
To fight such fraud, the regulators recommended exploring new requirements for banks, especially foreign  ones like Daiwa, including an audit by outside examiners, an independent inspection of the bank's internal controls and redoubled enforcement of the two-week vacation requirement.


BEAUTY REGIME
You may never be as beautiful as we are, but you can certainly try.
And that's the whole idea behind our new Beauty Regime, a system so complex only we  understand it.
We call it DigiLook, and it's meant for only you.
That's why we named it ComputoFace, a program so new we've only just invented it.
And because  it's designed with anyone in mind, we decided to call it BeautyMarx.
What is it?
It's a beauty curriculum so advanced it took three electricians working three hours each for three days to wire it.
We call it LoveCheeks, and so will you.


Defending Harlem: Residents Weigh In
To the Editor:
As an African-American of Caribbean descent and a Harlem resident (born in Brooklyn, nurtured in Millbrook, Dobbs Ferry and Cambridge, Mass.), I was thoroughly disgusted by "Harlem on Her Mind." I do not comprehend why one person's shallow and subjective opinion on a neighborhood merits one and a half  pages of your space.
Perhaps the writer's landlords valued her company, but if I may presume to speak for the rest of the neighborhood, good riddance to a bad attitude.


Kangaroo Bounces Back
Despite subfreezing temperatures, a pet kangaroo captured on Thursday after nearly a week in the woods near this Chicago suburb was apparently in good condition, said its owner, Robert Urbanski.
The kangaroo lived at Mr.
Urban ski's Pet Gallery store, but it fled in terror last Friday when a golden retriever arrived for grooming and chased it away.
After it escaped, the kangaroo was seen wandering around a forest preserve in the steel-making belt south of Chicago.


Trouble Spots On the Roads
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.
1.
ROUTE 3 Rutherford.
Various lanes closed at night for repaving until the end of the year.


THE CAMPAIGN TO DEMONIZE SHEILA BURKE
I do not suppose that you will be telling us about the left's "attack machine" any time soon.
It includes the major television networks, most newspapers and the vast majority of academia.
Quite formidable when compared with a few magazines of limited circulation, some talk-radio hosts, a couple of  think tanks and a few political pundits.
RICHARD J. WERTHER Novi, Mich.


BIRTH OF A VISION: A special report.;Files Show How Gingrich Laid a Grand G.O.P. Plan
The following article is based on reporting by Stephen Engelberg, Jeff Gerth  and Katharine Q. Seelye and was written by Ms.
Seelye.
They spoke to each other in the conspiratorial language of revolutionaries, aware, as one put it, that more mainstream Republicans might see their activities as "treason." Their vision was audacious: To gain control of the Congress, realign American politics and remake the Republican Party in the image of their leader, Newt Gingrich.


9th Ave. Homeless Spark Dispute
Keep Door Clear -- This Is Not a Hangout," says the sign at 551 Ninth Avenue. Ignoring it, two homeless men stand in the doorway to avoid the chilling wind. The men, who decline to give their names, say they will spend the night. "We don't bother anybody," one says.
As long as anyone remembers, the sidewalks of Ninth Avenue by the Port Authority Bus Terminal have drawn street people.
Under the elevated bus ramps, they find shelter from snow, rain and hot sun.
Inside the terminal, they can use the public toilets.


Its Heart Is Still 7th Avenue;Garment Union Keeps Piece of Past
Over the last century, no union has been more closely tied to New York City's ups and downs than the International Ladies Garment Workers Union.


Seasonal Spices: How They Grow
COOKS are no doubt going through their recipe files about now to refresh their memories about the family's favorite cakes, cookies and other holiday treats.
Where would the celebrations be without the many spice flavorings, not the least of which is cinnamon?
Some might say this spice somewhat dominates the season, in mulled wine, cider, eggnog and any number of apple-based dishes.
So the time has come to pay humble tribute to an often unsung plant, the cinnamon tree, without which many celebrations could be rather dull.


Drug Figure Loses Appeal Against U.S.
A Federal appeals court has criticized the abduction of a drug trafficker in  Honduras by United States marshals, but the court decided that the marshals' actions did not warrant overturning the trafficker's convictions, which related  to the death of an American drug agent in Mexico.
The forcible removal of the drug trafficker, Juan Ramon Matta Ballesteros, from his Honduran home in 1988 was "conduct we seek in no way to condone," a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in San Francisco said in a unanimous ruling on Thursday.
Yet the court said that alone did not provide a reason to overturn the convictions.


A Child Dies, and the System Tries to Hide
To the Editor:
Re "Judge Told City Welfare Agency to Monitor Girl Who Was Slain" (front page, Nov. 28), in the case of Elisa Izquierdo, a child abuse victim who was brutally murdered:


FUNDS WATCH
Seeing the Space Between the Stars


The Readable Feast: A Holiday Quiz
You are cordially invited to identify the literary meals below.
In the holiday spirit, please forgive us if your personal favorite (Fezziwig's ball? Thornton Wilder's "Long Christmas Dinner"? One of the "Little House" Christmases?) has been left out.
1 Hanukkah!
Eight whole days with no school.
Potato pancakes to eat; a dreidel or top to spin; and Hanukkah money comes from every side.
Who needs a better holiday? . . .
Mother is in the kitchen, still melting goose fat and baking potato pancakes.
My brother Motl and I are spinning our dreidel.
Father and Uncle Benny sit down to play checkers.


Cone Does Not Mind The Hired-Gun Label
In the space of little more than three years, David Cone was traded by the Mets to Toronto, signed with Kansas City as a free agent, was traded to Toronto, was traded to the Yankees and, finally, became a free agent again.
In the process, he has become known as the best hired gun in the business.
"People ask me all the time, do you get tired of bouncing around, don't you get tired of this hired-gun thing, don't you want to settle down?" Cone said.
"I answer no. When I think about it, it's exciting. The hired gun-mercenary thing doesn't bother me."


E-Mail
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review


Of Wine Tastings, and Prix-Fixe Dinners
MIRABELLE, the French restaurant at 404 North Country Road in St.
James (484-5999), is holding a five-course $100 game-and-wine tasting dinner at 7 P.M. on Thursday.
The game dishes, which will be paired with Rhone wines from the Delas Frere Vineyard, include tea-smoked pheasant, rabbit, venison and wild boar.
A 1992 Hermitage blanc and a 1993 Chateauneuf du Pape are two of the five  wines that will accompany the meal.
The Bellport, in conjunction with Palmer Vineyards and Swiftway Liquors of Medford, is planning a winemaker dinner on Thursday.
The five-course $55 meal includes a terrine of Long Island game, a croquette of Peconic Bay scallops and  a ragout of rabbit.
Among the four Palmer Wines will be a 1993 barrel-fermented  chardonnay, a double gold-medal winner at the New York Wine and Food Classic.


Cabbies Care About a Reputation for Honesty
To the Editor:


A Fashion Maker Looks Beyond Seventh Avenue
ROBERT LEE MORRIS HELPED make jewelry fashionable in the 1980's when he produced a glittering array of crescents, crosses, cubes and shields for designers like Calvin Klein and Donna Karan.
Then in the early 90's, tastes changed, and the unadorned look took over.
"I think this is the first time in the 20th century that fashionable women stopped wearing jewelry," said Mr.
Morris, a 48-year-old Manhattan metalsmith and designer.
But recently he has seen signs that the drought is ending.
"Now, women are fed up with what I call the blank look," he said.
"So they're buying and wearing bracelets again." The lull, while bad for business, was good for his psyche.
It  spurred him to re-evaluate his own designs, and as a result, his work has become more restrained in form and the pieces have become smaller.


New C-Note Is Awaited In the Land Of Fake Bills
If some parts of the world are nervous at the prospect of a revamped American $100 bill arriving in 1996, Africa's bankers are nothing but relieved.
The third world is the playground of the bogus C-note.
The United States Secret Service said $248 million in counterfeit American currency was seized outside the United States last year, compared with $73 million seized domestically.


Tabletop Drama: The Theater District
BECCO ** (212) 397-7597; 355 West 46th Street; $(c) all major credit cards


Less Time In Hospital For Mothers In Britain
When she had her first child 10 years ago, Meg Goodman spent a little less than 24 hours in the hospital, a stay that would have been considered unwisely short by American standards at the time.
But one thing that helped her make the  difficult transition between hospital and home was the midwife who visited her every day for the first 10 days.
Midwives are an established fixture of the British National Health Service's  maternity care.
Ms.
Goodman's midwife filled in the gaps when the new mother did not know what to do.


Seeking a Stable Solution
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton isn't horsing around when he says he wants to put a stable for police mounts in Central Park.
Opponents say the landmarked Claremont Riding Academy is a better alternative.
With reports from SoHo, TriBeCa, Flushing, Middle Village and East New York.
PAGES 6-14


French Union Leaders Push To Make Strike Nationwide
French union leaders called today for a nationwide strike of all salaried workers next week in a showdown with the conservative Government over plans to tighten pension rules for state employees and restructure the deficit-ridden state railway system.
There was no subway or bus service and hardly any trains in Paris today, the  ninth day of a strike by public-sector employees that is pushing the French economy back to recession just as the Government begins tackling deficits accumulated during the last economic slowdown three years ago.


Mary A. Miller, Ronald K. Moss
Mary Agnes Miller, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward G. Miller of Bayside,  Queens, was married yesterday to Ronald Keith Moss, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald E. Moss of Westfield, N.J.
The Rev.
Leslie Hughes officiated at Christ Episcopal Church in Manhasset, L.I.
Mrs.
Moss, 29, is the marketing development manager at TV Guide in New York.
She graduated from Queens College, from which she also received a master's degree in English literature.
Her father retired as a meat manager at the former Bohack supermarket in Bayside.


Both Parties' Genes Are Found in Deficit
For years Republicans have traced the nation's budget deficit to what they called the Democrats' unbridled spending.
The Democrats vehemently pointed to the Reagan years, when a large jump in military spending was coupled with a tax  cut.
In fact, both parties have compromised over the years in a way that has built the problem step by step.
News analysis, page 32.


Paying for Schools: Wary Officials Assess New Plan
Last month, when the State Education Commissioner, Leo F. Klagholz, announced the latest plan to equalize spending between rich and poor school districts, superintendents around the state held their breath.
Yet another attempt to end 25 years of court battles, the new plan was bound to affect some districts for the worse.
Under the plan, New Jersey would define the "thorough and efficient" education mandated by the State Constitution in terms of what is taught, not what is spent.
Dr.
Klagholz wants to set curriculum standards and determine how  much they would cost each of more than 600 districts, rather than letting local  voters decide on a budget.
The state would pay as little as nothing or up to 85  percent of a district's costs to meet the standards, depending on the district's wealth.
The rest of the budget would come from local property taxes.


Just About the Size of It
They used to be called B.M.O.C., and then came feminism and correctness and this nom de hotshot vanished.
But now the big men on campus are back, women too, and their return has nothing to do with undergrad hierarchy.
No, it's strictly about size, bulk.
Everyone wants to be big these days, extra-extra-large big.
At Princeton, H. Gross, an off-campus outfitter, sells its athletic-department T-shirts emblazoned with XXL -- no matter the real size -- because "no one wants to wear small." But Princeton's Tigers aren't the only monsters in the varsity jungle.
Powers Inc., which makes the Princeton shirts, is beefing up pseudo-jocks up and down the East Coast.
And even Sports Illustrated, which gave the lie to athletes who gained something extra with steroids, is using sweatshirts branded XXL as a subscription come-on.


RECIPE/Aunt Ann's Pumpkin Pies;A Family Favorite, Topped With a Twist
Total time: 20 to 30 minutes, plus 1 hour baking


Scorned, Shunned and Doing Quite Nicely
JUST THIS YEAR, Interscope Records has ushered into the mainstream three up-and-coming rock acts -- the British grunge band Bush, the taut, postpunk Toadies and the blue-eyed pop group Deep Blue Something -- "and none of them are controversial," Ted Field, the label's owner, says with a chuckle.
But it is Interscope's gangsta rap roster that has drawn the most attention to the five-year-old Los Angeles label.
Several of the rappers have had legal troubles, including Snoop Doggy Dogg, whose murder trial just opened in Los Angeles.
Last May, William J. Bennett, head of the conservative group Empower America, and C. Delores Tucker, chairwoman of the National Political Congress of Black Women, began pressuring Interscope's financial partner, Time Warner, to dissociate itself from the label.


Sing a Song of Spices, Cinnamon for Sure
COOKS are no doubt going through their recipe file boxes about now to refresh memories about the family's favorite cakes, cookies and other holiday treats.
Where would the celebrations be without the many spice flavorings, not the least of which is cinnamon?
Some might say that this spice somewhat dominates the season, in mulled wine, cider, eggnog and any number of apple-based dishes.
So the time has come to pay humble tribute to an often-unsung plant, the cinnamon tree, without which many celebrations could be rather dull.


A Cooper Creation Needs Clarification
Michael Pollak's thoughtful exploration of Sybil Ludington's reputed 1777 night ride through Putnam County ["Heroine of 1777 Still All in a Revolutionary  Lather," Oct. 22] unfortunately resurrects another Revolutionary War myth, introduced in 1821 by James Fenimore Cooper.
Cooper was not above confecting history to serve a creaky plot line.
From whole cloth and unsupported by a shred of wartime documentation, Cooper's anonymously published novel "The Spy: A Tale of the Neutral Ground" asserts the  existence of a troop of roving American terrorists -- Westchester guerrillas he called "skinners." For almost two centuries, credulous historians have dutifully repeated and embroidered Cooper's fanciful fabrication.


Tibet's Ultimate Political Comeback
OF the many secrets enveloping Tibet, that mountainous desert of a land, perhaps none is as mysterious as the time-honored search for the reincarnated spirit of a deceased leader, or lama.
Over the centuries, elderly red-robed monks have divined prophecies while sitting beside a holy lake, then they have traveled the Tibetan countryside on horseback to find a young boy with the celestial markings of a lama.


Succeed Like Jesus and Attila the Hun!
STRUGGLING to stay atop the highly competitive global marketplace, American business people are turning to some unexpected sources for inspiration: Winnie-the-Pooh, Attila the Hun and the Little Engine That Could.
Two decades ago, top business books carried weighty titles like "Spatial Economic Theory" (Free Press) and "The Function and Analysis of Capital Market Rates" (Prentice-Hall).
Now, Business Week's best seller list is crammed with volumes of M.B.A.-Lite, like "Make It So: Leadership Lessons From Star Trek, the Next Generation" (Pocket Books) and "Jesus C.E.O.: Using Ancient Wisdom for Visionary Leadership" (Hyperion).


Green Acres Mall As a Good Neighbor
Mall Irks Green Acres, Now Mill Brook" [Nov. 5] had two inconsistencies. (1) Your headline suggests that the Green Acres Mall "irks" a neighborhood, when in  fact the neighborhood simply wanted to have its own identity. The president of the Mill Brook Civic Association said as much in the article: "The Green Acres Mall is addressing its problems and doing a great job. . . .
But we want our own identity." Does that sound like the head of an irked neighborhood?
The second inconsistency stems from a contention that the mere mention of Green Acres Mall "conjures up images of commerce, congestion and crime." Again, this does not accurately reflect the true situation.
Yes, the Green Acres Mall has had some isolated incidents of trouble in the past couple of years.
But when you weigh those numbers against the sheer volume of people who go through the Green Acres Mall each and every day you get a true appreciation for the extraordinary efforts extended by Green Acres Mall management.


It Was a Conference With Character
The Southwest Conference concluded an 81-year football history yesterday with the Texas-Texas A&amp;M and Houston-Rice games.
During its colorful existence, conference members won national titles in 1938 (T.C.U.), 1939 (Texas A&amp;M), 1963  (Texas) and 1969 (Texas) and five players won the Heisman Trophy.
But it was the behind-the-scenes levity and individualism among the players, coaches, alumni and fans that created a memorable legacy.
Jones Ramsey, who served as sports information director at two S.W.C. schools (Texas A&amp;M and Texas) during a 32-year period, captured some of these magical moments in memoirs he wrote for his children after his retirement in 1983.
Here  are "some of the stories" Ramsey told his children.
"These things really did happen," he said from his home in Ponca City, Okla.


PATAKI TO PROPOSE SHARPLY REDUCING WELFARE BENEFITS
The Pataki administration will propose New York's first time limits on welfare benefits, as well as deep cuts in monthly welfare checks, when the Governor unveils his 1996 budget later this month, administration officials said today.
The proposal comes as the state prepares to grapple with significant reductions in Federal welfare spending and an overhaul of Federal welfare rules, changes that on one hand would mean less money for the state, but on the other hand could give it greater flexibility in deciding who receives welfare and how  much their benefits will be.


Transforming An Eyesore Into a Jewel
The Astor building, at 583 Broadway, between Houston and Prince Streets, has  seen better days.
In the heady 1980's, the owners knocked out most of the windows in preparation for turning it into a luxury hotel -- and then defaulted  on the mortgage.
Four years ago, strong winds sheared off its elaborate zinc cornice.
Over the last decade, its only tenants have been the New Museum of Contemporary Art, on the first floor and in the basement; roosting pigeons and the occasional squatter.


ABOUT LONG ISLAND
AS E. B. White, the cat, walked across the desk, Patti Vunk pointed to a stack of books piled next to it.
"I still have those to read," she said.
Ms.
Vunk, owner of the Dolphin Bookshop in Port Washington, tries to read every children's book she sells.
Winnie the Pooh or Nancy Drew, it doesn't matter.
You can't recommend a book if you haven't read it, she maintains.


In Iowa, Buchanan Tries to Convince Conservatives That He's Their Man
It's the tail end of the morning rush hour, and Patrick J. Buchanan, the cultural-values warrior and 1996 Presidential candidate, is in K LIVE 105's FM studio, whooping it up with Dan Tooker, a G-rated, west-of-the-Mississippi version of Don Imus.
Mr.
Tooker tweaks Mr.
Buchanan for having a bigger campaign Winnebago than other Republican candidates, and Mr.
Buchanan retorts that actually his R.V. is  nothing compared to the "mobile homes" he says Morry Taylor, another Presidential hopeful, rides on the campaign trail.
Then Mr.
Buchanan, who traveled in a dark green van this week, raises the ante with this slice of campaign life about Mr.
Taylor:


U.N. Fields Odd Allies As It Wages AIDS Battle
The director of a new program to coordinate and strengthen the work of the United Nations in battling the spread of AIDS has an odd assortment of allies: a prostitutes' union in Calcutta, the Thai Army and a grass-roots group in Uganda  that is teaching women to move beyond their traditional roles and become militant in the name of prevention.
Such pockets of hope are small and scattered, said the director, Peter Piot of Belgium, but they demonstrate the lesson he wants to deliver to the developing world, where more than 90 percent of H.I.V.-infected people live.


Port Chester Is Upbeat About Its Future
WHEN it comes to Port Chester, the triumvirate of Borrelli, Greve and Korff are fighting mad, ready to do battle against apathy, ignorance and stereotype.
Together they believe they have the ammunition to effect change.
Christine Korff, the first woman to be elected Mayor of Port Chester, has been in office for seven months.
On Oct. 27, H. Gregg Greve became the new executive director of the Port Chester-Rye Brook Chamber of Commerce, which is headed by its president, Michael J. Borrelli, a local businessman.
"If ever there was a perfect candidate for a job, it had to be Greg," said Mr.
Borrelli in speaking about Mr.
Greve's appointment.
"As soon as I interviewed him, I called the members of the screening committee and said, 'We have a perfect fit.' And when they met Greg, they agreed with me unanimously."


Video Gambling Aids Education. Ask the Losers.
RESTAURANTS in her neighborhood are forbidden territory these days for Caroline L. Too risky, she says.
It has nothing to do with the food.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


For Neptune, Winning a Title Is the Best Revenge
The players on Neptune High School's football team had waited almost a year for their revenge.
They got it today, defeating Franklin by 21-12 for the Central Jersey Group 3 title and avenging last year's 39-25 state championship loss.
The victory in the first of four New Jersey State Interscholastic Athletic Association championship games at Giants Stadium earned the Scarlet Fliers their first state title since 1923.


Alice in Chains Finds Persecutors All Around
IF ALICE IN CHAINS IS TIRED OF being called a grunge band, it can be a grudge band instead.
On its third album, "Alice in Chains" (there have also been three  EP's), the band from Seattle settles into its electric mode: slow-grinding, diminished or minor-chord guitar riffs and calmly accusatory vocals, with an occasional shift into a major key to belie lyrics like "Heaven beside you . . .  hell within."
On the band's previous releases, Layne Staley and Jerry Cantrell, the band's  guitarists and main songwriters, have specialized in sociopathic misery, writing about despair, isolation and drug addiction.
"Alice in Chains" (Columbia) moves  from torment to vindictiveness.
"You have always told me you would not live past 25," Staley sings in "Sludge Factory." "I say, stay long enough to repay all who caused strife."


Knicks Recover to Beat Sixers, but It's Nothing to Brag About
There was Patrick Ewing lying prone, writhing in pain.
And there were his teammates, watching him on the floor underneath the basket in the first quarter, about to give another bad team a dose of self esteem.
"I'm not going to lie and say we weren't concerned," Anthony Mason said.
"We  just didn't match their intensity in the first half."


New Inmates Reflect Surge in Use of Cheap but Potent Heroin
The number of inmates arriving on Rikers Island who are addicted to heroin has increased by 23 percent this year, providing substance abuse experts with some of the most solid evidence yet of the resurgence of heroin use.
The addiction statistics from New York City's jails reflect a plentiful supply of relatively inexpensive but highly potent heroin that has become available in the United States in the last few years, substance abuse experts say.


TWO RUSSIAN AIRLINES TO BEGIN U.S. SERVICE
FOR Americans wanting to fly directly to Moscow from anywhere but New York, which is served by Delta, there has been only Aeroflot-Russian International Airlines to consider.
Soon, however, it will be possible to fly directly from Chicago or Los Angeles to Moscow (and back) on two Russian airlines that have just received approval to fly in the United States.


THE THINGS THEY LEAVE BEHIND
The experience of seeing the artifacts left at the Vietnam Memorial is almost as moving as seeing the Wall itself ("The Things They Leave Behind," Nov. 12).
In 1992, I also had the experience of seeing an exhibition of many of these artifacts at the Smithsonian.
However, the most heartbreaking thing I ever saw at the Wall was a note that said it all in three short lines:
To Hobie Baldwin Killed, 1968 Died, 1984 RICHARD H. ROSICHAN Miami Beach


PATH Train Kills 2 Men Working on the Tracks
Two PATH employees were killed and a third was hospitalized today when a train headed from Jersey City to Newark struck them as they worked on the rails  near the station here.
The cause of the 2 P.M. accident was not immediately known, said Gwen Williams, a spokeswoman for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which runs the Port Authority Trans-Hudson trains.
It occurred in broad daylight about
200 yards east of the station as the train approached it.


Colleges Told To Publish Sports Costs
The Education Department has published rules requiring colleges and universities to issue yearly reports on how much they spend for men's and women's intercollegiate athletics.
Advocates for female athletes say the new rules, which were published on Wednesday and take effect next July 1, could make it easier for them to prove charges of sexual discrimination.


Foreign Affairs;Think Haiti
Just a couple of months ago when you asked Administration officials exactly how the Bosnia peacekeeping operation would unfold, they would answer: "Think Haiti" -- we go in big, stabilize the situation on the ground, bring in civilian reconstruction teams, hold elections and we're out of there in a year.
Well, think again.
Haiti is no longer being touted as the model for Bosnia, because the U.S.-led effort to restore democracy in Haiti is deteriorating.
As we go into Bosnia we should still "Think Haiti" -- but as a cautionary tale about the limits of American power to remake a country.
The U.S. military accomplished its objectives in Haiti -- ousting the old regime and restoring basic security.
But the political, economic and police objectives, which accompanied that military mission, are all in jeopardy today.


Zeus Opposed in Rabin Rite
For 20 years, the plaster casts of Zeus and the Florentine Pieta have stood before the admiring gazes of visitors at the Queens Museum of Art.
But last week they stood in the middle of a religious tug-of-war.
The second-floor balcony that is home to the statues had originally been chosen as the site for a memorial service tomorrow night for the slain Israeli Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin.
But the Queens Jewish Community Council, an umbrella group of Jewish organizations, objected to the location on the ground that nudity and symbols of Christianity were inappropriate for the occasion.


THE CAMPAIGN TO DEMONIZE SHEILA BURKE
In your 25-year summary of organizations that "promote the conservative political agenda," we are reminded that Floyd Brown produced the 1988 Willie Horton commercial, which he did.
You fail to mention that the Willie Horton story was first used by Al Gore in the 1988 primaries and subsequently adopted by the Bush campaign.


Streetscapes: Readers' Questions;Portrait of the Carriage House at 111 East 77th St.
111 East 77th Street


Mascot Ruling Upsets Indians At the University of Illinois
Despite protests by American Indian students, the Federal Education Department has ruled that the mascot of the University of Illinois, Chief Illiniwek, does not create a hostile environment for Indians.
But in issuing its ruling last week, the department's civil rights office also urged university officials to prevent the dispute over the mascot from creating animosity toward Indian students.


Under a Mattress Will Be Fine, Thanks
AN attractive, well-dressed man drives along a Beverly Hills street in a white Rolls-Royce, a glamorous blonde by his side.
They see a tattered homeless  woman sitting forlornly in the street, and the man seems to recognize her.
"You know her?" the blonde asks disdainfully.


THE CAMPAIGN TO DEMONIZE SHEILA BURKE
In the article on Sheila Burke, you have done the whole nation a service by lifting the rock labeled Republican Party to reveal the slime underneath.
It appears as if the G.O.P. is hell-bent on turning itself into CRAP (Christian Coalition Republican Alliance Party)!


New Prices, Features For the Eurailpass
On Jan. 1 the prices of Eurailpass and its scaled-down version called Europass are going up, and the use of Europass is being broadened.
Those with firm plans to ride a European train before mid-1996 can save money by buying a pass on or before Dec. 31 at the current price and completing their travel within six months of purchase.
Sample new rates are $522 (compared with $498) for a first-class Eurailpass,  good for 15 consecutive days of unlimited travel in 17 European countries; $1,468 (versus $1,398) for three months' use of the same pass, $418 (versus $398) for a 15-day, second-class Eurail Youthpass for those under 26, $237 (versus $210) for a first-class Europass good for five days of travel within two months in three of these countries: France, Germany, Italy, Spain and Switzerland.
A second-class Europass Youth pass, for four of the five countries: $210 (versus $198).


Money Woes: BID in a Bind
The East Brooklyn Business Improvement District is different from the 32 other districts that have sprung up around the city over the last 18 years, levying an assessment in return for extra services like security and sanitation.
It is the city's only industrial improvement district, designed to help factories instead of retailers, and the only service it provides is security.
Now the East Brooklyn district is about to gain another distinction: It will  become the first district to have its request to raise its assessment denied by  the City Council, according to Herbert E. Berman, chairman of the finance committee.


Word for Word: The Doomsday Clock;How Many Minutes to Midnight 50 Years After The A-Bomb's Birth?
ARE we still close to nuclear catastrophe?
To mark its 50th anniversary, The  Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, the magazine that conjured up and periodically resets the symbolic minutes-to-doomsday clock, will convene its first public hearing Thursday in Chicago on just how much time is left before the proverbial nuclear "midnight."
The Bulletin was founded in December 1945, by scientists who had worked on the Manhattan Project to create the world's first nuclear weapon.
Among them was Leo Szilard, the physicist who had sponsored a petition to President Harry S. Truman, urging him not to use the weapon unless Japan was informed ahead of time of its consequences and still refused to surrender.
On Aug. 6, 1945, without warning, the United States dropped an atomic bomb on Hiroshima.
Three days later another was dropped on Nagasaki.
The scientists who started the Bulletin wanted  to save the world.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 Czar's brood: The Romanovs of New York take a stand.


West Side Story: Three Partners And an Idea
THE next century may be several years away, but for Broadway between 66th and 68th Streets, the Millennium has already arrived -- and brought with it startling changes.


Marian A. Ormont, Robert P. Pinsk
Dr.
Marian Amanda Ormont, a psychiatrist in New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Robert Paul Pinsk, a radiologist at Paoli Memorial Hospital in Paoli, Pa.
Dr.
Kenneth O. Jones, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Princeton Club in New York.
Dr.
Ormont, 33, is the associate director of consultation-liaison psychiatry  at St.
Luke's Hospital and is an assistant clinical professor of psychiatry at the College of Physicians and Surgeons at Columbia University, both in New York.
She graduated from Johns Hopkins University and received her medical degree from Temple University.


The Final Reward
Enjoy your coffin while you can.
Since all of life is a march to the grave, the Ga people of Ghana believe in planning ahead for a send-off that says something special about the sendee.
"For a Ga, it is better to incur lifelong debts than to cut back on funeral expenses," Thierry Secretan writes in "Going Into Darkness: Fantastic Coffins From Africa." The result, shown above, is more  burial theme park than cemetery.


A Step Toward Super-Sharp TV
Broadcast television came a step closer to the digital age last week, when a  key federal panel strongly endorsed a new system for transmitting super-sharp pictures, data and much more.
The new system was developed by an alliance of electronic companies, and is the result of a competition launched eight years ago by the Federal Communications Commission to develop a new standard for television transmission.


Rituals of the Season
CONSUMER RITES The Buying &amp; Selling of American Holidays.
By Leigh Eric Schmidt.
Illustrated. 363 pp.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. $24.95.


A Candied Delicacy From Italy For the Holidays
IN Siena, Italy, they have been making panforte since the Middle Ages.
The name means "strong bread" in Italian, but this traditional Christmas delicacy is almost like a candy, consisting of glazed fruits, nuts, honey and spices.
The crusaders carried it with them on their expeditions because it lasted so well (and it must have provided the perfect pick-me-up for altercations with infidels).
During the holiday season, brightly colored boxes of panforte imported from  Italy appear in food stores, and they make great gifts.
But I have never had a better panforte than the one that Maida Heatter, the author of many books on baking and desserts, sent me one year, along with the recipe.
It was one of the  most delicious cakes I have ever eaten: dense and rich, made with candied oranges and lemons, almonds and hazelnuts, held together in a chocolate-honey dough.
It is the sort of cake you find yourself going into the kitchen in the middle of the night to nibble, so it doesn't last long.


Stepping Out With Stephen Foster
IN THE YEAR 1857, Stephen Foster thanked a journalist for a "puff" piece (as  they were called even back then).
"I am beginning to think, since reading it, that I am 'some punkins.' " Foster would certainly feel he was "some punkins" if he learned that his music was making a curious comeback nearly a century and  a half after he wrote hit songs like "My Old Kentucky Home" and "Jeanie With the Light Brown Hair."
When Mark Morris and his Dance Group present "Somebody's Coming to See Me Tonight" on Saturday as part of the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Next Wave Festival, it will be the third New York premiere in less than two years of choreography set to Foster's music.


Trouble Spots On the Roads
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.
1.
ROUTE 3 Rutherford.
Various lanes closed at night for repaving until the end of the year.


Holding Nothing In on Love
WHEN THE SUBJECT OF pop genius is discussed, the names that usually come up belong to eccentric musical inventors like Brian Wilson, Phil Spector and Prince, whose names are synonymous with particular sounds.
But there is another  sort, exemplified by Kenneth Edmonds, whose brilliance lies in a broad and flexible mastery of pop forms.
Mr.


McGriff Stays With Braves
Fred McGriff returned to the Atlanta Braves tonight, agreeing to a four-year  contract.
Keeping McGriff with the Braves for their World Series title defense had been had been the No. 1 priority of General Manager John Schuerholz.


Sports of The Times;Center of the Problem: Misfits in the Middle
WILLIS REED, this is your life.
Well, not your entire life, merely the part that is not defined by a night of limping glory.
Although it must be said that these two lives are inextricably linked.
This is the part you have spent looking for another Willis Reed.
Unfortunately, without success, but not for lack of effort.
All you have ever wanted as the Nets' general manager was someone like yourself.
Big.
Strong.
Committed, with a shooter's touch.
We understand, at this point, you will settle for Shawn Bradley to be like Rik Smits.
Expectations change.
Benoit Benjamin has that effect on people.


High Crimes and Peccadilloes
WHAT more could Swedes want in a prime minister than youth, experience, good  looks, vigor and compassion, all of it in a woman?
Those were the qualities that recently led Prime Minister Ingvar Carlsson, who is retiring, to name his 38-year-old deputy, Mona Sahlin, to fill out his term.
Mrs.
Sahlin was all but inaugurated when suddenly everything went wrong.
Scandal engulfed her, and last month she tearfully withdrew from consideration.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Cheer Around the Country
A LIGHT show set to Handel's "Hallelujah" chorus, a 1,209-square-foot model train display and an illuminated Cajun village are among the spectacles in cities and towns throughout the United States this holiday season.
Travelers will find a Danish Christmas in Solvang, Calif., and a Creole Christmas in New Orleans.
For those whose tastes run to colonial, there are strolls with Thomas Jefferson in Williamsburg.
A craving for opulence will undoubtedly be satisfied by events at Newport's summer "cottages" and at George  Vanderbilt's 250-room chateau in Asheville, N.C.
From Hawaii to Florida, enthusiasts of Victoriana will be rewarded with a remarkable abundance of 19th-century Christmases.
For those in pursuit of immediate sensory gratification, there are places like Branson, Mo., where the huge polyhedron star that illuminates the Ozark heavens is among the more subtle displays.


DUSTY RIDES AGAIN
In response to Dusty Springfield's comment that if her current CD does not sell, she will never record again ("Dusty Rides Again," by Rob Hoerburger, Oct.  29), I have enclosed a check for $812.13.
If you could, please pass it along to  Columbia Records and ask them to send as many copies of Dusty's "A Very Fine Love" as it will buy.
This check represents all the money I have in the world.
If it will keep Dusty in front of a microphone, I am happy to part with it.
(Please also inform Springfield that at the guest house I manage in Provincetown, she is neck and neck with her idol, Aretha, when it comes to song requests. Please don't disappear again, Dusty!)


Correction
The Commercial Property column last Sunday, about the refurbishing and marketing of the former GE headquarters building at 570 Lexington Avenue, misspelled the surname of the chairwoman of the Landmarks Preservation Commission.
She is Jennifer Raab, not Rabb.


A Lot of Pain, Minuscule Capital Gain
IT'S that time of year when mutual fund investors often trip over the tax law.
If they buy shares in a fund just before it makes a distribution, typically in November or December, they will probably be disappointed.
The share price drops in an amount equal to the amount of the distribution, and the investor gets a tax bill even though he did not participate in those gains over the last  year.
With so many funds expected to post big gains this year, the tax could be  considerable.


Reuben Holden, 77, College President And Yale Executive
Reuben A. Holden, a former executive at Yale University who became a college  president in North Carolina, died on Wednesday at Memorial Mission Hospital in Asheville, N.C.
He was 77 and lived in Black Mountain, N.C.
The cause was cancer, said his son Reuben A. Holden 5th.


A Little Radio Station That Could Basks in the Limelight
Rock bands like Smashing Pumpkins and Toad the Wet Sprocket have thousands of fans, but it is probably safe to assume that few of them live in Burlington County.
Mostly rural and sparsely populated, it is home to more farmers than hipsters.
But demographics mean little to WBZC-FM, a fledgling radio station operated by Burlington County College here.
The station has been playing cutting-edge music since January, and if listeners are scarce, it is doing fine without them.
Last month, WBZC was named Station of the Year by the National Association of College Broadcasters, beating out dozens of stations with far more experience.


Welcome Mat Is Wearing Thin for G.I.'s in Asia
Half a century after American troops waded ashore on Japan and liberated Korea, a growing number of people are suggesting that it is time they left.


Get Police Off the Traffic Beat
ALMOST as soon as he became the city's police commissioner, William J. Bratton began pushing for a consolidation of all police-like functions under the Police Department, and that included the work of the Department of Transportation traffic agents.
You might think that, as a former commissioner of transportation, I would have my doubts about such a move.
In fact, I agree that most law enforcement belongs under police control.
But there is a better and less expensive way of accomplishing the same objective.


THE CAMPAIGN TO DEMONIZE SHEILA BURKE
In your article, you report that Sheila Burke off-handedly dismisses as "dumb" a provision that would allow states the flexibility to craft welfare programs to address the needs of battered women by temporarily exempting them from mandatory work requirements.
This not-so-dumb measure was passed by voice acclamation in the Senate but has since been peremptorily eliminated by the House-Senate conference committee.
MARTHA F. DAVIS Senior Staff Attorney NOW Legal Defense and Education Fund New York


Restaurants Put Health on Menu
From the lowliest fast food outlets to the most exalted crystal-and-silver dining palaces, chefs are catering to the slim and slim wannabes.
Even if only 10 percent of the dining-out public is interested in healthful menu choices, that's enough to keep low-fat, low-calorie dishes on the menus.
It's called niche marketing.
"If four people go out for dinner and one of them wants low-fat food we don't want to lose everyone because we can't take care of that person," said Harry Day, a spokesman for Chili's, one of the country's largest restaurant chains.


Sybil Ludington; Or Is It Sibbell?
It was finally refreshing to see a story on Sybil Ludington which did not swallow the whole story without a dose of skepticism.
Even the spelling of her name can still get locals to froth at the mouth.
In 1986 our Putnam Philatelic Society prepared a special cachet to celebrate the 10th anniversary of our organization.
We spelled her name "Sibbell," which I got from her tombstone in Patterson.
We had some strenuous objections.
HERBERT MOORE Carmel


Coleman Tries to Get Started on Right Foot
Saying that he was looking forward to a fresh start in Philadelphia, Derrick  Coleman spoke publicly tonight for the first time since the Nets traded him to the 76ers on Thursday.
At a news conference before the 76ers' game against the Knicks at the Spectrum, Coleman said he was eager to get started with a new team after five controversial years in New Jersey.


Give Her A Few More Years
To the Editor:
Although I've always admired Annette Bening, I found her remark in James Ryan's article "Brainy Siren, Now a Mom" [Nov. 12] that acting is one profession she can do when she gets "very, very old" to be curiously myopic in light of the industry's abysmal treatment of actresses in their 40's and beyond.


For Buffett Buffs, Clues From His Charity
WITH his gargantuan reputation, Warren E. Buffett is rarely able to make even the smallest investment without attracting attention.
But even the most alert Buffetteers might have overlooked one important way to learn about the maestro:  his charitable foundation.
A close look at the foundation can yield tantalizing clues about Mr.
Buffett's investment thinking, affection for research, aversion to taxes and limited philanthropy.
It also offers interesting parallels to the stocks held by Berkshire Hathaway, the company of which he is chairman.


DIARY
CHINA SYNDROME Trade Complaints Renewed "We will not wait forever," Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, said as Washington warned Beijing's leaders to end the pirating  of software, music and movies or face stiff trade sanctions.
American officials  said the Chinese were dragging their feet on enforcing an agreement reached earlier this year to close 29 factories that churn out millions of illegal copies of American films and software.
The piracy has cost American businesses at least $800 million this year, they said.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Love Lost on Love Lane


Sports of The Times;Brooklyn's Wanderlust Gas Fumes
IN the years after World War II, ecology was not in Brooklyn's vocabulary.
Apparently nobody detected an odorless gas seeping out of the Gowanus Canal or the Canarsie dumps and creating wanderlust behavior in the psyches of some residents.
At least four that breathed its fumes would be victimized, never quite content with where they were and what they had.
The late Walter O'Malley, the Brooklyn Dodgers' owner in those years, not only took that cherished baseball franchise to Los Angeles after the 1957 season but also persuaded the New York Giants to settle in San Francisco.


Family Album
George Stevens's I REMEMBER MAMA (1948) fondly recalls a close-knit clan of San Francisco Norwegians and their matriarch (Irene Dunne) - FRIDAY at 6 P.M. on AMC.
Based on Kathryn Forbes's novel, John Van Druten's skilled war-time stage hit had spotlighted Mady Christians. (As her son, a muscular youth in knickers named Marlon Brando made his Broadway debut).
A popular television series featured Peggy Wood in the title role.
The tasteful film also scored - a graceful feather in Miss Dunne's cap as the durable star entered middle age.
HOWARD THOMPSON


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column last week about the Federal Aviation Administration's assessment of other countries' surveillance of air safety included outdated references to Israel and the Netherlands Antilles.
Both were declared in full compliance with international air safety standards on Nov. 9; the report was based on an F.A.A. announcement of Nov. 2, when both had only conditional status.


BEST SELLERS: December 3, 1995
Weeks This Last
On Week Week  List Fiction


A Green Groundswell
To the Editor:
"A Greener White House" (editorial, Nov. 26) makes a valid point: that President Clinton benefits from being seen to take strong environmental positions.
However, it is not too late for other politicians (including Republicans) to gain points by supporting laws that protect habitat and contribute to health and safety.


Ada V. Ciniglio, Paul J. Weinstein
Ada Vapnek Ciniglio and Paul Jerome Weinstein were married yesterday by Judge Judith Kaye, the Chief Judge of the Court of Appeals, in her Manhattan chambers.
Ms.
Ciniglio, 60, is the executive director of High 5 Tickets to the Arts, a  nonprofit organization in New York that provides students with tickets to cultural events.
The bride, who is keeping her name, graduated from Skidmore College and received a master's degree in English from the State University College at New Paltz, N.Y.
She is the daughter of the late Bertha and William Vapnek.


Whose Body Is That Sitting Just Below Seward's Head?
To the Editor:


Anne Teshima, Steven M. Cohen
Anne Teshima, the vice president at Eugene A. Hegy &amp; Associates, a real estate company in New York, was married yesterday to Steven Martin Cohen, a novelist.
Judge Janice L. Bowman of the Bronx Civil Court officiated at the English Speaking Union in New York.
Ms.
Teshima is keeping her name.
She graduated from Douglass College and received an M.B.A. from Rutgers University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James K. Teshima of Lyndhurst, N.J.


Georgian Force Disbanded
President Eduard Shevardnadze of Georgia has decided to disband an elite antiterrorist unit because it was found to have been involved in an assassination attempt against him, the Acting Security Minister, Avtandil Ioseliani, said today.
Mr.
Ioseliani said that one of the senior officers from the security unit, called Alpha, assembled the explosive device that blew up a car on Aug. 29 while Mr.
Shevardnadze's motorcade was passing.


Republicans Litigate A Nonballot Issue
To the Editor:
"Just Say No, Mr. Dole" (editorial, Nov. 29) mischaracterized the presence of Republican National Committee lawyers at a hearing about selecting delegates to  the Republican National Convention.


Handling It: Tales From a Cancer Hot Line
ODETTE PETERSEN, 53, soft, nonjudgmental, and Carol Hochberg, 38, quick and intense, sit back to back in a midtown office several days a week, listening to  each other's phone conversations and passing notes.
If you have breast or ovarian cancer, call them right now (212-382-2111), unless you want to find out  how they got to sit together.
During her regular mammogram four years ago, just before Christmas, Ms.
Petersen nervously noticed that the technician suddenly wouldn't make eye contact.
A few minutes later, the radiologist said he suspected a small, early stage, treatable malignancy.
A half-hour after that, Ms.
Petersen was in her Upper East Side apartment, a trembling hand on her telephone.
She didn't want to call her husband, Rick, because he was in the midst of important business meetings.


Whose Body Is That Sitting Just Below Seward's Head?
To the Editor:
The Nov. 5 F.Y.I. column asserts that there is no validity to the story that  the head of the statue of William Seward in Madison Square Park sits atop a statue of Abraham Lincoln's body.


A New Incarnation For a Classic 'Illusion'
THRUST belly. Parry. Slash face. Slash belly. Thrust belly. Draw sword.
"One more time," commands Jonathan Fox, who wrote those director's notes for  a duel between the actors playing Adraste and Clindor, rivals for the beautiful  Isabelle.


5 Roman Exemplars Of Cucina Creativa
LIKE many Romans with a terrace, my companion and I tend to concentrate a year's entertaining in the warm summer months.
Enjoyable as that is, we look forward to the return of cold weather, when we revisit our favorite restaurants.
This year, to give ourselves some relief from home cooking, we chose places with innovative or imaginative menus, in preference to traditional Roman cuisine.
For ambiance, we sought small, quiet places with dignified but friendly service and attractive but not intimidating surroundings.
Degree of chic was irrelevant.
The prices ranged from medium to high, but not the highest in town,  and all the places we tried gave good to excellent value for what they charged.
We had no geographic prejudice, and only one (Il Convivio) turned out to be in the heart of old Rome.


Ellen R. Frank, Peter D. Steinberg
Ellen Rachel Frank, the daughter of Ann Moskowitz of New York and Peter Frank of Key West, Fla., is to be married today to Peter Douglas Steinberg, a son of Sybil and Dr.
Harold Steinberg of Westport, Conn.
Cantor Richard Botton is to perform the ceremony at the Central Synagogue in New York.
Ms.
Frank, 25, is keeping her name.
She is a management trainee in the international correspondent banking division of Republic National Bank of New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from New York University.
Her father, who retired as the president of Beta Systems, a computer service company, owns rental properties in Wisconsin and Florida.
Her maternal grandfather, the late Louis A. Moskowitz, was chairman of Republic National from 1981 to 1986.


Let's Talk
Everybody has something to say, but some people get paid to say it.
A full auditorium of such speakers for hire, and how to engage them, is contained in the 864 pages of the 1996 Yearbook of Experts, Authorities and Spokespersons (published by Broadcast Interview Source, Washington).
Some topics to be pontificated:
*
Corns *
Dressing down *
Due diligence *
Genius *
Dumb jocks *
Vibrators *
Paper pirates *
Explosives terminology *
PT boats *
Accent reduction *
Affluence *
Asian psyches *
Aseptic packaging *
Saturn's disk *
Arizona cactus *
Doubtful medical devices *
Guerrilla selling *Deep breathing *
Low-fat eating *
Miracles *
Stupidity *
Cyberlove *
Puns


Ready for Aquatic Reindeer?


Orange County Learns Change Is Never Easy
THOMAS C. ROGERS, a cattle rancher and former head of the Orange County Republican Party, had a singular vision when the county announced a year ago this week that it had lost $1.7 billion from reckless gambles in the bond market.
Mr.
Rogers saw the nation's largest municipal bankruptcy not just as a crisis.
He saw it as an opportunity for citizens to seize control of a government he believed had run amok and transform it into what even the new conservatives in Congress might consider a model of lean, efficient management.
It did not seem a vain hope, given that Orange County is the most Republican  and conservative county in California, filled with libertarians who had been demanding a less intrusive government long before the Contract With America was  conceived.


HOPE SPRINGS NOCTURNAL
Regarding Mary Tannen's article (Style: "Hope Springs Nocturnal," Nov. 5), it's interesting how time, "the subtle thief of youth," has changed baby-boomer  vocabulary.
When I was young, "free radicals" could have been a youth-culture slogan calling for the liberation of the Chicago Seven, or a fitting description of young student protesters.
Now the presence of free radicals means we're getting  old.


Diversity Pays Off in a Babel of Yellow Pages
At two inches thick, the Russian Yellow Pages has a familiar look and heft with some basic refinements: Russian translations, a Russian information line and a crucial section mapping the locations of Manhattan's better public toilets.
"Someone once said we are united by the Constitution and television," said Ilya I. Levkov, officially the publisher of the 800-page Russian Yellow Pages, but more often its chief writer, editor and salesman.
"I thought I could unite the Russians here by the Yellow Pages."


Rebirth of Jewish Life in Russia Cuts Emigration
Borukh Gorin, all of 22, is editor of Lekhaim, a monthly magazine for Russia's Jews that began in December 1991 with eight muddy black-and-white pages, published in 3,000 copies.
The latest issue, in color and stuffed with advertisements from some of the new Russia's most prominent Jewish businesses and banks, is 80 pages, with 50,000 copies published.
The name of the magazine is the Russian transliteration of l'chaim, Hebrew for "to life."


'Duchess of Malfi,' in Permanent Rehearsal, Arrives
WHEN CHEEK BY JOWL opens its production of "The Duchess of Malfi" at the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Majestic Theater on Wednesday, the play will be in rehearsal.
And it still will be when the company returns to its native England two weeks later.
Indeed, the director, Declan Donnellan, and his actors will be meeting at least once a week to try out new ideas and make changes throughout the last six  months of a world tour that began in September.


Spinning Wild Fantasies on a Weird Science
TERRENCE McNALLY'S NEW PLAY "Master Class" is right at home on Broadway.
What better place for pedagogic stage shows than a theater.
Theatricality is the bread and butter of the master class, teaching a sideline.
Certain of my colleagues sneer at Mr.
McNally's shallow attentions to the elements of music, but they may be missing the point.
"Master Class" isn't about music or education, though in its over-the-top way it ends up saying a few things about both.
At the Golden Theater we visit Maria Callas -- a fading, ravaged, still mythical diva -- as she takes on the role of visiting professor.
We are presumably at the Juilliard School during 1971 and 1972; though given Mr.
McNally's free-flying fancy, Juilliard is, if anything, a distant point of departure.


Changing Health Insurance?
This month, many employers are asking employees if they would like to change  their medical insurance.
Are you thinking about switching?
Pay Your Own Way


Test of Faith


Two Former Rajineesh Followers Get Five Years for Conspiracy
Two former followers of the Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh were sentenced on Friday to five years in Federal prison for conspiring to kill a United States Attorney.
Sally-Anne Croft and Susan Hagan, British citizens who were extradited to the United States for trial, were convicted in July of plotting to kill Charles Turner, who had led a grand jury investigation that brought charges of widespread immigration fraud against a commune in Oregon.


A Candied Delicacy From Italy For the Holidays
IN Siena, Italy, they have been making panforte since the Middle Ages.
The name means "strong bread" in Italian, but this traditional Christmas delicacy is almost like a candy, consisting of glazed fruits, nuts, honey and spices.
The crusaders carried it with them on their expeditions because it lasted so well (and it must have provided the perfect pick-me-up for altercations with infidels).
During the holiday season, brightly colored boxes of panforte imported from  Italy appear in food stores, and they make great gifts.
But I have never had a better panforte than the one that Maida Heatter, the author of many books on baking and desserts, sent me one year, along with the recipe.
It was one of the  most delicious cakes I have ever eaten: dense and rich, made with candied oranges and lemons, almonds and hazelnuts, held together in a chocolate-honey dough.
It is the sort of cake you find yourself going into the kitchen in the middle of the night to nibble, so it doesn't last long.


Craft Is Launched To Peer at the Sun
NASA today launched a United States-European observatory craft on a $1 billion mission to study the Sun.
The Atlas rocket carrying the spacecraft blasted off at 3:08 A.M.
The launching was more than a week late because of rocket problems.


Webber Keeps Talking, As He Keeps Playing
Chris Webber shoulders a heavy burden in a literal sense.
His fragile left shoulder, twice dislocated, could pop out of joint at any time.
One wrong move could end the season for the multitalented forward of the Washington Bullets.
It could happen tonight, when the Bullets play the Knicks at Madison Square Garden.
It could happen at a practice.
Doctors have told Webber that he could dislocate the shoulder even during his sleep.
"And let me tell you, the pain is excruciating," said Webber.
"Imagine your shoulder bone out of place, not wanting to go back in, and somebody turning your arm, trying to get it to pop back in. You think I want to go through something like that again? Would anybody?"


The Night Caller: 21 Years of Unspeakable Grief
One afternoon in March 1974, 17-year-old Amy Billig came home from school, changed clothes and headed for her father's nearby art gallery to get money for  lunch.
Construction workers in her neighborhood, in Miami's Coconut Grove section, saw her walk by.
Then she vanished.
Like the parents of thousands of other American children reported missing every year, Susan and Ned Billig wavered between hope and dread as they spent their waking hours searching for their daughter.
But her disappearance in itself was only one cause for their grief.
Another was the telephone calls that came at night, from a man who claimed to be the abductor and who described the things he was doing to their child.


Postcard Tricks
To the Editor: About six weeks after my return from a tour in Turkey I became aware of an interesting scheme involving postcards.
I was surprised to hear that about half the cards I had written were not delivered, including two to my husband.
Then one appeared and a few days later, the other.
I checked with friends, and they, too, had now received their cards.
When I looked closely I realized that the postage I had affixed had been removed and a new stamp of less than half the value had been attached over my Par Avion sticker.
This was not a monumental loss -- only temporarily disappointed friends -- but it is something to be aware of.
The postage removed  from each card would have bought about four loaves of bread.
Multiplied by, say, 50 cards a day, it becomes sizable.
My recommendation is to post mail in larger  towns or at the post office, and not in the mail boxes conveniently located near tourist sites and postcard sales areas.


Gators Earn a Chance To Play for the Big 1
Not even a President in a Hog Hat would suggest that there was any real suspense here tonight.
The University of Florida secured its place in the Fiesta Bowl with a 34-3 victory over Arkansas in a Southeastern Conference championship game that was more of a formality than anything else.
The Gators, 12-0 for the first time in school history, earned the chance to meet Nebraska on Jan. 2 in a game for the national championship.
Florida, which  finished first just once in the first 58 S.E.C. seasons -- and saw that championship erased from the conference records because of National Collegiate Athletic Association violations -- won its fourth conference title in five seasons and its third in as many years.


Mayor Defends Bid to Cut Child Welfare Caseloads
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani defended the Child Welfare Administration yesterday for pressing caseworkers to close cases as quickly as possible, saying the use of budget-driven formulas to keep caseloads down was merely an attempt to clear  a backlog caused by years of inefficient management.
The Mayor said he supported the actions of the agency's borough director in the Bronx, who issued an internal memo on Nov. 15 telling child protection supervisors to urge their caseworkers to use a "simple mathematical equation" to close or transfer two cases for every new case opened.
Mr.
Giuliani said he had  not seen the memo but believed it was an acceptable management tool to control caseloads.


Sentence Reduced In Amputation Error
A doctor who amputated the wrong foot of a diabetic patient and cut off another patient's toe without her consent was fined $10,000 on Saturday and barred from practicing medicine for six months.
The 15-doctor state Board of Medicine voted unanimously to reduce the sentence recommended last month by a state hearing officer.
The board cited the  previously unblemished record of the physician, Dr.
Rolando Sanchez, and his damaged reputation and noted that the diabetic's other leg would probably have been amputated later.


A Skewed Profile
To the Editor:
I am both baffled and appalled by William Harris's article about the Broadway choreographer Rob Marshall ["How Quickly the Hands That Applaud Can Slap," Nov. 19].
I am baffled by the misconception created by the article and appalled that The Times would be so unsupportive of one of the theater's youngest rising talents.


Q and A
Mighty Midges of Scotland


Ms. Patterson, Mr. Neustaetter
Peyton Reed Patterson and Thomas Michael Neustaetter, financial executives in New York, were married yesterday at St.
Bartholomew's Church in New York.
The Rev.
William McD.
Tully performed the Episcopal ceremony.
The bride, 38, is the senior vice president in the consumer lending division  of Chemical Bank.
She graduated from Kenyon College and received an M.B.A. from  George Washington University.
She is the daughter of Kathleen Owsley Patterson of Washington and William Lamont Patterson of Las Vegas, Nev.


Mary, Queen of Sitcoms
AFTER ALL By Mary Tyler Moore.
Illustrated. 332 pp.
New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. $24.95.


THE CAMPAIGN TO DEMONIZE SHEILA BURKE
After reading of Sheila Burke's dedication, hard work and knowledge, one thing kept haunting me.
Why didn't she go to the game with her son?
Politicians have been talking about family values for years now.
What rhetoric!
That night was "sacrosanct." "A longstanding promise" was made to a 7-year-old boy who does not understand the welfare bill.
He may understand when  he is older, but by then he will have stopped asking his mom to accompany him.


Theater Workshops At Victoria &amp; Albert
London's Theater Museum, a branch of the Victoria &amp; Albert Museum in Covent Garden, has introduced a makeup demonstration, a costume workshop and a Christmas Pantomime program.
During the makeup demonstrations participants learn how to use stage makeup to create animal faces, aging and special effects.
A video on the processes involved in creating the creating the stage make-up for "Phantom of the Opera" is also shown.


Calling for Answers To a Patient's Needs
QUESTIONS about cancer can begin to be answered through a toll-free phone call program in the new year.
The Cancer Care Counseling Line (800-813-4673) will be in operation during regular business days from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. starting Jan. 1.
The line will be staffed by social workers able to offer information on counseling, education, information and referrals to other cancer services in the area.


Hard Times Persist in Sarajevo


Psst . . . Showalter Had 2d Chance
Buck Showalter marveled at the gorgeous mountains on Friday while gazing through the window in Jerry Colangelo's corner office.
He imitated how clumsy his golf swing had been two days before, because he was stupefied by the captivatingly beautiful course.
He proudly displayed the three snazzy versions of Arizona Diamondbacks baseball caps.
Only when he was asked a probing question about the Yankee owner George Steinbrenner's secretive and stunning pursuit of him, after Joe Torre had already been hired as his managerial successor, did Showalter's demeanor change.
His face turned crimson, his chin dropped to his chest and he adjusted his tie.
The question shocked Showalter, because the clandestine meeting was supposed to  remain so.


In Calamity, Common Ground
A month before the assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, the presidents of American Jewish organizations were stunned when Prince Saud al-Faisal greeted them in New York with the traditional Hebrew High Holy Day wish, "G'mar hatima tova," -- May you be sealed in the Book of Life.
"People nearly fell off their chair," said Henry Siegman, a member of the group.
The words, after all, were spoken by a son of the late King Faisal, the Saudi monarch whose antipathy for Israel was legendary.


After 17 Years, Simpson Will Leave Senate
Senator Alan Simpson, a Republican, told a hometown crowd today that he would not seek another term in Congress.
Senator Simpson, a 17-year veteran, made the announcement before a crowd of more than 200 at a Cody Country Chamber of Commerce meeting.


Bach, Handel, Beethoven Lead the Holiday Parade
AS the holidays approach, Bach and Handel are definitely in the forefront, with Beethoven a strong runner-up.
Victor Lionti conducts Beethoven's Fourth Symphony today at 3 P.M. with the Camerata Orchestra at Westchester Community College in Valhalla.
Also on the program are Mozart's Overture to "La Clemenza di Tito" and the "Classical" Symphony by Prokofiev.
At 3:30 today, Trio Sine Nomine plays two Beethoven Trios, the C minor and the "Archduke," in a free recital at the Ossining Public Library.
This young ensemble is made up of the violinist Yuki MacQueen, the cellist Eric Kutz and the pianist Eugene Alcalay, all graduate students at the Juilliard School.


Corrections
The What's Doing column on Nov. 19, about Aspen, Colo., misstated the opening date for skiing at the Aspen Mountain, Buttermilk and Snowmass areas.
It was Nov. 23, not Nov. 22.


100 Multiplied by 2 Equals A Possible World Record
NAMES Dora Kastner and Joseph Kornbluh, fraternal twins.
DATE OF BIRTH Dec. 12, 1895.
RECORD Judging by the current listing in the Guinness Book of Records, Mrs.
Kastner and Mr.
Kornbluh may be the oldest living twins in the United States.
The 1995 edition lists identical twins born in 1901 in Michigan as the oldest living twins.
Mrs.
Greenfarb has written to the publishers but has not received  an answer.
HOW THEY GOT HERE The twins are the last survivors of eight brothers and sisters, all of whom moved to the United States from Bolcshovic, Austria.
Mrs.
Kastner arrived in 1920, when she was 20, with her father.
Mr.
Kornbluh had arrived several years earlier.
Neither twin ever returned to Austria.
OFFSPRING Mrs.
Kastner has a daughter, Psela Greenfarb of Edison, six grandsons  and nine great-grandchildren; her son, Lester, died in 1992 at 63.
Mr.
Kornbluh  has one son, Bill, of Greenburgh, N.Y., three grandchildren and two great-grandchildren.
OCCUPATIONS Mrs.
Kastner was a draper, dressing models in New York City, until she married and became a homemaker.
Mr.
Kornbluh was a furrier and has lived in  the Bronx most of his life.
CURRENT RESIDENCES Mrs.
Kastner has lived at the New Jersey Geriatric Center of  Workmen's Circle in Elizabeth for two years.
Before that, she lived on her own in Newark, where she had spent most of her life.
Mr.
Kornbluh lives at the Hebrew Home for the Aged in Riverdale, the Bronx.
REASON FOR MRS.
KASTNER'S LONG LIFE "I've been lucky. God's given me a long life, that's all." She leads a healthy life, not smoking and drinking very little, her daughter said.
She never owned a car and walked wherever she needed  to go in Newark, delivering her husband's lunch to him at the couple's print shop about a mile from their home daily for many years.
MR.
KORNBLUH'S OUTSTANDING CHARACTERISTIC His sense of humor, says his son, Bill.
At 92, when he arrived at the nursing home where he now lives, he told Bill, he had "to liven the place up a bit." Having outlived two wives, Mr.
Kornbluh had a sweetheart at the nursing home until she, too, died recently.
"That's the problem with living so long: you lose people you love," Bill said.
HAPPIEST MOMENTS "When I see my children and grandchildren, this is my happiest  moment," Mrs.
Kastner said, and she is doing so at this year's birthday party, to which 70 relatives and friends are invited.
"I'm also happy when my daughter  comes to the Oneg Shabbat at the nursing home and sings." Her special song: "Sunrise, Sunset" from "Fiddler on the Roof."
KAREN DeMASTERS


New York Restaurant With a Sports Theme
With the opening of the Official All Star Cafe in Times Square this month New York will have a new destination before, during, after or even instead of the game.
What game?
Well, since Andre Agassi, Wayne Gretzky, Ken Griffey Jr., Joe Montana and Shaquille O'Neal are partners with the theme-restaurant maestro Robert Earl in this enterprise, just about any game will do.
With 34,000 square feet on three levels seating 650, the Official All Star Cafe sets out to do for sports what Mr.
Earl's Planet Hollywood has done for movies.


Jupiter Is a Nice Place to Visit . . . But You Wouldn't Want to Live There
It's hard to come to terms with a place like Jupiter.
So formidable, more than 1,000 times the size of Earth, Jupiter could swallow all the other planets  in the solar system with room to spare.
So far away from the Sun, it is a frigid sphere enveloped by a cloud of ammonia ice crystals.
And in every other respect, Jupiter's a real gasbag.
There is practically nothing to it but gases, hydrogen  and helium, which become denser with depth until they behave more like liquids.
But nowhere on the enormous planet is there a liquid ocean to navigate  or a single square foot of solid land to stand on.
Which may explain why we never traveled to Jupiter in our imagination long before we were able to go there in reality, as authors and actors did so often and so vividly with the Moon and Mars.
There was no place of encountering anything like the beautiful Dejah Thos, Princess of Helium, or any kind of life.
Edgar Rice Burroughs (also of Tarzan fame) sensibly confined the exploits of John Carter, gentleman adventurer, to Mars.


The Danger, and Rewards, Of Befriending the Dying
To the Editor:
I was deeply moved by your Nov. 19 Soapbox essay "What Cicely Was Like" and its warning: "Once you let a dying person near your heart, you're in danger" --  letting yourself in for "a flood of pain one day."


Will a No-Tax Policy Go Up in Smoke?
Each of two million New Jerseyans smoke 4.8 packs of cigarettes on average per week.
They are arguably not the most health-conscious people around, and given what we know about smokers, they are probably also not the richest.
Are they to be the ones who pay for Governor Whitman's first new tax?
The possibility comes up because of the way Christine Todd Whitman has structured her administration.
She cut government income (by reducing income taxes) before she figured out where to cut the government to match.
Among other  consequences, this back-to-front approach (Ronald Reagan also favored it, but he had a credit card called the national debt) has left the Governor sailing ever closer to the wind, fiscally speaking, and with less and less room to maneuver when the sudden need for ready cash comes up.


Lincoln Was a Soldier
To the Editor:
In a Nov. 30 letter, Milton B. Beckerman asserts that President Lincoln did not serve in the military, nor of course, did President Clinton.
This is not accurate.
While President Clinton did not serve in the military, Lincoln certainly did, albeit for a short time, during the Blackhawk Wars.


On Language;Gifts of Ga
PUT AWAY THAT stack of catalogues; turn off the infomercials.
Instead, if your friends and family have been good this year and are moderately literate, give them books about the English language.
Here are a half-dozen to choose from, beginning with an updated dictionary:
*
Webster's New World College Dictionary, Third Edition ($22.95).
The 1988 edition, first to be called "third," was published by Simon &amp; Schuster; the 1994 edition was published by Prentice Hall; the new edition is by Macmillan.
What's  going on here?
This is the dictionary of first reference of The New York Times and The Associated Press; nobody should be ashamed to put the company name on it.
Why is it being handed around Publishers' Row like a plate of lexicographical cookies?


The Danger, and Rewards, Of Befriending the Dying
To the Editor:
I was deeply moved by your Nov. 19 Soapbox essay "What Cicely Was Like" and its warning: "Once you let a dying person near your heart, you're in danger" --  letting yourself in for "a flood of pain one day."


Neal Shapiro and Juju Chang
Juju Chang, a reporter at KGO-TV in San Francisco, and Neal Shapiro, the executive producer of "Dateline NBC" in New York, were married last evening.
Rabbi Bernard Bloom officiated at the 200 Fifth Club in New York.
Ms.
Chang, 30, is keeping her name.
She is a graduate of Stanford University.
In January she is to be a reporter for ABC News in New York.
She is a daughter of Okyong and Palki Chang, who own the Friendship Inn in Sunnyvale, Calif.


Newcomers' School? Plan Is Proposed
As any teacher or parent will testify, adolescent angst strikes nearly every  junior high school student, but for immigrant youngsters, the stress is often be compounded by the inability to speak English and by feeling foreign in a new home.
Now, some educators in Queens are considering creating a school that would help the students cope by offering instruction in their native languages and help them and their families adjust to life here.


Government Safety Net Cut, Charities Turn to the Public
A meals-on-wheels program has lost a New York City grant that paid for nursing visits to the homebound elderly.
A social service program has lost city  and state money that paid a social worker to visit six day-care centers, looking for signs of child abuse and neglect.
A rent assistance program whose Federal financing ran out in September is able to help those who face eviction within 72 hours, but no one else.
Government efforts to overhaul poverty programs and balance budgets have eroded the resources of the charities whose programs provide a safety net for needy people, heads of New York City charities say.


Jet Rookie Has Become Something Special on Special Teams
It is the diary of a hit man, albeit one with a 1990's sensibilities.
In the never-ending cycle of Wisconsin football practice, followed by studying in the library, Chad Cascadden needed to unwind.
With no extra money to spend, with pressure to perform as a special-teamer, with the knowledge he needed more than a B average to keep alive his hopes of medical school, he began to put down his thoughts on a personal computer at the end of the day.


L.I. Vines
Reserve Lenz Winery, Peconic, 1991. About $11.


6 Lanes Too Close for Condo Comfort?
Next month, if the city has its way, an office building at 19 Rector Street will house a new processing center to determine whether physically and mentally  disabled people on Home Relief can receive Federal benefits instead.
The program, part of the Mayor's welfare reforms, would accommodate 150 clients a day.
The city's previous attempt to place the program, at 150 Williams Street, failed this fall, after local elected officials persuaded Deputy Mayor Fran Reiter that it was too close to a residential complex, Southbridge Towers, and the South Street Seaport.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
House 1.
Lobbying: Vote on an amendment to a lobbying reform bill intended to prohibit efforts by the executive branch to mobilize public support for legislation.
Rejected 238 to 190, Nov. 28.


Jessica Thomas, Timothy Wilson
Jessica Jeakens Thomas, a state social services administrator in Wilmington,  Del., was married there yesterday to Timothy Robert Wilson, a business strategist for E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company in Wilmington.
The Rev.
Kevin  Bean performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Wilson, 31, graduated from the University of Wisconsin and received an M.B.A. and a master's degree in long-term-care administration from Widener University.
She is a daughter of Florence Mack Kelly of New York and John Edward Thomas of Milwaukee.
Her father is a lawyer in Milwaukee.
Her mother is a research assistant at Merrill Lynch in New York.


She Was No Monster
To the Editor:


Supermodel Wannabes: Face to Face With Fame
A 16-YEAR-OLD Louisiana high school student was chosen Supermodel of Tomorrow by a premier modeling agency in New York, while in Las Vegas, Nev., an 18-year-old Hungarian woman was dubbed the 1995 Supermodel of the World by another top agency in a singular night of dueling high-fashion hyperbole and glamour.
Haley Carmouche, an 11th grader from Gonzales, La., near Baton Rouge, won a $100,000 modeling contract in the Wilhelmina Model Search awards dinner on Thursday night at the Fashion Cafe.


Condo Owners Aren't Taking to the Cleaners
After two years of searching for a tenant to rent the ground floor of his building, Stephen Corelli was elated this summer when he found a dry cleaner to  lease the 3,500-square-foot storefront at 39 N. Moore Street.
"I figured this would be a nice amenity for the residents upstairs," said Mr.
Corelli, 37, who lives in the 10-unit luxury condominium.
But what he regards as a convenience, his neighbors -- who include the actor  Harvey Keitel and the MTV chief, Tom Freston -- see as a toxic menace.
Residents fear that perchloroethylene, the chemical agent used in dry cleaning and a suspected carcinogen, will threaten their health.


Young Performers Front and Center
YOUNG and old mix and match at several concerts this week starting today at 3 when David Strom, concertmaster of the Danbury Community Orchestra and a senior  at Ridgefield High School, plays Beethoven's Romance in F in Ives Hall.
The free program also includes Richard Brooks conducting Bach's Brandenburg Concerto No.  2 and Brahms' "Academic Festival Overture."


INSIDE
INVESTING IT /Page 4/ At this altitude, the Dow is taking investors' breath away.
Some tips on how to  get it back.
By Laura Pedersen.


Whenever Banks Merge, It's Time to Check Insurance
THE pending merger of the Chase Manhattan Bank and the Chemical Bank will affect depositors in a more serious way than just altering their account numbers.
They could lose part of their deposit insurance.
There have been 383 bank and savings and loan mergers this year, and, like the proposed merger of the two New York banking giants, they all raise the same issue.
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation insures deposits in identically named accounts of up to $100,000 in a bank or savings and loan.


'There Is Life Beyond the Stage'
To the Editor:
Is playing in a professional orchestra really making "A Pathetic Living at the Symphony" [Oct. 29]?
I wonder.


Two Collections and a Courtship
The New-York Historical Society is home to an extraordinary trove of American books, ephemera, prints and paintings that represent "the memory of a city." The Museum of the City of New York contains the stuff of scholars' -- and Americana  lovers' -- dreams.
Together they would make one of the most exciting cultural institutions in New York and, indeed, in the country.
But making that marriage is going to take a great deal of brokering on the part of both museums, the city and the state.
Two years ago the Historical Society was nobody's dream of a possible spouse.
Because its former board, a monument to old names and old money, failed to insure its endowment or proclaim its glories to the mass of New Yorkers, it faced bankruptcy and dissolution.
Today, as a result of a healthy influx of state and city money and the controversial sale of collections deemed inessential to the society's mission, the building is in better shape and the endowment stands at $22 million.
A $7 million grant from the Luce Foundation to  establish a study center will be coming in March.


Awakened Isles Beat the Devils
Mike Milbury said before tonight's game against the Devils that his team "better use this as a wake-up call."
By this, Milbury meant the firing of General Manager Don Maloney, which the Islanders announced before the game.


Liberties;Peacemaker's Perils
In the land of Joyce and Yeats, of terrible beauty and widening gyres, you don't hear much psychobabble.
So the Irish cocked a brow when President Clinton called their bloody tribal  war a diversity issue and advised the South, since it has "more emotional and physical space," to do some outreach with the North. (Less I.R.A., more interface, less terrorism, more closure.)


Outsiders Gone, Cambodia Unravels
THE offices of a struggling independent newspaper are ransacked by ax-wielding villagers, and the Prime Minister applauds.
A new opposition party is declared illegal before it is formally launched.
Grenades explode at the office of an independent-minded senior politician, and in the courtyard of a Buddhist temple that has been sheltering his supporters.
This is newly democratic Cambodia.


THE CAMPAIGN TO DEMONIZE SHEILA BURKE
DeParle's piece makes the strongest possible argument that Sheila Burke should lose her job.
By allowing Democrats to get away with the big lie that Republicans are mean spirited about issues like welfare reform, Republican women who work on the Hill are missing the point entirely.
As a woman and mother, Burke should be the first to blow the whistle on such  hypocrisy.
These programs are built on the backs of middle-class women who must  leave their children in day care while they work to pay the taxes that support entitlements that desperately need reform.


Actor as Overseer, Actors as Ensemble
FIRST Greg Naughton considered the Westport Playhouse, if only for a trial run.
But he knew the theater space was not the thing.
Neither, for that matter,  was the play.
It was the players, all of them, who had to be numero uno.
And actors hang out in Manhattan.
In the tradition of the actor-manager, perhaps most famously exemplified by Richard Mansfield in the 19th century, the Blue Light Theater Company was formed just a year ago.
Mr.
Naughton is listed as its actor-manager -- a term virtually unheard of in contemporary theater parlance.


The Patience of Jobs
Steven P. Jobs. Hmmm. The name rings a bell.
He was, of course, the whiz kid who wrote a huge chunk of computer history as co-founder of Apple, and then -- as far as most people knew -- vanished from the face of the earth.
He didn't vanish, though.
Among other fancies, in 1986 he invested $60 million in a tiny computer-animation company called Pixar Animation Studios.


Warm and Inviting, Italian Fare With Flair
IN a corner space in New Haven formerly occupied by Carbone's, Tre Scalini is warm and inviting in an unostentatious way, with cream-colored brick walls, pressed-tin ceiling, and cafe-curtained windows that line the front of the building.
It is a lively scene, especially on weekends.
With the main dining room fronting on the street, it seems odd that the front door is blocked off and the  entrance has been put in the rear of the building, up five or six steep steps.
But the place becomes packed early: both dining levels, with three steps (that's the tre scalini) separating them, and the bar area with a few tables near the entrance and cloakroom.


Art Imitates Life Imitates Art. And Vice Versa.
TO create "Familias," a drama that opens Friday, performers of the Pepatian company ate, spent afternoons and attended family gatherings with eight South Bronx families over a period of 15 months -- intense, personal research that the troupe's directors, Merian Soto and Pepon Osorio, who are married, have used in  prior collaborations.
But in this case, the shoe was eventually placed on the other foot: members of three of the families began training with the company and will appear as extras in the show's six performances.


Jerome Cooper U.S. Soccer Builder, 81
Jerome Cooper, who helped organize a professional soccer league in 1966 that  later merged with another league to form the North American Soccer League, died  of pneumonia Thursday in Washington.
He was 81.
Mr.
Cooper was involved with the Washington Whips, one of 12 teams in the United Soccer Association, a league of European and South American teams that represented 12 American cities and played a 12-game schedule.
The Whips were represented by Aberdeen of Scotland.


MOVIES THIS WEEK
DIFFERENT treatments of suspense and groovy comedy by experts highlight the television film roster this week.
Channel 31 has a pair of early Alfred Hitchcock gems.
In BLACKMAIL (1929) and MURDER (1930), you'll recognize the master's touches.
Nothing creaky here -  just detailed, colorful crescendo.
"Blackmail," the director's first talkie - Tuesday at 8 P.M. - spans a defensive slaying, a sinister aftermath and a picturesque chase in the British Museum.
Anny Ondra and John Longden have the leads.
In "Murder," a burrowing juror (Herbert Marshall) determines to save an actress (Diana Baring) condemned to execution.
The circus showdown delivers a double jolt - Monday/Early Tuesday at 1 A.M.


GARDENING
ALTHOUGH it's been years since I planted a proper vegetable garden (too little sun, too many ornamental perennials), in winter I like to dream about it, just about the time the catalogs start rolling in from the Cook's Garden, Shepherd's Garden Seeds, and other purveyors of choice seed for vegetables unlikely to turn up in a supermarket.
I laze downstairs on the couch, listening to the chilly wind howl outside, turning pages and figuring out which  pepper, out of a possible 40, I would plant this year, if, that is, I were planting any.
Vegetable seed catalogues are much safer reading for me than mail-order plant nursery catalogues, a proven source of expensive temptation.
Now, however, there's good winter vegetable reading not in catalogues but in  a pleasant pair of books that complement each other nicely.
The more luscious is THE ART OF FRENCH VEGETABLE GARDENING, by Louisa Jones, with photographs by Gilles Le Scanff and Joelle Caroline Meyer (Artisan, $35).
The photographs are scrumptious, especially the cover shot of a wooden basket filled with tomatoes of more sizes and colors than I knew existed. (One is almost purple!) Ms.
Jones, an American who has lived and gardened in the south of France since 1975, writes charmingly about the passionate affair the French have been carrying on with their vegetable gardens almost since all Gaul was divided into three parts.
This book provokes a certain wistfulness, for the great majority of the vegetable varieties she writes about are not to be had here. (The simple recipe suggestions can be adapted.) THE KITCHEN GARDEN, by Sylvia Thompson (Bantam, $27.95) is, accordingly, very welcome, for it restricts itself to vegetables (even rare and uncommon ones) whose seeds are available here, and it also tells  us where to get them.
It's almost enough to persuade me to get rid of some day lilies and purple coneflowers to make room for Lady Finger potatoes and celeriac. (There is a companion "Kitchen Garden Cookbook" as well.)


MARKET TIMING
Monday


District of Columbia Is Paying Millions to Insure Former Workers
With the District of Columbia still scrambling to find $130 million in spending cuts to meet a proposed budget of $4.99 billion for 1996, local officials say the city has wasted millions of dollars for years on health-care premiums for workers no longer employed by the municipal government.
In information presented to the financial control board that oversees all city operations, the District's personnel director, Larry A. King, said that premiums are still being paid for thousands of former employees because of the city's inadequate computer system and lax oversight by department managers.
In some years, Mr.
King told the board, the city lost as much as $10 million.


THE HOLY TERROR
Rudolph W. Giuliani, not ONE TO UNDERESTIMATE HIMSELF, FEELS A CERTAIN kinship when he looks at the portrait of Fiorello La Guardia that hangs behind his desk at City Hall.
"A really terrific role model," Mayor Giuliani calls him.
So far the resemblance has eluded most other New Yorkers.
In the public mind Fiorello La Guardia is the Little Flower, the builder of modern New York, the benevolent figure who read the comics to children on the radio; Rudolph Giuliani is the control freak, the slasher of budgets, the taut face denouncing the vile  stupidity of his enemies on television every night.
But consider a few judgments of these Mayors rendered by journalists and public officials of both eras. (For  quiz purposes, telltale past-tense verbs have been changed.) See if you can distinguish which of these statements refer to Mayor La Guardia and which refer  to Mayor Giuliani:


Another Late Date With Glory For Army
It took a 99-yard drive to win the Army-Navy game today and an admittedly poor decision by the Navy coach to help lose it.
Army produced the long drive that concluded with John Conroy powering over left tackle for the winning touchdown with 63 seconds left to play.


Lawyers Here, Lawyers There
Should not the word "lawyers" have been used instead of the word "Republicans" in "Republicans in Nassau Poised to Run Legislature" [Nov. 4].
Also, the word "ruin" may also replace the word "run."


The Life and Times Of an American Classic
REVELATIONS" WAS BORN ON A CHILL Sunday afternoon in January 1960 at the 92d  Street Y. Created by a handsome, charming young Broadway show dancer named Alvin Ailey, the piece was a success from the start, not only with that first, stunned audience but also with dancegoers around the world, from Australia to Europe to  China and back. Today, "Revelations" is perhaps the best known and most loved of all American modern-dance classics.
Thirty-five years after its creation, "Revelations" will be celebrated by the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater with a special performance on Wednesday, the  opening night of the company's monthlong season.
For this occasion the music, haunting Negro spirituals, will be performed live by singers and instrumentalists, a departure from the company's years of using taped accompaniment.
It will be a fitting tribute, for spirituals were the heart and inspiration of the dance: in "Revelations," Ailey looked back to the churches of his West Texas childhood and to the songs' messages of faith.


A Horror Scene Made Real
Two men who set fire to a subway token booth in Brooklyn last week did more than gravely injure the clerk inside.
They showed that the fear that art -- or mere entertainment -- can inspire undesirable behavior is as potent as it was when "Fanny Hill" was banned more than two centuries ago.
The attack was similar to parts of "The Money Train," a movie released the week before, making it the latest film blamed for inspiring violence.
It recalled the 1993 death of a teen-ager who lay in the middle of a highway, copying a scene in the film "The Program."


Getting Best Deal On a Move
WHEN it becomes time to move, getting the best deal from a mover is often the equivalent of heavy lifting.
Here, then, are some suggestions to help make a change of address less of a change of financial status.
"Get a minimum of three estimates," said Judy Stuchell, director of marketing for the National Moving and Storage Association in Fairfax, Va.
If one estimate  is significantly lower than the other two, Ms.
Stuchell said, resist the temptation to jump at the bargain.


Correction
A review on Oct. 29, about three books on the last days of Czar Nicholas II and his family, gave an incorrect date in 1918 for their deaths.
They were assassinated on July 17, not June 17.
A letter dated Nov. 1, calling attention to the error, was misdirected at The Times.


Sing A Song of Spices, Cinnamon for Sure
COOKS are no doubt going through their recipe file boxes about now to refresh memories about the family's favorite cakes, cookies and other holiday treats.
Where would the celebrations be without the many spice flavorings, not the least of which is cinnamon?
Some might say that this spice somewhat dominates the season, in mulled wine, cider, eggnog and any number of apple-based dishes.
So the time has come to pay humble tribute to an often-unsung plant, the cinnamon tree, without which many celebrations could be rather dull.


The Ghost of a Christmas Past
MR. IVES' CHRISTMAS By Oscar Hijuelos. 248 pp. New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $23.


Dr. Rosenberg, Mr. Abramovitz
Dr.
Sharon Rosenberg, a resident in anesthesiology at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, is to be married this evening to David Abramovitz, an associate at Deutsch &amp; Spring, a New York law firm.
Rabbi Jacob Jungreis is to perform the ceremony at the Manhattan Beach Jewish Center in Brooklyn.
Dr.
Rosenberg, 27, graduated magna cum laude from Queens College and received her M.D. degree from the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
She is a daughter of Lila Silfen of Riverdale, the Bronx, and Gerald Rosenberg of Port Richmond, S.I., and a stepdaughter of Joseph Silfen.


INSIDE
Giuliani Defends Child Policy


Do Politicians Fit Academe's Groove?
THE announcement last week that William M. Bulger, the powerful president of  the Massachusetts State Senate, will be the next president of the University of  Massachusetts prompted some criticism about the intrusion of politics into the sacred groves of academe.
Mr.
Bulger, a lawyer who has controlled the Senate for 17 years, has taught law courses at Boston University and Suffolk University but has no experience as an academic administrator.


CHILDREN OF THE BEATS
So the children of the Beat writers and artists had dysfunctional parents ("Children of the Beats," by Daniel Pinchbeck, Nov. 5).
So what?
So did thousands of us during the 50's and 60's.
My alcoholic father kept us broke and ignored me, too, but he never wrote a poem or painted a picture.
At least the Beats produced a body of work that inspired and gave hope to some of us.
I'm sorry Jan Kerouac's father didn't do much for her -- he sure did a hell  of a lot for me.


Less Is More: Faith and Facts in Welfare Reform
THE liberals' War on Poverty has been an unmitigated disaster.
While the Government has thrown trillions of dollars at the problem, the misery has only grown.
The cities are filled with 14-year-old mothers and 30-year-old grandmothers and 45-year-old drug addicts who never held a job.
Never have so many suffered so much at the hands of "compassionate" government.
These are the arguments that Republicans are using to drive American social policy toward a historic U-turn.
As the House of Representatives voted this fall for unprecedented cuts in the antipoverty budget, its ebullient members claimed  the mantle of compassion.
"Today, what we have shown is that we are a caring country," said Christopher Shays of Connecticut.
"Instead of giving the food, we are going to help people learn to grow the food."


Tales From the Alternative Career Path
Doctor, lawyer, butcher, baker -- the world seems filled with people toiling  at conventional jobs.
But here and there are those who work to the ringing of a  different cash register, as shown by these reader responses to a request from The New York Times.
Take Dr.
Ivan Huber, a professor of biology at Fairleigh Dickinson University, who sought to turn pest into profit with the help of one of New York City's most ubiquitous denizens.


Taiwan's Ruling Party Barely Keeps Majority as Opponents Gain
The governing Nationalist Party in Taiwan kept its majority in parliamentary  elections today, but it suffered its biggest challenge ever from resurgent opposition parties.
The Nationalists won 85 seats, or just over half, in the 164-seat Parliament, down from the 92 the party now holds, final results showed.
It received only 45  percent of the popular vote, its lowest percentage since it took power in 1945.


Teen-Ager Dies at Rink
A Durham teen-ager died today after collapsing on an ice rink at a sports center here.
Emergency workers responded to a 911 call during the afternoon about an 18-year-old who had collapsed on the ice at the Tri-Town Sports Center, said Dave Jahn, a spokesman for the Fire Department.


Friends and Family Mourn Slain Model
Glossy photos of a smiling Linda Sobek decorated a church where mourners remembered the model for the vibrancy of her life and the sadness of her death.
"I remember that smile," said Eric Dickerson, a running back who knew the former Los Angeles Raiders cheerleader when he played on the team.
"She was a real cheerful person. She just didn't deserve that."


Rube Goldberg's Universe: 'A' Tilts 'B,' Which Overturns 'C,' Which . . .
RUBE GOLDBERG.
THE NAME, in a swift turn that's both comic and mildly terrifying, still personifies the detailed but jury-rigged armature of modern life -- cause and effect gone irredeemably awry.
It's regularly linked to just about anything, from health-care plans to children's contraptions to the stock market.
But who in the world was the man himself, and what exactly did he do?
Above all, he was a cartoonist.
For more than four decades, until the early 1960's, his work originated in New York City newspapers and permeated the American scene through syndication.
He commented on fashion as smoothly as he commented on politics and sports.
And in his "invention" cartoons, he created little dramas of human fallibility where "B," "C" and "D" did proceed from "A" but only by flying in the face of all reason.
Twenty-five years after his death, the Salander-O'Reilly Galleries are celebrating that range of quirky insight in  "Rube Goldberg (1883-1970): The Art of Invention," an exhibition of about 40 works that opens Tuesday and will continue through Dec. 30.


All-Conquering Hungarians, Empire or No
Hungarian culture is best known for music -- Franz Liszt, of course, and Bela Bartok and Zoltan Kodaly -- but it spawned an even greater number of important and influential photographers.
Photography between the two world wars would be sorely diminished without the Hungarians.
Significantly, those who became best known emigrated, and then they conquered the world.
Brassai went to Paris and pictured its demimonde as more vivid, more complex, more quintessentially French than anyone had since Toulouse-Lautrec.
Martin Munkasci, a sports photographer and photojournalist, came to America in the early 1930's and transformed fashion photography with an injection of natural movement.
Andre Kertesz moved to Paris and then New York, transplanting to America a European appreciation of split seconds, incongruities and spatial surprises.


No Headline
Someone once said we are united by the Constitution and television.
I thought I could unite the Russians here by the Yellow Pages." -- ILYA I. LEVKOV  [1:3.]


How a Rabbi's Rhetoric Did, Or Didn't, Justify Assassination
The 73-year-old rabbi moved across the den of his house on Ocean Parkway in Brooklyn one night last week and peered through the drawn blinds of the front windows.
He said he was unafraid, but it was with a certain concern that he stared out into the gathering darkness.
"I'm a high-profile person all of a sudden," he said, managing a sort of sad  wink.


Correction
An article last Sunday about Marty Glickman, the retired sports broadcaster,  misidentified the television network that employs the former Oakland Raiders coach John Madden as an announcer.
It is Fox, not CBS.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Turning a Fresh Ear To Two Bits of Timelessness New York Philharmonic Avery Fisher Hall


Hungarian Town Mobilizes For G.I.'s Bound for Bosnia
At midday in this remote and sleepy village, the loudest sound comes from Istvan Papai's pushcart, where he sharpens knives against a flint wheel powered  by a foot pedal.
"Who would have believed it?" Mr.
Papai mused as he fingered a shining blade.
"I'm an old man, and now, before I die, I'm going to have a chance to meet Americans."


'Christmas Carol' Flows From Stage to Lobby
Charles Dickens as librettist and Alan Menken as composer are not a combination to be taken lightly.
So the meeting of the 19th-century author of such a perennial crowd pleaser as "A Christmas Carol" and the 20th-century composer of such Disney megahits as "Beauty and the Beast" and "Aladdin" merits  serious attention.
If their union in "A Christmas Carol," now in an 88-performance run through Dec. 31 at the Paramount, falls somewhere short of show-business enchantment, neither artist can be seriously faulted.
Dickens has provided the show with an indestructible story, Mr.
Menken has filled it with melody and Lynn Ahrens as lyricist has served both well.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Strike at Caterpillar Is Abandoned by U.A.W.
Striking workers at Caterpillar overwhelmingly rejected a hard-line contract proposed by the company, but leaders of their union, the United Auto Workers, called off the 18-month walkout even before the votes had been counted.


Mexico Files New Charges Against Jailed Brother of Ex-Chief
The Mexican Government has brought new charges against the imprisoned brother of former President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, according to news reports published today.
The state-owned news agency Notimex and the daily newpaper Reforma said Judge Diogenes Cruz Figeroa ordered on Saturday that the brother, Raul Salinas, face new charges that he falsified official documents to set up fake bank accounts.


Fiesta Gets Showdown Of 2 Unbeaten Teams
John Junker wanted to know what went wrong.
The waiting and worrying was over late Saturday night, and the executive director of the Fiesta Bowl finally had the matchup that the new bowl alliance was created to produce.
Nebraska and Florida, the last two perfect major college teams, will meet in Tempe, Ariz., on the evening of Jan. 2 to determine a clear, if unofficial, national champion.
A year after Nebraska and Penn State remained undefeated, untied and unmatched at the unresolved end of the 1994 season, the Cornhuskers and Gators will create a less political conclusion to this one.
That is what Junker marveled at after Florida secured its place with a 34-3 victory over Arkansas in the Southeastern Conference championship game on Saturday.


Abroad at Home;It's Who Wins, Stupid
If the Republican budget legislation were a consistent, logical effort to cut Federal spending, it would deserve respect.
If it put fiscal goals ahead of the  wishes of big contributors, it would deserve respect.
If it resisted ideological lusts, it would deserve respect.
It fails those tests.
And the failure undercuts the Republicans in their budget contest with President Clinton.


Java Backers Taking Aim At Microsoft's Dominance
Hoping to steal a march on the Microsoft's Corporation's Internet strategy, which will be disclosed this week, a number of Silicon Valley companies plan announcements on Monday that together constitute an anti-Microsoft campaign.
The most noteworthy: A plan by Sun Microsystems Inc. and the Netscape Communications Corporation for a user-friendly version of the Java software technology for the Internet's World Wide Web.
Moreover, Microsoft is apparently in some internal turmoil over what strategy it should take with respect to the Java language.


Retaliatory Justice in Washington
Operating on the Washington principle that no good deed should go unpunished, the Justice Department is investigating whether the law was violated by the disclosure earlier this year of Central Intelligence Agency misconduct in Guatemala.
The administration of justice is warped when the Government pursues someone for exposing misdeeds that the Government itself found deplorable and that led to the dismissal of two senior C.I.A. officers and the punishment of several others.
The person under investigation is Richard Nuccio, a special adviser on Cuba to President Clinton and Secretary of State Warren Christopher.
The Justice Department, at the instigation of the C.I.A., is examining whether Mr.
Nuccio may have illegally given information about agency operations in Guatemala to Representative Robert Torricelli, a New Jersey Democrat, who disclosed and denounced the operations in public.


Sampras Sparks an Emotional Charge
Tom Gullikson was fighting tears from behind a microphone, and it was impossible not to flash back to a spotlighted tennis court in Melbourne, Australia, 11 months earlier when Pete Sampras was the one crying.
"It's been such an emotional year for both of us," Sampras said today after winning the Davis Cup for the United States with a 6-2, 6-4, 7-6 (7-4) victory over Russia's Yevgeny Kafelnikov.
"For Tom and I to have to deal with this situation in a public arena has not been easy."


Patents;A new test can detect marijuana use by analyzing a snippet of hair. Baldness is  not a defense.
AS drug screening becomes more pervasive in the workplace, at schools and among athletes, drug tests are becoming more sophisticated and easier to comply  with.
Until recently, analysis was done mostly on samples of blood or urine.
But now many companies are asking employees to donate a snippet of hair to be examined for drugs, using a test patented by a Massachusetts company called the Psychemedics Corporation.
Some drugs show up in hair more clearly than others.
Psychemedics's tests can detect minute traces of cocaine, opiates like heroine, methamphetamines like speed, and PCP, or angel dust.
Marijuana use is tougher to establish because hair contains a chemical of its own that mimics marijuana.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
Getting It Together, Even Good and Evil Tracy Chapman The Academy


Union Leaders Give Up on Caterpillar Strike
Union members at Caterpillar, the world's largest maker of heavy equipment, rejected a contract offer today, in a move that will let them have their old jobs back without gaining anything after a bitter 17-month strike.
Union members rejected the latest company offer as the United Auto Workers' central bargaining committee voted to send the 8,700 strikers back to work.
Union officials would not say why they ended the strike.


Triathlon to Buy Stations
The Triathlon Broadcasting Company said that it had exercised its option to buy 10 radio stations in three markets from Pourtales Radio Partnership for $18.5 million.
The stations to be acquired are in Colorado Springs; Spokane, Wash., and Washington's Tri-Cities area of Richland, Pasco and Kennewick.
Triathlon said on Friday that it had terminated its option to buy three radio stations in Mobile, Ala., from Pourtales, in keeping with a goal of concentrating on markets in the West.


Metro-North Union Says No Disruption Is Planned Today
Riders of the Metro-North Commuter Railroad were assured late last night that there would be no walkout today, and there were strong indications that the labor dispute that has plagued the railroad since Tuesday may be over.
An official close to secret contract talks held yesterday said he expected a  settlement to be announced today between the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which is Metro-North's parent agency, and the union representing track workers.


Shula Can Relax, for a Week Anyway
With fan sentiment for his dismissal at a crescendo, a relieved Miami Dolphins Coach Don Shula watched his team score in the fading seconds today to end a three-game losing streak.
Shula, whose Dolphins defeated the Atlanta Falcons, 21-20, before 63,395 fans at Joe Robbie Stadium, is the National Football League coach with the most regular-season career victories, 326 in 33 seasons.
But nearly 80 percent of more than 13,000 call-in voters to The Miami Herald and Fort Lauderdale Sun-Sentinel recently called for his dismissal.


Campus Speech Codes Seek Antidote for Hate
To the Editor:
Re "Living in a Cocoon" (column, Nov. 27):


Boggs Will Remain the Happy Yankee
Some players can't wait to get away from the Yankees, but not Wade Boggs.
After three years, Boggs didn't want to go anywhere else, and yesterday he and the Yankees made sure he wouldn't.
Although the Yankees made no announcement, a club executive said they reached agreement with the free-agent third baseman.
The executive did not disclose any terms but said the club planned to announce the deal tomorrow or Wednesday.


New Jersey Schools Adding Up Parity Proposals
Over the last 10 days almost everyone with a hand in running New Jersey's public schools has huddled over the new Department of Education financing report, trying to prophesy how the state will try to offer equal education in its richest and poorest districts.
Although state officials all but stuck on a warning label noting that the report's recommendations were rough and its dollar figures hypothetical, educators scrambled for their calculators.
The results left the wealthier districts aghast and planning to start venting their frustration Tuesday, when the State Legislature holds the first of three hearings on how to transform the  recommendations into law.


Singapore Libel Case Casts Shadow on Press
To the Editor:
Re your Nov. 29 news article on the Singapore libel case: By paying the $214,285 fine and waiving the right to appeal, The International Herald Tribune  accepts liability for flimsy charges by Government leaders in Singapore and throws into doubt the freedom of expression that should transcend American borders.


METRO DIGEST
RAIL UNION PLEDGES NO WALKOUT TODAY


Birth Rate
After a small surge in the 1980's the birth rate in New York City is falling  again and the trend will probably continue, according to city planners.
Fertility in the city parallels the nation's, and as more women of the baby boom generation move out of their childbearing years the number of births is expected to drop.
The birth rate tends to move in long swings, occasionally pushed up or  down by momentous events, experts say.
Births fell to their lowest levels of the century in the 1930's.
The city recorded its highest number of births in 1947 and the ensuing baby boom continued untile the mid-60's.


Detroit Family in the Jaws of a Monster
The Carter family is being stalked here by what the clan's 54-year-old matriarch, Regina, calls a monster -- crack cocaine.
She has watched it swallow  her daughter, and now she is fighting it for her grandson's soul.
The 15-year-old boy disappeared from her house six months ago and was found by police officers on Monday, after a half-year of beatings, hunger and sexual abuse, with a tale that is a searing reminder of how desperate the battle is for those on the front lines in the war on drugs.


Schools Aren't Alone in Tumbling Down;Welfare Stigma
To the Editor:
Re your Nov. 29 news article on a plan by New York City to use welfare recipients to supervise students while out of class: As a lawyer who represents  welfare recipients, as well as a former high school teacher, I cannot imagine a  more detrimental policy.


Schools Aren't Alone in Tumbling Down
To the Editor:
Your description of the poor condition of New York City schools (editorial, Nov. 27) applies not only to the public school system but also to the public and private nonprofit agencies that provide the bulk of educational and social services in the city.


K'nex Toys Selects Two Agencies
Two agencies have been named to create consumer advertising for K'nex construction toys in North America and overseas.
The combined billings were estimated at $13.8 million.
K'nex Industries in Hatfield, Pa., a unit of the Rodon Group, has named Kirshenbaum Bond &amp; Partners in New York to handle the North American account, with billings estimated at $10 million.
It was previously handled in-house, though in October K'nex Industries hired Ground Zero in Venice, Calif., to create a holiday-season television campaign.
Kirshenbaum Bond was selected on Friday after a monthlong review in which the other participants were not disclosed.


Wagner Narrowly Captures the Title
The John F. Kennedy Knights' 23-game winning streak and championship run ended yesterday at Columbia's Wien Stadium as Susan Wagner pulled out a last-minute 32-31 victory in one of the most exciting Public Schools Athletic League title games in recent memory.
"I'm not thrilled about losing," said Kennedy Coach Jerry Horowitz, whose team, seeking a second straight championship, finished the season at 11-1.
"But  we got through 23 straight games without a loss. We went though an entire season without an injury. I told the kids not to dwell on misery, to thank the Lord for the good things."


IN BUDGET TALKS, NO HINT OF PACT ON HEALTH ISSUES
Less than two weeks before the next budget deadline, President Clinton and Congress have yet to begin serious discussion of compromises on Medicaid or Medicare, issues that are essential to reaching a budget accord.
The shape of the nation's health policy is at the heart of the debate between the White House and the Republicans.
After a week of fruitless budget negotiations, the two sides are expected to return to the table on Tuesday, just 10 days before the expiration of the Government's temporary authority to spend money, when the prospect of another partial Government shutdown looms.


Jet Engine Machinists Approve a Contract
Pratt &amp; Whitney machinists averted a strike today, narrowly voting to accept  a contract that raises wages 9 percent over three years and includes a buyout offer for older employees.
The contract was approved by 132 votes, with 2,531 union members at the jet engine maker voting for it and 2,399 against.


Report Cards for the Schools
The State Board of Education will issue some report cards when it meets on Wednesday.
They will compare schools on the basis of student test scores, student-teacher ratio, the number of teachers with advanced degrees and per-pupil spending.
The board is required to issue them every year.


Arab Police for Bethlehem
The first Palestinian police who are to take control of Bethlehem from Israeli troops by Christmas raised the Palestinian flag on a hill overlooking the city today.
Israeli troops are to leave Bethlehem on Dec. 18, but they may retain control of the main road to the city.


Panama Changes Tune to 'Yankee Don't Go Home'
Almost from the day they first arrived here in 1903 to build the Panama Canal, Americans have contended with chants of "Yankee Go Home!" But now, with the United States actually poised and apparently eager to leave, Panamanians are suddenly having a change of heart.
The turnabout stems from the growing realization here that when the United States leaves on Dec. 31, 1999, as required by the Panama Canal Treaties of 1977, Panama will, for the first time in its history, be left to fend for itself.


Nearly 7% of Adult Black Men Were Inmates in '94, Study Says
Nearly 7 percent of all black male adults nationwide were in jail or prison last year, compared with less than 1 percent of white male adults, the Justice Department said in a report released today.
The report released by the Justice Department's Bureau of Justice Statistics  also found that by last June the number of Americans behind bars had reached 1.1 million, having grown by nearly 90,000, or 9 percent, since June 30, 1994.


Sri Lanka Troops Take Control Of Most of Rebel Stronghold
Government troops cleared the city center of Jaffna of mines and booby traps  today after regaining control of the Tamil rebel stronghold in northern Sri Lanka.
Sri Lankan soldiers hoisted the national flag on an 18th-century fort they recaptured on Saturday, five years after being forced to abandon it to the rebels.


High-Speed Chase in 3 Towns
A man driving a stolen dairy van led the police on a high-speed chase down a  main shopping street in three towns yesterday before crashing into a transport van from a Korean church and injuring two people, the police said.
The driver raced down Broad Avenue in Englewood and Leonia before running a red light and hitting a van from the Han Moory Presbyterian Church of Ridgefield Park, the police said.
The driver of the church van, Jin Soo Park of Palisades Park, suffered a concussion and a broken arm and was listed in serious condition at Hackensack University Medical Center.
A female passenger was treated and released.
The driver of the stolen van, whose name the police would not disclose, was not seriously hurt and was expected to be charged with auto theft and traffic violations.


James Yeargin, 86, Prosecutor And Judge for 12 Years, Dies
James M. Yeargin, who was one of the first black prosecutors in the Manhattan District Attorney's office and who later served 12 years as a Criminal Court judge, died on Nov. 13 at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Hospital.
He was 86 and lived in Manhattan.
From the time he was named an assistant by District Attorney Thomas E. Dewey  in 1938 until he was appointed to the bench by Mayor John V. Lindsay in 1966, Mr.
Yeargin was one of the busiest and most visible prosecutors in New York.


For Telecommunications Bill, Time for Some Horse Trading
Scrambling to pass a sweeping telecommunications bill before Christmas, members of a House-Senate conference committee will try to find compromises this week on issues ranging from media conglomerates to smut in cyberspace.
"This week is deal-making time," said Representative Rick White, Republican of Washington.
"The leadership of both houses has said we have a very short window of opportunity."


Blaze Suspect Held in Death Of Firefighter
A man who said he set fire to his bed because his wife had left him, then walked away as the flames consumed his Queens tenement, has been charged in the  death of a firefighter who was killed in the blaze, officials said yesterday.
The man, Moises Antonio Blandon, 27, an unemployed auto mechanic, was arrested late Saturday and charged with two counts of second-degree murder and arson in the death on Oct. 8 of Peter McLaughlin, 31, a firefighter with an elite rescue unit, Fire Department officials said.


When a Wealthy Guy Wants to Be President
To the Editor:
You report (front page, Nov. 25) that Malcolm S. Forbes Jr. is wealthy and wishes to be President.
Both are desirable attributes.
What should concern us is that Mr.
Forbes may be using his wealth to promote the ambition of an unknown individual.


Business Districts Keep Our Cities Alive
To the Editor:
"When Neighborhoods Are Privatized" (Op-Ed, Nov. 30), on business improvement districts, displays an ideology that has lain waste to our cities.
Doug Lasdon and Sue Halpern's method does not involve persuasion of the public or of legislative bodies authorizing creation of such districts but an appeal to a single judge equipped with injunctive powers.
It is not neighborhoods but public policy that is thus sought to be privatized, usually by people living far from the areas affected.


Huskies Keep Crimson Tide in Its Place
Words of wisdom from Coach Geno Auriemma before his Connecticut team convincingly beat Alabama, 81-67, today in the final of the Central Fidelity Bank Invitational women's basketball tournament:
"There's a big difference between the top and bottom teams in the top 25. The five or six top teams can dominate some of the bottom teams."


Democracy to Judge Former Seoul Leader
A once all-powerful leader of South Korea, Chun Doo Hwan, was arrested yesterday for staging the military coup that brought him to power in 1979.
He is also expected to face murder charges in the massacre of pro-democracy protesters in the city of Kwangju a year later.
The trial of Mr.
Chun, who was feted by President Ronald Reagan at the White House, will resonate through many countries stepping from dictatorship to democracy.


Jets Find One More Way To Barely Avoid Victory
Those maddening Jets, who somehow turn things inside out at the moment of truth, performed another of their strange rituals today.
They ended their first eight possessions with seven punts and a fumble.
And yet, with the game on the line in the fourth quarter, they nearly came back against a stumbling collection of Rams.


N.H.L. Gothic: Heads Roll and Empires Tremble
The moon wasn't quite full Saturday, but lunacy ruled the National Hockey League.
It began when the Islanders fired Don Maloney as general manager without naming a replacement.


Oakley Shows the Bullets The True Value of Talk
Somewhere in between grabbing 16 rebounds, scoring 16 points and pontificating on the state of the National Basketball Association, Charles Oakley found a way to get inside the often impenetrable head of Chris Webber last night.


UConn Extends Its Streak Over B.C.
The streak lives," said Jim O'Brien, the Boston College basketball coach, who was more resigned than upset about it.
His teams have lost 16 games in a row to Connecticut, a streak dating to 1988, and the closest defeat of all came today when the Huskies beat the Eagles, 63-62, in the Big East opener for both schools.


Governor Pataki's Jobs Shuffle
Gov.
George Pataki is trying to take state jobs away from Democratic urban centers like New York City and move them to Republican areas upstate.
His administration calls it reinventing government.
Political payoff seems much closer to the mark.
The plan, which has been percolating for nearly a year, involves transferring state workers to empty I.B.M. facilities in Kingston and Binghamton.
The Governor says he wants to save money by merging the state's far-flung data-processing operations in these buildings.
Efficiency and cost-cutting are always desirable.
But Mr.
Pataki's aides went about it in a most peculiar way.


Instant Chess Via Internet: Kasparov Vs. the World
That Garry Kasparov, the current world chess champion, plans to play 10 simultaneous games today is hardly startling.
That he will be playing these games in real time -- and across three continents -- over the World Wide Web, the colorful, graphic-heavy section of the global Internet, is indeed something  new under the sun.
Computers and chess have gone together like bread and butter since the earliest days of computing.
This affinity, which translates into ease of play over the Internet, gives chess the potential of being what Dan Edelman, president of International Sports and Games Ventures Inc., calls the first major "cybersport."


Assassin Hints A Bodyguard Helped Him Kill Rabin
The confessed assassin of Yitzhak Rabin suggested today that one of the slain Prime Minister's bodyguards had been an accomplice in the shooting.
The killer,  Yigal Amir, asserted that if he told everything he knew, it "would turn the country upside down."
Mr.
Amir spoke to reporters before the start of a hearing at the Tel Aviv Magistrate Court, where he was ordered held in custody for four more days.


Essay;Your New $100 Bill
What is the value of trust in America?
On or about Presidents' Day in February, the U.S. will issue a new $100 bill.
The real reason for this change in our currency lies deeper than either Treasury or the Federal Reserve says.


Double-Title Dream Ends For Portland
Clive Charles saw more corner kicks than any soccer coach in the United States the past three days.
He coaches the men's and women's soccer teams of the University of Portland, and they played on opposite ends of the country the last three days in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournaments.
Charles, who is also the assistant coach to Steve Sampson with the United States men's national team, is the second man in the history of collegiate soccer to reach the Final Four for both men and women, matching Anson Dorrance's feat with North Carolina in 1987.


The Rand Corporation salutes E-mail as the new foundation of democracy.
DESPITE open hostility in today's political arena toward new taxes, a well-known public policy research organization has bravely published a sweeping  thesis: not only does every American citizen need access to electronic mail to fully participate in a democratic society, but the Federal Government should make sure that industry helps foot the bill.
That proposal by the Rand Corporation comes in a newly released report, "Universal Access to E-Mail: Feasibility and Social Implications." It can be found on the World Wide Web at http://www.rand.org/publications/MR/MR650/.


Fantasies of a Regular Guy (With Worshipers)
MISS AMERICA By Howard Stern 482 pages. Regan Books. $27.50.


A Ladybug Takes On the Lice;Professional Nit-Picker Has More Business Than She Can Handle
She is the professional nit-picker of Borough Park. And no one is complaining.
Almost every day, they trek to Dalya H.'s house in Brooklyn -- distraught, exhausted parents, hands wrinkled from loads of laundry; children with slightly  shamed faces and scalps afire with itching.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
Worrying About Aging And Singing About It Lloyd Cole, singer Supper Club


John H. Eisele, 104, Builder for 45 Years
John H. Eisele, who had a 45-year career as a builder in and around New York  City, died on Tuesday at his home in Bronxville, N.Y.
He was 104.
Mr.
Eisele went into the building trade in 1905 at 14 as a clerk for the construction of the New York Public Library.
He completed his education at night school and graduated from the Columbia University School of Engineering, where he later taught.


Police Seek Identity Of Man in Attack
A homeless man who stabbed a six-year-old girl with a hypodermic needle on a  subway train Saturday was expected to be identified today, the police said last  night.
The suspect, described as a man in his 50's, was still unidentified last night as the authorities waited for the results of tests, including fingerprints, said Doram Tamari, a police spokesman.
The man has not spoken since the incident.


Clinton Showing Strength Among Michigan's Voters
This state may be known for automobiles, soul music and Big Ten football, but it also has an impressive record as a political mirror: For decades, the vote for President in Michigan has been nearly identical to that of the entire nation.
That is why politicians are taking special note of a small renaissance for President Clinton here.
After two years of slipping and sliding, Mr.
Clinton is  enjoying newfound popularity in the state, according to interviews with politicians, academics and voters as well as the latest opinion polls.
In a whimsical sign of the President's rising acceptability, a bumper sticker spotted near here proclaimed, "Clinton! At Least He Cares," instead of the more familiar, "Impeach Clinton."


Husband of Judicial Nominee Says He Is Not Focus of Inquiry
The husband of the United States Attorney in Newark said last night that he is not the target of a criminal inquiry into false insurance claims submitted by a medical group that once employed him.
Mark Hochberg, the husband of Faith S. Hochberg, who was nominated last week  by President Clinton to a Federal judgeship, worked until 1993 for a surgical group that is now under investigation.
The group had charged Government health providers for the services of more than one surgeon during procedures when only  one was present, law enforcement officials said late last week.


Clintons' Friend Threatened With Subpoena in Travel Case
Harry Thomason, a Hollywood producer and a close friend of the Clintons, faces a showdown with Congress for refusing to release documents on his role in  the case of the White House travel office.
The chairman of the House Government Reform and Oversight Committee, William  F. Clinger, Republican of Pennsylvania, has scheduled a vote by the panel for Dec. 12 to authorize subpoenas that would compel Mr.
Thomason to provide a wide  range of records.


Camden Audit to Be Sought
Some politicians in Camden County have been wondering if the Board of Freeholders is on top of the county's $227 million budget.
Today, two Republican Assemblymen, Lee A. Solomon and John A. Rocco, who represent Camden, will ask the Assembly's State and Local Government Committee to approve a resolution calling for a state audit of the county's performance.
The State Department of Community Affairs favors the audit but needs the county's approval, said Bob Friant, a spokesman for the department.


Intermission, With a View


The End of an Active Hurrican Season
As meteorologists predicted, 1995 was a very active Atlantic storm season, producing 19 named storms, the most since the National Hurricane Center started  assigning names to those storms in 1953.
At the beginning of each hurricane season, which officially lasts from June  1 to Nov. 30, the hurricane center comes up with 21 names, which are to be given to storms when their surface winds reach the tropical storm force of 39 miles per hour.
This is the first year it has ever had to use a names beginning with the letter O.


Gore Visit To Signal New Status For Pretoria
Vice President Al Gore is not signing any earth-shaking accords on his trip here this week, but senior diplomats say his visit is meant to signal a more serious United States attitude toward the new South Africa.
Washington, they said, intends to treat South Africa not as another aid-hungry African nation but as a continental powerhouse and an emerging multiracial democracy that could serve as an example to smaller countries overwhelmed by ethnic hatreds, from Rwanda to Bosnia.
President Nelson Mandela,  for instance, recently led the international criticism of Nigeria for executing  human-rights activists.


Murder Trial Site May Shift
Moving the trial of the accused killer of 7-year-old Megan Kanka from Mercer  County to Camden County would cause a hardship for the girl's parents and thereby violate a new state constitutional amendment that prohibits interference with a victim's right to attend the proceedings, prosecutors said recently.
Kathryn Flicker, deputy first assistant prosecutor for Mercer County,  said she had asked Judge Andrew J. Smithson of Superior Court to reconsider his  decision to try the defendant, Jesse K. Timmendequas, in another county because  of publicity about the case, which inspired a law requiring notification of the  whereabouts of released sex offenders.


The Job Is Posted: Is Milbury Interested?
In the wake of Don Maloney's dismissal as general manager of the Islanders, Coach Mike Milbury spent his day off weighing whether he wants to be considered  for the job.
"I haven't come to a conclusion," Milbury said yesterday afternoon.
"I know there's a tight timetable. I'll probably let them know where I stand tomorrow."


NEWS SUMMARY
International
A3-11


Powerful Quakes Rock Islands North of Japan
A strong earthquake hit the Kurile Islands in the Russian Far East early today, but no injuries or damage were immediately reported.
The quake measured 7.2 on the Richter scale and was centered about 31 miles  undersea off the island of Iturup, Japan's Central Meteorological Agency said.
It followed a quake on Sunday that measured 6.9 and was centered 60 miles east of Iturup.
Five other quakes hit the region last week, but there were no reports of injuries or damages from the sparcely populated area.


After a Crushing Loss, One Check Is a Godsend
When Patricia Louise Bowles began to lose her financial footing, she found it hard ask for help.
Independent and at one time the owner of her own business, she clung to the hope that her lifelong passion of sewing could again be turned  into a money-making venture.
But she found that she could not do it on her own.
Ms.
Bowles, 55, is legally blind and collects Social Security and disability  benefits.
After her husband passed away two years ago, she found a part-time job as a florist to help make ends meet.
But an error in the way her income was  reported caused the loss of all her benefits.


Price Wars on Personal Computers Are Already Heating Up Sales forHoliday Season
There may have never been a better Christmas to buy a computer.
There may have never been a Christmas when it was such a bruising battle to sell one.
Seductive prices and consumers' eagerness to be on the Internet have set off  a stronger-than-expected start for home PC sales this holiday season.
But the intense competition among computer makers is putting the squeeze on companies like Packard Bell Electronics, which is fighting to maintain its lead against companies with better-known names and deeper pockets, like Compaq Computer and Hewlett-Packard.


Schools Aren't Alone in Tumbling Down;The Unschooled Roam
To the Editor:
Re your Nov. 26 news article on "efficacy" as a policy for New York's public  schools: The Board of Education misses the point.


G.O.P. Sends Mixed Signals on a New Shutdown
Senior Republican lawmakers and their majority leader, Senator Bob Dole, sent varying signals today about the chances of a new Government shutdown over the budget.
But all seemed to back away somewhat from optimistic remarks Mr.
Dole made on Saturday.
About 800,000 Federal workers were sent home last month when their departments and agencies were without money because Congressional Republicans and President Clinton were at an impasse over the budget.
After a week Congress  and Mr.
Clinton agreed to a temporary financing bill to return the Government to full operations.


Nearing the $500 Computer for Internet Use
The $500 PC may not be here yet, but how about the L500 PC?
A British computer maker is about to introduce a stripped-down machine for Net surfing that sells for about $900, roughly L590.
Even as the chief executives of the Oracle Corporation and Sun Microsystems Inc. proclaim their intention to produce low-cost, easy-to-use devices for viewing the World Wide Web, Acorn Computer Group P.L.C. already has a product that comes close: the A-7000, a multimedia personal computer equipped with a color monitor and software.


West Texas Journal;Land of Dancing, Dizzy Traffic Lights
Traffic lights that clank and blow and even break in the wind may not be much of a problem in your hometown.
But in West Texas, where powerful gusts frequently rage across the open land, vibrating traffic lights are indeed a vexing issue.
That is why researchers at Texas Tech University, at the Institute for Disaster Research and the Wind Engineering Research Center, have spent nearly three years and $275,000 in state grants to study a wind-caused phenomenon known as galloping.


700 U.S. Troops on the Way
President Clinton announced today that he had approved the deployment of an advance party of American troops to Bosnia, and White House officials said some  would start arriving at a staging area in Hungary on Monday.
As expected, the President approved a plan under which 700 communications and logistics specialists are to be deployed from bases in Germany.
Most will go by  rail to Hungary and then by road.
They will be based in Tuzla, in the northeast  of Bosnia.


Treasury Sets Bill Auctions This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week includes today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills and a 52-week bill being auctioned  Thursday.
At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.28 percent and the rate on the six-month  issue was 5.19 percent.
In when-issued trading, the 52-week bill was offered at  a price to yield 5.04 percent.


Ex-QVC Executive Joins Home Shopping
Home Shopping Network Inc. has named a former executive of QVC Inc., James Held, as its president and chief executive.
The move came a week and a half after Barry Diller, the former QVC chairman, agreed to acquire a controlling stake in Home Shopping.
Mr.
Diller, who left QVC early this year, agreed in November to buy the Home  Shopping stake and to acquire Savoy Pictures Entertainment Inc.
He has been trying to expand his Silver King Communications television network.


General in Sarajevo Is Recalled to France
Defense Minister Charles Millon of France said today that he had ordered the  commander of United Nations forces in Sarajevo, Gen.
Jean-Rene Bachelet, to return to Paris after the general criticized the Bosnia peace accord, saying France should have rejected it.


Road Signs Checked
The poles supporting 15 electronic-message freeway signs in Riverside and San Bernardino Counties were being examined this weekend for cracks, the authorities said.
Last Monday, one of the signs fell in high winds and killed a driver on Interstate 15 in Rancho Cucamonga.
A crack was found near the base of its support pole.
Nine of the five-ton signs, which cost $91,000 each, were removed  on Thursday and Friday after cracks were found in most of the poles supporting them.


Police Sweep Shuts Down Sports Gambling Rings
Striking minutes before the kickoffs of yesterday's professional football games, 160 police officers swooped down in Westchester and the Bronx, shutting down 12 gambling telephone banks linked to organized crime before the bookmakers inside had a chance to destroy their receipts, law enforcement officials said.
The officials described the so-called wire rooms as among the cleverest they  had ever seen.
They said the bookmakers, who included a second-grade schoolteacher, took bets on football games over a chain of cellular telephones,  all set to forward calls to avoid the possibility of a trace.


Paying Tax With Plastic
Should county governments and municipal clerks be allowed to accept property  tax payments by credit card?
That's one measure up for a vote today before an Assembly committee, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
But if the bill is sent to the floor by the local Government Committee and approved by the Legislature, local agencies would need to adopt ordinances and buy verification  equipment before the public could pay by plastic.


A Man Fights Child Support For a Girl, 6, Who Isn't His
A 32-year-old man who learned that the girl who called him "Daddy" for six years was not his biological daughter has been ordered by a judge to resume monthly support payments to her.
The man, a bus driver known in Erie County Court papers only as "Mr. G," has  been trying to cut off contact with the girl for two years, ever since blood tests confirmed that another man had fathered the child.
But family law experts  say the odds are against him.
They say a legal determination of parenthood at birth is extremely difficult to alter later in a child's life.


Schools Aren't Alone in Tumbling Down;None So Blind
To the Editor:
As a freshman at Benjamin N. Cardozo High School, I'm sick of being a pawn in the chess game of budget cuts.
Why is it that all the officials we choose are so nearsighted?
They think of having an army to protect the people of today, but they can't think of the education of the leaders of tomorrow.


Bridge
Benito Garozzo of Palm Beach, Fla., who won 13 world team titles as a member  of Italy's great Blue Team and was considered the world's best player in his heyday, came close to winning another title a week ago in the American Contract  Bridge League's Fall Nationals.
He and his partner, Lea Du Pont, also of Palm Beach, led a cosmopolitan group in the National Open Swiss Teams.
A teammate, playing with Karen Allison of Jersey City, was Michael Ledeen of Chevy Chase, Md., who many years ago provided bridge audiences in Italy with bilingual and knowledgeable commentary on Garozzo's efforts.
Ledeen and Allison met and formed a partnership far apart, playing on the Imagination Network.
Also in the team, and playing with Judy Tucker of Manhattan, was Irina Levitina of Teaneck, N.J., who in Russia was once a runner-up in the World Women's Chess Championship.


Ex-U.S. Colonel Resigns As Estonian Army Chief
The chief of Estonia's Army, a former colonel in the United States Army, was  forced to resign today in the wake of political fighting with the Baltic country's Defense Minister.
President Lennart Meri of Estonia said in a statement that he had asked for the resignation of the army commander, Aleksander Einseln, because he had argued with Defense Minister Andrus Oovel in public.


Thompson Firms Up De Beers Account
The J. Walter Thompson Company has named David Lamb, an account director at Abbott Mead Vickers BBDO in London, to head its important De Beers Consolidated  Mines Ltd. account as global business director based in London.
Mr.
Lamb, 34, succeeds Chris Jones, who was recently named co-president of Thompson and is moving next month to New York.
Mr.
Lamb rejoins Thompson after 18 months at Abbott Mead, part of the Omnicom Group, where he headed the account of the J. Sainsbury P.L.C. supermarket company, with billings estimated at $61 million.
Before that he worked in London for Thompson, a unit of the WPP Group, as the director in charge on the Kellogg  Company and Kraft General Foods accounts.


Sports of The Times;Chris Miller Didn't Answer 'The' Question
AS he moved through the Giants Stadium tunnel to the bus that would take the  Rams to Newark Airport, he was walking slowly with his head down, his shoulders  slouched, his hands in his pockets, like someone searching for a lost coin.
But  in the fog of his fifth concussion in the last 14 months, maybe Chris Miller was really staring into his future.
"Are you a little worried about things now?" somebody asked.


Robertson Davies, 82, Dies, Chronicler of Moral Battles;Considered for Nobel
Mr.
Davies built his international following through publishing more than 30  volumes of fiction, including three trilogies, as well as plays, essays and criticism.
He was once mentioned as a potential recipient of the 1993 Nobel Prize in literature, which went instead to the American novelist Toni Morrison.
Though he retired as an educator more than a decade ago, he had continued to  write in recent years, and his last novel, "The Cunning Man" (Viking, 1995), made the best-seller lists this year.
It is a chronicle of personal and social change in Toronto as reflected in the life of a doctor whose brilliant diagnostic skills rest on shamanism and Platonism as well as scientific medicine.


U.S. Settlement Reached on STP Oil Ads
The STP Corporation and its parent company, the First Brands Corporation, have agreed to pay $888,000 to settle Federal Trade Commission charges of false  advertising for STP motor oil, the commission said last week.
In radio, television and print ads, STP said that its XEP2 motor oil additive would protect engines from wear at start-up and that regular motor oil would not, according to the F.T.C., which said the statements were false.


For Buoyed Clinton, Down to Business
The President who came to Europe to talk about peace went to the Prado on Saturday night to look at pictures of war.
Bill Clinton, who first toured the museum as an Oxford student, asked specifically to see a violent painting by Goya depicting a Frenchman shooting a Spaniard in an uprising against Napoleon.
He also sat on a bench for a moment  to gaze at an outsized Titian canvas of a Spanish emperor going to battle.


E.P.A. Helping Cities to Revive Industrial Sites
With the support of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, state legislators, local officials and real estate developers in scores of cities have begun to redevelop thousands of acres of urban industrial land that was long neglected because of concerns over legal liability for pollution and contamination.
These so-called brownfields, which are concentrated in the Northeast and the  Midwest, have lingered as trash-strewn eyesores while businesses have shifted their operations to pristine locations in the suburbs and the countryside.


Jurgen Wattenberg, 94, P.O.W. Who Escaped
Jurgen Wattenberg, a U-boat commander who engineered the largest and most spectacular escape from a prisoner-of-war camp in the United States in World War II, died on Nov. 27 at a nursing home in Hamburg, Germany.
He was 94.
On the night of Dec. 23, 1944, 25 German prisoners made their way through a makeshift tunnel from the Navy's Papago Park prison in Scottsdale, Ariz., and captured the grudging imagination of the American public.


Simpson Joins Ranks of Pragmatists Leaving Senate
Senator Alan K. Simpson, the blunt Wyoming Republican, announced on Saturday  night that he would not run again, tying a 100-year-old record for voluntary retirements that is stripping the Senate of experienced lawmakers comfortable with compromise when it requires reaching across party lines.
Mr.
Simpson's retirement is the 12th among Senators up for re-election next year, the most since 1896, when state legislatures chose senators.
Since 1913, when senators were first directly elected, the most voluntary retirements came in 1978, when Mr.
Simpson and five more of this year's retirees won open seats.


Forbes the Candidate: Different Hat, Same Message
When Malcolm S. Forbes Jr., the chief executive of Forbes Inc. and the editor in chief of Forbes magazine, announced on Sept. 22 that he would seek the Republican nomination for President, relatively few people had heard of the self-effacing and somewhat shy 48-year-old candidate.
Mr.
Forbes, known as Steve, had never been elected to office, though he had gained attention as the architect of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's tax-cutting program in New Jersey.
And for years, as a rising executive in the family publishing business, he was overshadowed by his flamboyant, motorcycle-riding father, Malcolm, who died in 1990.


Gay Men Are Denied A Marriage License
After a seven-month courtship with the notion of granting a marriage license  to two gay men, city officials in Ithaca, N.Y., have decided they are not yet ready to take the plunge.
"I regret that the city cannot issue a marriage license to a same-sex couple  at this time," Mayor Benjamin Nichols said in a statement.


Return of N.B.A. Refs Hinges on Vote Today
The National Basketball Association referees, locked out since early October, could be on the verge of returning to work.
The referees union will meet today in Chicago, where the members are expected to vote on the league's latest contract offer.
If the offer is approved, the referees could return as early as next week.


Death and Deficiency in Kidney Treatment
Two hours into the medical treatment that was cleansing her blood, Sue Ellen  Coffin screamed, pulled at her hair and vomited.
Pandemonium spread at the Albuquerque Kidney Center as Mrs.
Coffin's screams  were followed by those of five other people in intense, unexpected pain.
The nurses on duty shut off the kidney dialysis machines hooked up to the six people.
Most of the patients recovered.
But Mrs.
Coffin died within six hours.


Redskins Sign Stadium Deal
The Washington Redskins have signed a deal to build a 78,600-seat stadium in  suburban Maryland.
The Washington Post reported Monday that the team owner, Jack Kent Cooke, thwarted in efforts to move to Alexandria, Va., and Anne Arundel County, Md., has signed an agreement with Prince George's County Executive Wayne Curry and Maryland Gov.
Parris Glendening.
The stadium is to be built on a 300-acre tract  known as the Wilson Farm about five miles from R.F.K.
Stadium, the team's home since 1961.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:
MONDAY


Redskins Pull Off Sweep of Dallas
Redskins 24, Cowboys 17


Widow of Ray Robinson
Mildred (Millie) Robinson, widow of the boxer Sugar Ray Robinson and executive director of the Sugar Ray Robinson Youth Foundation, has died.
She was 77.
Mrs.
Robinson died of cancer Tuesday at Cedars-Sinai Hospital, the foundation's executive secretary, Thelma Miles Smith, said today.


The WPP Group sets up an award to honor original thinking in the marketing-services field.
MENTION the name Atticus and most people think of Atticus Finch, the pious hero of "To Kill a Mockingbird." Few would recall Atticus, Titus Pomponius, who  lived in Athens and Rome in the century before Jesus and, according to the Encyclopaedia Britannica, "devoted himself to study and business interests."
It is that Atticus whose moniker the WPP Group, the world's largest agency company, is borrowing for an annual awards program meant to honor "original published thinking" among employees around the world.
The work being honored must demonstrate "intellectual curiosity and commercial flair" in marketing-services fields like advertising, research and sales promotion.


Street Wins 6th in a Row
Picabo Street proved today that her domination of the women's World Cup downhill competition last season was no aberration.
Street won the first downhill event of this season -- and her sixth race in a row -- with a time of 1 minute 26.61 seconds.
Only the 11-race streak of Annemarie Moeser-Proell from 1972 to 1974 is longer.


Editorial Notebook;Asia's Lost World
Alas, atlases no longer contain blank spaces where lost worlds may yet lurk.
But there are gray patches, notably in inner Asia, which have long been closed to visitors.
High on this list is what is grandly called the Xinjiang-Uighur Autonomous Region in western China, a huge arid area roughly the size of Alaska, covering 600,000 square miles.


Computer Theory as Social Science;Innovative N.Y.U. Program Stresses Content and Use in the Real World
Wedged into a tiny control room at New York University, hair flying and arms  waving above their heads, a group of graduate students danced wildly in the glow of television monitors and to the cacophonous sounds of canned music, scratchy broadcast conversations, touch-tone phone beeps and the screech of feedback.
"You got it!" Prof.
Nick West shouted into a microphone.
"Experimental television, and we're putting the 'mental' in it!"


Getting All the Rhythms Down (and on Paper)
If anything showed how far the modern rhythm section has advanced in jazz during the last 15 years, Dave Douglas's show at the Brooklyn Academy of Music did.
Mr.
Douglas, a virtuoso trumpeter, led a sextet on Friday night with Uri Caine on piano, James Genus on bass and Bill Stewart on drums, and the three of  them changed meters, tempos, rhythms and textures with the sort of ease that would have been impossible a generation ago.
Mr.
Douglas, who was appearing as part of the Alternative Jazz Festival, is a virtuoso small-group arranger as well, and he and the band -- which included Chris Speed on clarinet and tenor saxophone and Josh Roseman on trombone -- used written interludes and riffs.
He likes pellucid colors for his horn writing, and the music had an airy quality to it, solemn at some moments and vibrant at others.
Mr.
Douglas set up his compositions precisely, writing contexts for improvisation that the soloist adhered to.
Though the music didn't sound Ellingtonian, it was similar to the small group sessions Ellington led to highlight his improvisers.


Horror vs. Hindsight: A War of TV Images
In television shorthand, the debate over sending troops to Bosnia is often framed by two sets of images.
On one side are the bombings of civilians, the children in hospital beds, the refugees.
On the other side are the body bags of  Americans from Vietnam, Lebanon, Somalia.
But how much do these images explain about Americans' feelings or lack of them, much less what Bosnia portends for the United States role as solitary global superpower?
Jim Lehrer's 15-minute interview on Thursday evening with three historians was more illuminating about  that than the week's worth of image-mongering.
The images are being evoked as part of a contest for who can wrench the most  hearts.
In his talk from the Oval Office last week, President Clinton spoke of the bombings that "turned playgrounds into killing fields" being "seared into our minds."


Louise W. Kahn, 85, Benefactor of Arts
Louise Wolff Kahn, a patron of the arts and education in Dallas and elsewhere, died on Monday in the Presbyterian Hospital of Dallas.
She was 85.
She had lived in Dallas since 1937, but also kept a home in Manhattan, where she was born.
She graduated from Smith College, then pursued a career in advertising, retailing and interior design in New York before moving to Dallas.
There, she worked at Neiman Marcus as the personal secretary to its president, Stanley Marcus, a boyhood friend of her husband-to-be, Edmund J. Kahn, who made a fortune in real estate, cotton and oil.


On Solving Problems, Musically, That Is
Wayne Shorter didn't choose an easy path for his first New York concert in five years on Friday night at Town Hall.
His original fans would have been overjoyed if he had performed with an acoustic jazz quintet, like the lineups of the Jazz Messengers and the Miles Davis groups that revealed him as one of the most innovative composers and striking improvisers of the 1960's.
More recent fans would have enjoyed tuneful, buoyant pop-jazz like his work with Weather Report in the 1970's.
But his current septet -- with drums, percussion, electric bass, electric guitar and two keyboard setups joining Mr.
Shorter's tenor and soprano saxophones -- pursues something that has remained constant through his career: a determination to come up with uncommon structures.
At his concert, musical problem-solving took precedence over expressiveness.


New Effort by U.S. and Vietnam to Return Boat People Home
Seeking to end a long epilogue of the Vietnam War, Washington is working quietly with Hanoi to create a program that would persuade the remaining 40,000  Vietnamese boat people in Southeast Asian refugee camps to return home.
The initiative is being undertaken by the National Security Council and the Departments of State and Justice in hopes of avoiding more public debate and violent protests in the camps by detainees who do not want to return to Vietnam.


Thermo Reports On Deal Terms
The Thermo Electron Corporation said that two of its subsidiaries had purchased Analytical Technology Inc. in transactions totaling $94.9 million.
The agreement on the deal was announced in July, but terms were not disclosed until Friday.


Site on the Web For Channel 13 Starting Today
Jazz fans who did not have time to watch "Wynton Marsalis on Music," a four-part series on public television, may want to chat with Mr.
Marsalis.
Art lovers unsure what to make of "outsider art" may like to look at it before deciding to traipse to a gallery.
Teachers lucky enough to have computers may need advice on how to use interactive media in their classrooms.
People with access to the Internet's World Wide Web can find such resources on a Web site being officially introduced today by Thirteen/ WNET, New York's public television station.


This Time, Can Barry Diller Avoid Having Buyer's Regret?
At Home Shopping Network Inc.'s headquarters here, the company's new chairman, Barry Diller, peppered a group of veteran and newly appointed corporate executives with questions today.
"What's the status of H.S.N.'s back-order business?" Mr.
Diller wanted to know.
"What's behind the concept of celebrity marketing at H.S.N.? Could management vacate the corporate headquarters and rent that space out?"


Insurance Capital' Hartford Finds Itself Without Its Net
A decade ago, the idea that Aetna Life and Casualty Company would sell the heart of its business, its casualty and property divisions, would have been unthinkable.
"To put it delicately," said Paul Shipman, an aide to Hartford's Mayor, Michael P. Peters, "people would have thought you were crazy."


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week:
Monday


Robertson Davies, 82, Dies, Chronicler of Moral Battles
Robertson Davies, the novelist, journalist and educator who became one of the first Canadian literary figures to gain an international following, died on Saturday at a hospital in Orangeville, Ontario, 50 miles northwest of Toronto.
He was 82.
The cause was a stroke, said his secretary, Moira Whalon.
Mr.
Davies, who lived in Toronto but had a home in Caledon East, near Orangeville, had entered the hospital last Tuesday, said a supervisor at the hospital where he died, the  Dufferin-Caledon Health Care Corporation.


Stocks Rise in Japan
Stocks traded slightly higher here today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues closed up 64.27 points, or a third of 1 percent, at 18,897.37.
Earlier in the session, the Nikkei surpassed 19,000 points for the first time since Jan. 20 before retreating.
On Friday, the Nikkei rose 88.68 points, or roughly half a percent.


Los Angeles Considers Potbellied Pig as Pet
A proposed change in zoning laws here would allow potbellied pigs to be licensed like other pets, but city planning officials contend that the law should not be changed because the pigs are a passing fad.
Under current law, city residents who want to keep potbellied pigs must go through a lengthy and expensive zoning variance process.
The proposed change, advocated by pig owners, would put the pigs in the same category as dogs and other more common pets, but the city Planning Department is objecting.


Ithaca Denies Gay Men a Marriage License
After a seven-month courtship with the notion of granting a marriage license  to two gay men, city officials in Ithaca, N.Y., have decided they are not yet ready to take the plunge.
"I regret that the city cannot issue a marriage license to a same-sex couple  at this time," Mayor Benjamin Nichols said in a statement.
"Given a choice, we would like to do so. The real answer to the question of adoption and other privileges and responsibilities for same-sex couples is to give them the fundamental right of marriage."


8th Argentine Arrested In Jewish Center Bombing
An eighth army officer was arrested today in connection with the car bombing  last year of a Jewish cultural center, the main prosecutor in the case said.
The arrest of Sgt.
Luis Alberto Ferreyra came after a judge investigating the bombing authorized raids at the Campo de Mayo army base outside Buenos Aires, said the prosecutor, Eammon Mullen.


Whitehall-Robins Expands Lowe Ties
The Whitehall-Robins Healthcare division of the American Home Products Corporation has further expanded its relationship with Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS in New York by naming that agency to handle advertising for Clear Blue Easy and Clear Plan Easy pregnancy and ovulation tests, which had been at the New York office of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. for the last seven years.
The combined billings were estimated at $3 million to $5 million.
Thomas Cavanagh, a vice president at American Home in Madison, N.J., and Richard McGowan, a spokesman for Y.&amp; R., said on Friday that the company and agency had agreed to part company on the brands.
Y.&amp; R. New York continues to handle other Whitehall-Robins brands like Advil pain reliever.
Lowe, which is owned by the Interpublic Group of Companies, handles additional Whitehall-Robins brands like Robitussin cough products and on Thursday was awarded the Dristan line of decongestants that was previously handled by McCann-Erickson New York, also owned by Interpublic.


Nelson Butters, 58, Memory Researcher
Nelson Butters, a professor of psychiatry at the University of California at  San Diego and an expert on memory and memory disorders, died on Nov. 18 at his home in San Diego.
He was 58.
Dr.
Butters died of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig's disease, his colleagues said.


Builders Prefer Old Ways To City's Gift of Autonomy
Faced with budget cuts, the Giuliani administration offered the New York City Department of Buildings a gift that many officials believed would not only please building contractors but also save the city money and vastly simplify the ordeal of applying for a building permit.
Starting a year ago, plumbers, architects and engineers were given "self-certification" authority.
Instead of waiting for city inspectors to visit  sites to certify work as safe and legal, the contractors could certify themselves by stating that their plans satisfied all city building codes.
That way, they could avoid days or weeks of bureaucratic review.
The sites would be spot-checked later.


When a Wealthy Guy Wants to Be President
To the Editor:
Malcolm S. Forbes Jr. (front page, Nov. 25) is called Steve not to "portray himself as a commoner" but because his dad was Malcolm, and Stevenson is Mr.
Forbes's middle name.
Whose idea is it that pronouncing "tomato" one way indicates patrician roots?


Emotions Run High as U.S. Beats Russia in Davis Cup


Educational Workfare Weighed
The administration of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman is considering a plan to require pregnant teen-agers and teen-age mothers to remain in high school or enroll in night school to continue receiving welfare benefits, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
Since 1992, the state's Family Development Program has required welfare recipients to enroll in job-training or education programs or risk losing part of their monthly welfare grant.
But current law allows mothers  on welfare to avoid participating until their youngest child is 2.


Dinesh Singh, Indian Cabinet Minister, 70
Dinesh Singh, a former Foreign Minister, died on Thursday after a long illness, his family said.
He was 70.
Mr.
Singh, who had been a member of Parliament for 38 years, became Foreign Minister in 1993.
He was made a Minister Without Portfolio this year after failing health made active duty too difficult.


100 Clubs in Holiday Spirit
One hundred garden clubs from around New Jersey are helping the statehouse get into a holiday mood.
Decorations from club members are being used to trim a  20-foot pine tree in Governor Whitman's outer office, which will be lit Dec. 11, a spokeswoman for the Governor said.
The garden clubs are also providing decorations for Drumthwacket, the Governor's mansion in Princeton.
TERRY PRISTIN


No Headline
It reaches the point where your conscience won't allow you to do nothing.
At  night sometimes, I would sit and think of how it must be for some of these poor  Bosnian mothers, trapped in some darkened hovel, waiting for children to come home, knowing they might never come home. -- MARY HOLLANDER, of Manchester, Mo.  [A10:2.]


G.M. Treasurer Appointed As ITT Industries Executive
The ITT Corporation yesterday named Heidi Kunz, the treasurer of the General  Motors Corporation and its highest-ranking woman executive, to be the chief financial officer of ITT Industries, one of the three companies to be formed out of ITT..
Ms.
Kunz, who is 41, will manage the finances of ITT's sprawling automotive,  military, electronics and fluid-technology businesses, which would make up ITT Industries.


Along a Missouri Highway, Worries and a Sense of Duty to Help Bosnians
The notion of sending American troops to risk their lives in Bosnia initially struck Scott Nichols, a 26-year-old trucker in this rough-hewn Ozarks town, as downright foolish.
Mr.
Nichols, browsing in a gun shop for something to hunt rabbits and squirrels with, ticked off the reasons he thought that President Clinton was wrong to commit 20,000 troops to the peacekeeping effort: the lack of a clear national interest in the Balkans, the odds against quelling deep-rooted hostilities, the danger to American forces if guerrilla-style fighting erupts.


Equity Issues To Be Offered During Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week: Access Health Inc., Rancho Cordova, Calif., 2.5 million shares.
Merrill Lynch &amp;  Co.
Advanced Lighting Technologies Inc., Solon, Ohio, an initial public offering  of 2.9 million shares.
Prudential Securities Inc.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
Andalusian Tradition, Via Algeria Mohamed Khaznadji Symphony Space


Bronx Group Signs Recycling Company for Mill Project
After a court battle stalled its plans for a year, a group seeking to have a  paper recycling mill built in the South Bronx has taken the first step toward construction of the $400 million operation at the old Harlem River Rail Yard, officials said last week.
The group, the Bronx Community Paper Company, has signed an agreement with the Prins Recycling Corporation of Fort Lee, N.J., to build and operate a $25 million wastepaper sorting plant on a 19-acre tract just north of Randalls Island, said Allen Hershkowitz, a senior scientist at the Natural Resources Defense Council, the environmental group that has been seeking developers for the project.


Maine Guarantee Sought
J.
P.
Bolduc, who was ousted as chief executive at W. R. Grace &amp; Company this year, sought state backing on Friday in his bid to buy a Maine rope manufacturer.
Mr.
Bolduc has signed a letter of intent to buy Andrew Crowe &amp; Sons Inc. of Warren, Me., which sells $35 million in products a year and makes more than 1,000 kinds of rope and twine.
The Finance Authority of Maine has been asked to provide $2.3 million in loan guarantees as part of an $11.5 million bank financing package for the deal.
The state agency referred the request to a subcommittee that will decide on the guarantee by Dec. 15.


Infomercial Channel To Start on Jan. 1
The Consumer Resource Network, a cable television channel for infomercials, said it planned to begin operations on Jan. 1 after teaming up with the Product  Information Network to expand to six million homes nationwide.
The terms of the  agreement were not disclosed.
As part of the alliance, Product Information -- a joint venture of Jones International Ltd. and Cox Communications, a unit of Cox Enterprises -- will initially make Consumer Resource available for six hours a day to viewers in large television markets including Chicago, Cleveland, Los Angeles and Washington.
Joseph O'Donnell, a former chairman at the J. Walter Thompson unit of the WPP Group, is chairman and chief executive of Consumer Research in Manchester, Vt.


Rejecting Second Fiddle in Paris Opera
Given the strikes, power struggles and bad press tearing at the newly inaugurated Bastille Opera in the early 1990's, the smaller Theatre du Chatelet  beside the Seine would have looked good if it had simply put on operas regularly, without fuss or disruptions.
But if it had done no more, it would always have remained Paris's second opera house.
Instead, the theater's young director, Stephane Lissner, decided to aim higher, programming rarely heard operas and neglected composers, recruiting innovative stage directors and inviting top orchestras to perform here.
And the  strategy worked.
Today, with a new management team at last bringing order to the Bastille, the Chatelet need not fear being overshadowed.
It has secured its own  niche of excellence.


Myths, Rituals and Hip-Hop in an Evening of Movement and Theater
The program presented by the Washington Square Dance Company on Thursday night at the Frederick Loewe Theater at New York University was almost too much  of a good thing.
The dancers, undergraduate and graduate students in the university's dance education department, were good movers and persuasive actors.
The pieces they performed were enjoyably theatrical.
But nine dances did make for a long evening.
Maria Davidson's "Turning Yello," danced to music by Yello, was an amusing hip-hop romp for nine dancers, made even more amusing by the fact that the cast  was white with several Asian performers.
The dancers were as engagingly believable in the closing "Praises," an exultant African-flavored ritual dance by Deloris Lemons-Sampson performed to percussion music played live.
Hope Lynn Burrows created the handsome native costumes.


Ex-Seoul President Now Facing Judgment of Democracy
Nearly 16 years after he seized power in a military coup, Chun Doo Hwan today was ushered into one of the same prisons he once used to banish pro-democracy campaigners.
Mr.
Chun, a former general who ruled South Korea as President from 1980 to 1988, was arrested for staging the coup in which he gained power in December 1979.
His trial, which will resonate through many countries stepping from dictatorship to democracy, is also expected to include murder charges for the massacre of pro-democracy protesters in the city of Kwangju in 1980.


America West's Layoffs
America West Airlines began notifying workers last week that it planned to lay off 500 of them, including half of its mechanics.
The airline also announced that it would have major aircraft maintenance performed by a contractor that is  owned by the B. F. Goodrich Company.


The Wee Problems Of the Seriously Rich In the Frenzied 20's
That sound you hear this morning is one of relief.
The Circle in the Square could be on its way to recouping some of its lost reputation with its youthful,  vigorous, good-looking revival of "Holiday," the nearly 70-year-old Philip Barry comedy of manners that opened last night.
You're only partly right if you think that the play, which is about the tiny  problems of the seriously rich, would appear to be arcane in 1995.
In fact, time gives this comedy a rather darker edge than it must have possessed originally.
On Oct. 28, 1929, Black Friday, just 11 months after the opening of the original production here, the stock market crashed.The Depression that followed was to change forever the lives of people like the Setons, the family Barry was writing about with such airy confidence in 1928.


Ciudad Juarez Journal;At U.S. Door, Huddled Masses Yearn for Better Pay
Sometimes Ana Serratos pauses outside a McDonald's restaurant here, but she resists the temptation to stop in.
Fast food is way beyond her means.
A Big Mac, medium Coke and fries cost $3.05, and for Ms.
Serratos, who earns  35 cents an hour wrapping tape around bundles of electrical wires in one of Juarez's assembly plants, that is a full day's wages.


CHRONICLE
KELY NASCIMENTO, a daughter of Pele, the Brazilian soccer superstar, is also  intent on involving her family in the theater.
Ms.
Nascimento is a founder and the creative director of the Walkabout Theater Company, whose second production, "Comfort &amp; Joy," opened last week at the Westbeth Theater Center in lower Manhattan.
She plays four of the 17 characters in the play by Jeffrey Hatcher.


Raiders Become Victims Again Against That Old Chiefs Magic
It was the Raiders' turn this time.
Enough.
Enough of this Kansas City hex, this voodoo thing, this string of five straight victories, and 11 of the past 12 victories for the Chiefs in this series.
And darn it if the Raiders did not quickly turn it around, scoring 61 seconds into today's game at the Coliseum.
It happened on a Chiefs mistake, the kind the Raiders usually make in this matchup.
Cornerback Terry McDaniel, on the third play of the game, took an interception 42 yards into the end zone and just like  that the Raiders led by 7-0.


Detroit's bitter newspaper strike is creating some unlikely rivalries -- and bedfellows.
IN addition to causing considerable financial, psychological and even physical pain, the 18-week-old strike against the two daily newspapers here has  yielded more than a little irony and just plain weirdness.
One of the dailies, for example, has hired a labor reporter to replace a striking journalist.
Among the obstacles he faces is that the unions in this labor town -- which is to say, the subjects of his beat -- will not speak to reporters who have crossed the picket lines at either paper, except to snarl at  them.


Rape Trial in Okinawa Reopens for 3 G.I.'s
Three American servicemen accused of raping a 12-year-old girl return to court on Monday in a case that has enraged Japan and threatens the military alliance between the United States and Japan.
The rape in September set off huge anti-military rallies on Okinawa, which is host to about 27,000 of the more than 45,000 American troops stationed in Japan.


Nets Thinking Positive and Winning
Smiles were plentiful in the Nets' locker room following Saturday night's 79-78 victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers.
General Manager Willis Reed, who has been vilified for the Derrick Coleman trade, was grinning ear to ear while shaking hands with the Nets' president, Michael Rowe, who was equally as pleased.
Coach Butch Beard was singing the praises of his team, which had just rallied from a 15-point deficit to win its third straight game and second since Coleman  was traded to Philadelphia on Thursday night.
With just eight available players  on Saturday after Armon Gilliam was scratched with a sprained ankle, the Nets extended their record at Byrne Meadowlands Arena to 6-0 and made Coleman's departure seem like old news.


Do Knicks Need Another Scrapper?
Three hours before the Knick game with Washington last night, Roy Jones Jr. practiced an assortment of jump shots and drives on the Garden floor.
Jones drilled an occasional 3-pointer while an HBO crew captured the action to promote Jones's Jan. 12 fight at the Garden against Merqui Sosa of Brooklyn.


HFS Joins Potamkin in Discount Car Deal
HFS Inc., the hotel and real estate brokerage franchiser, now sees itself becoming a big seller of automobiles.
HFS, based in Parsippany, said it had joined with Potamkin Fleet Sales to sell discounted cars to HFS franchisees.


INSIDE
Senate Stage: Exit Center


Kennedy Center Honors Presented


How We Can Stem Movie-Related Violence
To the Editor:
It cannot be denied that the horrendous episode in a New York City subway station involving a clerk who was critically injured when criminals set his token booth on fire was directly related to violence depicted in the movie "The  Money Train." We wonder whether in hindsight you would have given the film a favorable review (Arts pages, Nov. 22).


Revival Gains Without the Trimmings
There was something appealingly quixotic about Robert Wilson's plan to stage  a 12-hour, multinational work at the Olympics in 1984.
Inspired by Matthew Brady's Civil War photography but intent on taking a grander historical view, Mr.
Wilson sketched out "The Civil Wars: A Tree Is Best Measured When It Is Down" and found collaborators in several countries.
Each was to complete an act  and take it to Los Angeles, where the parts would be presented together as a monumental statement about war and peace, or whatever else one might glean from  Mr.
Wilson's characteristic abstractions.
Money problems doomed the full-scale production, but the components have taken on lives of their own.
Philip Glass's contribution -- the final act, called "The Rome Section" after its city of origin -- had a staged premiere in 1986 at the Brooklyn Academy of Music and was revived on Sunday at Carnegie Hall for a concert performance by the American Composers Orchestra and the Morgan State University Choir.


PRAXAIR EXTENDS CASH TENDER OFFER FOR CBI
Praxair Inc. said yesterday that it would extend for 11 days its $32-a-share  cash tender offer for the stock of CBI Industries, based in Oak Brook, Ill.
Praxair's offer would have expired at midnight yesterday, but will now run until at least Dec. 15.
CBI previously rejected Praxair's $1.5 billion bid and has held talks with other potential suitors.
Praxair, based in Danbury, Conn., said  holders of 1.6 million of CBI's 38 million shares outstanding had accepted its offer as of Friday.
Praxair and CBI are both industrial gases companies.


ABC Reported To Have Plans For Cable News
ABC is expected to announce plans today to begin a 24-hour all news cable service to compete with CNN, executives familiar with the decision said last night.
Robert A. Iger, the president of Capital Cities/ABC, is expected to make the  formal announcement of the channel at a news conference today.
ABC executives declined to comment on the announcement last night.


FREEMAN SPOGLI LEADS INVESTORS BUYING PANTRY
An investment group led by Freeman Spogli &amp; Company, a buyout firm, said yesterday that it had agreed to buy Pantry Inc., a closely held convenience-store chain based in Sanford, N.C.
Terms were not disclosed.
Pantry  operates 400 stores in the Southeast with annual revenue of $375 million.
Freeman Spogli would own 75 percent of the chain after the purchase is completed.
The other members of investment group are Chase Manhattan Capital, a unit of the Chase Manahattan Corporation, and Pantry management, who would have 18 percent and 7 percent stakes, respectively, after the transaction.


James Colgate Cleveland, 75, Ex-Congressman
Former Representative James Colgate Cleveland, a nine-term Republican Congressman from New Hampshire, a lawyer and a conservationist, died on Sunday in New London, N.H.
He was 75 and lived in New London.
The cause was complications from a stroke, said his administrative assistant, William R. Joslin.
He said Mr.
Cleveland continued to practice law until his hospitalization a few weeks ago.


Whitewater Witness Files Ethics Charge
A former Government investigator filed an ethics complaint today saying that  Senator Paul Sarbanes of Maryland and a Democratic lawyer on the Senate Whitewater committee invaded her privacy by lifting from a computer disk her highly critical description of President Clinton.
The former investigator, Jean Lewis, said Mr.
Sarbanes, a Democrat, and the lawyer, Richard Ben-Veniste, retrieved a letter she had deleted from her computer disk before turning it over to the Senate Whitewater Committee.


Biogen Shares Surge as Panel Clears New Drug
Shares of Biogen Inc. surged more than 12 percent yesterday after an advisory panel to the Food and Drug Administration recommended that the company's drug Avonex be approved for the treatment of multiple sclerosis.
The panel said that Avonex, the first drug proven to slow the progression of  multiple sclerosis, was a safe and effective treatment.


New Japanese Indexes
The Frank Russell Company and the Nomura Research Institute Ltd., a unit of the Nomura Securities Company of Japan, have created a series of 15 indexes to track the Japanese stock market, starting in the first quarter of 1996.
Frank Russell, the United States concern that produces the Russell 1000, Russell 2000  and Russell 3000 stock indexes, said yesterday that the new indexes included a broad index, the Russell/NRI Total Market Index, which would track the entire Japanese equity market.


Patterns
New Line to Go With Shoes


Orange County Bankruptcy: The Poor Feel the Most Pain
One year after startling America by declaring its improbable bankruptcy, Orange County is stumbling through a fiscal recovery that has generally placated its affluent middle class and faraway Wall Street but has shifted much of the burden to the county's growing numbers of poor.
The initially frightening predictions of a financial calamity that would spread across the land have proved overblown.
Instead, Orange County has passed  through phases of shock and defiance and has entered a comfort zone that many here say is part denial, part business as usual and part pushing the costs of the crisis on to those who have the least voice in civic affairs.


As Strike Intensifies, French Government Stands Firm
The 11-day-old strike over social service cuts that has paralyzed France's capital intensified today as air transport workers, telephone and public finance employees and truck drivers prepared to join in the protests while the Government vowed it would not retreat from its austerity plans.
After an emergency meeting of the Cabinet tonight, a Government spokesman, Alain Lamassoure, told reporters the Government was ready for a discussion with  the striking unions.
But he reiterated the Government's determination to stand by its plans to overhaul welfare benefits for public-sector employees to bring down a $50 billion deficit in the social security system.


N.B.A. Referees Accept Contract
By a one-vote margin, 27-26, National Basketball Association referees voted at a meeting in Chicago yesterday to accept the league's contract offer, and they are expected to go back to work next week.
The agreement ends a dispute in which the league, to the dismay of fans, players and coaches, locked out the regular officials and used replacement referees, who started in the preseason and worked into the regular season.


Quick, Watson! The Barometer! Of Microclimates and Crimes
WEATHER or not is the question that Dr.
Mark D. Shulman asks himself whenever a famous case comes to trial.
As a forensic meteorologist, he is less concerned with who done it than with  how the weather might have affected critical pieces of evidence or testimony.
Was it sunny, cloudy, raining, dry, hot or cold?
Was the moon shining or the wind blowing, and if so, in which direction?
If a storm was involved, was it a freak occurrence or one that people should have been prepared for?


Deadly Virus Spreads From Horses to Men in Australia
Troy Rail, 24, an Australian jockey, was born to race.
His father, Vic Rail,  was a renowned horse trainer along Australia's sun-soaked Gold Coast, where thoroughbred racing is a sporting obsession second only to surfing.
Despite their shared mastery of horse care, neither father nor son could figure out why the horses in the family's stables outside Brisbane were beginning to die.


World News Briefs;Confession in Japan Was Forced, Marine Says
An American serviceman accused of raping a 12-year-old girl testified today that American investigators dragged him out of bed before dawn and forced him to confess.


Man Guilty Of Killing Wife in Court
A former New York State parole officer was convicted of manslaughter yesterday for shooting his estranged wife to death as they waited in Family Court in Brooklyn for a hearing on custody and child support issues.
A jury in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn found that the former officer, Max  P. Almonor, intentionally killed his wife, Danielle, a Federal parole officer, when his anger over their collapsed marriage exploded into violence in a court waiting room nearly three years ago.


Softkey Now Offers Cash in Takeover Bid
Softkey International Inc. shifted its hostile bid for the Learning Company today to a cash offer of $65 a share, or about $606 million.
Softkey had previously offered a combination of cash and shares, which had declined in value as Softkey shares fell by 24 percent in the last few weeks.
The Learning Company, based in Fremont, Calif., had previously rejected the Softkey offer and agreed to merge with Broderbund Software Inc. of Novato, Calif., in a stock swap worth more than $530 million.
Learning Company officials said today that they were reviewing the new offer and could not comment.
Broderbund officials said they would not revise their offer, which was sweetened last month.
They said that they still expected to prevail when Learning Company  shareholders vote next Monday.


Owners Propose Changes in Arbitration
Baseball's club owners, contrary to an earlier stance, are willing to retain  salary arbitration without reducing the number of eligible players, but that doesn't mean they want to leave the system unaltered.
Under the proposal the clubs' negotiators gave to the players Nov. 15, the owners would make two significant changes in the criteria to be used by arbitrators in determining salaries of players who reach the hearing stage.
The  changes would have an impact not only on arbitrator-determined salaries but also on salaries negotiated between players and clubs prior to hearings.


Signposts to Nowhere on Highway to Utopia
HOW will students be effected by the new technologies?" asks a recent CD-ROM  concerned with the future of computers and communications. The answer given, unfortunately, is, "Every student will have more opportunity than the most privileged student had just a decade ago," not, "They will rely too heavily on spelling checkers."
Welcome to The Road Ahead, a CD-ROM bound into the back of the new book of the same name written by Bill Gates, chairman of the Microsoft Corporation, with Nathan Myhrvold, a Microsoft executive, and Peter Rinearson, a journalist and software entrepreneur.
The disk will not run on Macintoshes.
On my machine, running it with Windows 95 sometimes produced error messages and program crashes.
When it did run properly, it started with the friendly message "Installing temporary files," followed by "Opening C:book.sym" and "Installing global filters." This is all information of a sort, but it is not exactly what you would expect from an industry titan hawking the glories of a computer on every desk and in every home.


Winnipeg Jets Migrating South to Phoenix
The Winnipeg Jets have found a new home in Phoenix and intend to play there next season.
"It's not a done deal yet, but the announcement today in St. Paul makes it clear where we're headed," said Jerry Colangelo, the executive who stands to add the hockey team to his basketball Suns and baseball Diamondbacks.


Welsh Water to Buy South Wales Electricity
In yet another British electric utility takeover, Welsh Water P.L.C. won an agreement yesterday to buy South Wales Electricity P.L.C. in a cash and stock deal worth L872 million ($1.31 billion).
Welsh Water will eliminate an unspecified number of jobs as it combines operations in billing, computer work and transportation.
Welsh Water said its offer would allow South Wales Electricity shareholders  to retain their stake in the National Grid Group, the electricity transmission system that is being sold to public investors next week.
(AP)


No Headline
I suspect that five years from now this will be just a blip in financial history.
And believe me, this will happen all over again somewhere.
Nothing really has been learned."
ZANE MANN, municipal bond expert, on the bankruptcy  of Orange County, Calif. [D8:1.]


Depressed Need More Than Talk or Drugs
To the Editor:
I was surprised by what your Nov. 29 Health page article on the dispute between psychologists and psychiatrists over the relative merits of talk therapy and antidepressants left out.
The tragedy is that they seem to be of equally little value in helping people who are depressed.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a decision by officials in Ithaca, N.Y., against granting marriage licenses to same-sex couples reversed the identities of the two people shown.
Phillip G. Storrs was at the left; his partner, Toshav  Storrs, was at the right.


Woman's Body Is Found
The body of a 61-year-old Palisades Park woman who the police suspect was murdered by her daughter's boyfriend was found stuffed in a suitcase, officials  said yesterday.
The woman, Kyu Su Chun, had been reported missing on Nov. 27, and the boyfriend, Do Young Yoo, 32, was arrested in Dorchester, Mass., the next day, said Charles R. Buckley, the Acting Prosecutor for Bergen County.


Inching Toward a Budget Deal
The White House and Republicans continue to bicker over the budget.
The two sides remain far apart.
The White House, though claiming to embrace the Republican goal of balancing the budget within seven years, attacks the Republican deficit-reduction bill for crippling Medicaid, food stamps and other  programs for the needy.
The Republican leaders accuse the White House of hypocrisy in cynically attacking the Republicans for their cuts while refusing to identify who would lose under White House plans.
The blame game eased a bit last weekend when Democrats and Republicans slipped back from rigid positions.
Leaders of both parties began to gravitate ever so slowly toward a compromise plan put forth by a coalition of moderate and conservative Democrats.


So Many Parties, So Little Time
The designer Kalinka began the week with the kind of problem that goes with having a drawer full of party invitations: which night should she wear her short see-through dress and which night the long see-through dress?
Which night the iridescent dress that she says "fits like a corset" and which the black velvet top and hip-hugger pants?
"Four nights, full makeup and lashes," said Kalinka, who R.S.V.P.'s to invitations that come with or without her last name, which is Chopin but which she hardly ever uses.
"There are parties every night in this town, but this is something new. People are going to be staggering by the end of the week."


World News Briefs;Chechnya Bomb Kills 11 At Russian Headquarters
A car bomb exploded today outside the Russian administration headquarters here, killing at least 11 people and wounding more than 60.
The bomb went off in downtown Grozny, the capital of the separatist Chechen region, shattering the headquarters building, the Itar-Tass news agency reported.


Hershey Raising Its Candy Prices
Hershey Chocolate U.S.A. said yesterday that it was raising the wholesale price of its standard and king-size Hershey candy bars by 11 percent, a move expected to lead to price increases at the candy counter.
A spokeswoman for the Hershey Foods Corporation, the parent of Hershey Chocolate, said that while the company does not set or regulate retail prices, based on past practices retailers would most likely raise prices by about 5 cents on a standard 1.55-ounce Hershey chocolate bar.


When Is 'Paper Money' Not Real Money?
To the Editor:
There you go again!
Five times you use the phrase "on paper" in discussing the fortune made by Steven P. Jobs from the marketing of stock in his new company, Pixar Animation Studios (front page, Nov. 30).
Of course it was "on paper."


Dole at Forefront of Trade Battle To Aid Donor's Banana Empire
Senator Bob Dole is a busy man these days.
He is running for President.
He is immersed in the arcane details of the budget battle, Bosnia policy and the future of Medicaid and Medicare.
But when it comes to introducing legislation, one subject has repeatedly turned up at the top of Mr.
Dole's agenda: bananas.
Several times in recent months Mr.
Dole has tried -- so far unsuccessfully -- to include in the budget bill amendments that would impose sharp trade sanctions on Costa Rica and Colombia unless they pull out of a trade deal involving banana exports with the European Union.
At least one major American food producer, Chiquita Brands International, says that deal is intended to reduce its share of the profitable banana market in Europe.


CHRONICLE
Can we talk . . . of love?
JOAN RIVERS, who does not immediately conjure up images of fiery passion, will read words like these tomorrow: "He grabbed her up into his arms before she was swept overboard and carried her down to their cabin. He tossed aside her sable, sat her down upon the bunk and began to unbutton her wedding gown."
Ms.
Rivers is one of five celebrities, including Lauren Hutton, Susan Lucci,  Marla Maples Trump and Gregory Harrison, who will read excerpts from romance stories in a program at St.
Peter's Lutheran Church on Lexington Avenue.
The evening will be sponsored by Literacy Partners, formerly Literacy Volunteers of  New York City, and Leisure Books, publisher of "Love's Legacy," the anthology from which the stories come.


A Jam Session for the Nativity, With Funny Hats and All
Jazz has a tradition, albeit a small one, of large-scale productions that feature a cast of thousands, some with funny hats.
"Bending Towards the Light: A Jazz Nativity," which was performed at Avery Fisher Hall on Saturday and Sunday, falls into this category.
On Sunday night, a chorus of 40 or so showed up, as did the New York Voices.
A set of stars appeared, including Lionel Hampton, Jon  Faddis, Al Grey, Jimmy Slyde and Tito Puente, as did fine, lesser-known musicians like the saxophonists Bob Kindred and Jon Gordon, the trombonist Benny Powell, the guitarist Gene Bertoncini, the trumpeter Lew Soloff and the singers  Jackie Cain, Roy Kral and Gail Wynters.
The show, written and conducted by Anne Phillips and presided over by Charles Kuralt, was built around the story of the birth of Jesus.
Mary, in the form of Gail Wynters, was attended by the shepherds, one of whom, Mr.
Gordon, happened to carry an alto saxophone.
Mr.
Kindred soloed gracefully against a small jazz group and the chorus sang, mostly Christmas music, including "The First Noel, "We Three Kings" and "Silent Night."


Snider Was Sentenced First. Who's Next?
With Duke Snider sentenced for tax fraud and Willie McCovey awaiting sentencing, a Federal prosecutor said yesterday that the investigation that led  to their guilty pleas had been largely finished.
But another official said it was still possible that other retired baseball stars could face charges in the inquiry.
"Aspects of the investigation are continuing, but it has been largely concluded," said Seth L. Marvin, an assistant United States attorney in Brooklyn, who is prosecuting the case.


End for Roy and Canadiens
A sobbing and apologetic Patrick Roy said today that there was no chance of reconciliation with the Montreal Canadiens.
"I really wanted it to end differently -- not in a stupid way like this," the 30-year-old goaltender said at a news conference at a suburban hotel.


America Realizes The Arts Attract Tourists
In the competition for tourist dollars, Jonesborough, Tenn., cannot play in the same league with Disneyworld or Yellowstone Park.
But in October, Jonesborough (population 3,400) drew about 8,600 visitors from all 50 states and several foreign countries to its annual storytelling festival, generating $5 million worth of economic activity in the region.
Last year, "The Age of Rubens" attracted 234,000 visitors to the Toledo Museum of Art in Toledo, Ohio, more than half of of them from out of state.
In August, traditionally considered a dead month for art exhibitions, the Delaware  Art Museum in Wilmington opened a two-month show of Pre-Raphaelite art and marketed it to summer vacationers.
It pulled an audience from the mid-Atlantic states that raised museum attendance by 434 percent over the same period in 1994.


Robinson Is Ousted As Oriole Executive
The Baltimore Orioles have refused to renew the contract of Frank Robinson, their assistant general manager, who spent 19 years in the organization as a player, manager and executive.
The decision to release Robinson was made a week after Pat Gillick was hired  as the Orioles' general manager.


Casino Revenue Jumps
The Casino Association of New Jersey had more good news to report yesterday.
The organization said revenues last month at the 12 casinos were up 8.5 percent  over November 1994 -- the 18th consecutive gain over the year before.
The gambling halls took in $299.7 million, 67 percent of it at slot machines, The Associated Press reported.


Whistling While He Works (By the Book)


800 MIllion Offer of Pechiney Shares Set
Defying dismal stock-market conditions and growing social unrest, the French  Government announced today that it would sell off the aluminum and packaging giant Pechiney on Tuesday in an $800 million stock offering.
The Government said the sale would be priced at 187 francs ($37.43) a share for both retail and institutional investors.
The price was at the bottom of the  range indicated by Prime Minister Alain Juppe's Government of 187 to 215 francs  ($37.40 to $43) a share when it started preplacement of the shares.


A Fidelity Fund Decides Not to Close to New Investors
When Fidelity Investments introduced its New Millennium fund in 1992, it said that the fund would employ a process called change analysis to uncover companies "likely to benefit from social and economic trends."
So far, it has done just that.
The love for Internet-related stocks shown by  the fund's manager, Neal P. Miller, has given New Millennium the best performance this year among all diversified Fidelity mutual funds, with a gain through last Friday of 51 percent.


From Rabin Granddaughter, Memoir of a 'Pillar of Fire'
Noa Ben-Artzi Philosof, the 18-year-old whose eulogy for her slain grandfather, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel, brought nations to tears last month, has sold the rights to a book -- to be part memoir, part plea for peace -- to Alfred A. Knopf for a hefty advance, according to publishing executives and a published report.
Jonathan Segal, a vice president and senior editor at Knopf, a division of Random House, said yesterday that he had been deeply moved by the eulogy, in which Miss Philosof described her grandfather as "the pillar of fire in front of the camp."


Heating Oil Increases in Price As a Large Cold System Arrives
Heating oil futures prices surged yesterday as a large cold weather system moved into the middle United States and threatened to increase demand for already tight heating oil supplies.
Natural gas futures also gained.
Crude and unleaded gasoline futures prices moved higher in sympathy and on lingering concern over the health of King Fahd of Saudi Arabia, Tony Lerner, an oil analyst at Chase Manhattan, said.


John H. Eisele, 104, Builder for 45 Years
John H. Eisele, who had a 45-year career as a builder in and around New York  City, died last Tuesday at his home in Bronxville, N.Y.
He was 104.
Mr.
Eisele went into the building trade in 1905 at 14 as a clerk for the construction of the New York Public Library.
He completed his education at night school and graduated from the Columbia University School of Engineering, where he later taught.


Cowboys' Haley Says He Will Retire
Charles Haley, the star defensive end of the Dallas Cowboys, said yesterday he is retiring immediately because he has a ruptured disk in his lower back, The Dallas Morning News reported today.
"My career is over. I'm through," Haley told the newspaper.


New President For Goodrich
The B. F. Goodrich Company said today that it had named the head of its aerospace unit, David L. Burner, president of the company and a director, putting him in line to succeed John D. Ong as chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Ong, 62, said he planned to retire as chairman and chief executive in the first half of 1997.
He has been chairman and chief executive since 1979.


Big Board Seat Price Up
A seat on the New York Stock Exchange was sold for $1.05 million, up $50,000  from the last sale on Oct. 19, the exchange said yesterday.
Seat prices are almost back to their record highs of eight years ago.
The peak price for a Big Board seat was $1.15 million, set on Sept. 21, 1987, one month before the stock  market crashed.
A seat confers membership on a securities or commodities exchange.
There are 1,366 seats on the New York Stock Exchange; the number has been constant since 1953.


Japanese Stocks Off a Bit
Japanese stocks edged down slightly today.
At the close of trading, the benchmark Nikkei index of 225 issues was off 17.84 points -- less than one-tenth of 1 percent -- to stand at 18,879.53.
On Monday, the index rose 64.27 points.


METRO DIGEST
REPORTS OF GIRL'S ABUSE EMERGE Six months before Elisa Izquierdo was killed, the Child Welfare Administration received two formal complaints of her maltreatment, but dismissed both as unfounded after brief investigations.
These details emerged at the same time as  a scathingly critical memorandum cataloguing dangerous ineptitude by the protection agency's caseworkers. [Page A1.]


Yanks' Martinez Trade Talks Stall
With their pursuit of first baseman Tino Martinez stalled because they removed third baseman Russ Davis from the discussions, the Yankees have angered  the Seattle Mariners and are considering other options in securing a replacement for Don Mattingly.
A Yankee executive said yesterday that the talks with the Mariners were "not  dead." But a Mariner official said the only way to breathe life back into them was for New York to return Davis to the equation.


Corrections
A report in the Patterns column on the Fashion page last Tuesday about Japanese companies asking American designers to create collections for Asia referred incorrectly to negotiations between the fashion designer Anna Sui and the Japanese company Onward Kashiyama.
The parties were discussing possible distribution of the Sui by Anna Sui collection, not development of a new line.


Bilingual Education Is Linguistic Welfare
To the Editor:
Re "An English-Only Law Makes Common Sense" (letter, Nov. 30): This debate is about more than just declaring English "official." It is about spending billions of taxpayer dollars on printing government documents in several languages and on failed bilingual education programs.


Private British Company Gets $1.69 Billion Bid
The N. Brown Group and the Iceland Group have joined forces and made a bid of L1.1 billion ($1.69 billion) for Britain's largest privately owned company, the  Littlewoods Organization.
The bid is the second public offer for the Liverpool-based company, an operator of soccer pools, a home shopping company and a luxury retailer.
In August, the company's ousted chief executive, Barry Dale, made an unsolicited approach of the same amount.


As Logging Returns, Recrimination on Why
Loggers have returned to the old-growth forests of the Pacific Northwest this fall, bulldozing roads into pristine areas and leveling 200-year-old trees in a  manner that was illegal until four months ago.
The leveling, or clear-cutting, will damage rivers and streams, set back a $1.2 billion Federal program to restore overcut national forests and could eradicate some runs of Chinook salmon, President Clinton has said.


Buckeyes' George Gets Walker Award
Ohio State's Eddie George was chosen today as winner of the Doak Walker Award as the nation's top college running back.
George finished the season ranked fifth in the nation in rushing, with 1,826  yards, and fourth in all-purpose yards, with 2,225.


Milbury Leaves His Hat in the Rink for Isles' G.M. Job
Mike Milbury needs another couple of days.
The Islanders' coach met with the club's vice president of hockey operations, Al Arbour, to get some more information before he decides whether he would like to be considered for the vacant general manager's job.
The position became  open when the Islanders dismissed Don Maloney last Friday.


Q&amp;A
Making Teflon Stick


Sports of The Times;It's a Long, Long Way For Bradley
IF you're 7 feet 6 inches, the odds are that you've spent a good part of your life encountering not only low ceilings, but lowly insults as well, some of them intended as such, and some -- like the would-be meteorologists who want to know  what the weather's like up there -- simply insensitive.
Before and after his trade from the Philadelphia 76ers to the New Jersey Nets last week, Shawn Bradley has had to endure a surfeit of them.
He was called everything from a loafer to a cur.
He was called "The Great White Nope" in one newspaper.


Biopsies By Needle Cut Cost
Testing suspicious breast lumps with needle biopsies instead of the usual surgical biopsies could save more than $1 billion a year in the United States, a new study concludes.
The needle method is less painful, less disfiguring and takes much less time  than surgical biopsy, but it is not as well established and is much less commonly performed in the United States, doctors say.


French Commuters Scramble on Strike's 11th Day


COMPANY BRIEFS
FORE SYSTEMS INC., Warrendale, Pa., a maker of computer network systems, acquired Cell Access Technology Inc., Los Gatos, Calif., which supplies digital-access products used in computer networks, for stock with a current value of $41.6 million.


CRITIC'S NOTEBOOKThe Things That People Say
It's hard to say which situation is more surreal: Tabitha Soren of MTV interviewing Yasir Arafat or Barbara Walters talking to the grunge rock star Courtney Love.
In a cross-generational battle, the two interviewers go head-to-head tonight at 10.
On "The MTV Interview," Ms.
Soren talks to three "bad boys" as she calls them, including Sean Penn and the rapper Tupac Shakur, just out of prison and awaiting his appeal on charges of sexual abuse.
On ABC, Ms.
Walters presents "The Ten Most Fascinating People of 1995," including a good boy, John F. Kennedy Jr.
Together, the shows reveal a professional bloodline running from Ms.
Walters to Ms.
Soren.
Tossing softball questions, neither one gets her intriguing guests to say anything worth repeating, yet the  interviews are loaded with information in spite of themselves.
Look at the body language; listen to the revisionist images the interview subjects try so hard to project.
Mr.
Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, assumes the manner of a kindly uncle and easily sidesteps Ms.
Soren's single reference to his group's terrorist acts.
Mr.
Shakur presents himself as a tough guy who has learned his lesson, though he sounds a lot like a prisoner telling the parole board what it wants to hear.
Meanwhile, Ms.
Love, notorious for her drug use and dangerous leaps from the stage into the audience, is almost a model of mainstream decorum.
She wears a neat beige suit and, as if trained in the art of being a Barbara Walters guest, even weeps.


RAIL UNION AGREES TO NEW CONTRACT
Increasingly isolated from their fellow unions, the track workers who staged  two spot strikes last week against the Metro-North Commuter Railroad announced yesterday that they had agreed to a tentative contract, bringing labor peace to  the railroad, at least temporarily.
The agreement, reached late Sunday night, ended a weeklong impasse over the timing of an improved vacation package by essentially splitting the difference between the two sides.
The union representing the track workers agreed to having the added vacation time go into effect in 1998, a year later than it had demanded.
In return, Metro-North increased the number of workers who would get the benefit in the first year.


Hospital to Increase Scrutiny After Sex Allegations
Grey stone Park Psychiatric Hospital will stress more intense supervision by  administrators and more staff training in response to allegations that staff members have sexually assaulted patients.
The steps were outlined in a 10-page report issued yesterday by the state's Division of Mental Health Services.
It was the work of a committee of hospital administrators and medical personnel convened to investigate four separate allegations of sexual contact between male employees and female patients at the  Morris County hospital.


First Lady: Some Tea And Policy
The more traditional First Lady role that Hillary Rodham Clinton assumed last year after the defeat of her health care bill was reflected today in the kinds of questions she was asked -- and not asked -- at the unveiling of the White House Christmas decorations.
But tradition only goes so far: while only one question was asked about politics, Mrs.
Clinton made plain her intention to take an active part in the President's re-election campaign and said that uppermost in her mind was Bosnia  and the United States' peace-keeping mission there.


For Victims of Korea's Ugly Years, a Time to Savor
He lost an eye when soldiers stomped on his face, and his brother-in-law was  shot dead, and his younger brother was imprisoned, and his parents went insane,  but in some respects Lee Ji Hyun is a remarkably lucky man.
He lived.
Mr.
Lee survived a massacre of pro-democracy demonstrators here in the provincial capital, Kwangju, in an incident in 1980 that has haunted South Korea ever since.
As he plucked his false eye from its socket, holding it in one hand  and pointing with the other to the scars on his face, Mr.
Lee reflected on the prospect of a trial soon of two of the country's former Presidents for ordering  the massacre.


For Now, a Tobacco Ad Ban Won't Grow
The health ministers of the European Union rejected a plan last week to extend the ban on advertising for tobacco from television to magazines, billboards and all other media forms.
Britain, Greece, the Netherlands and Denmark voted against the proposed ban,  denying it the degree of support it needed for approval.
Still, the European Commission said the fact that most member countries voted for the ban meant that it expected to push the plan through in the first half of next year.


FIRST HAWAIIAN TO BUY 30 BANKS IN NORTHWEST
First Hawaiian Inc. agreed yesterday to acquire 30 bank branches in the Pacific Northwest that U.S.
Bancorp and West One Bancorp are shedding in connection with their proposed merger.
First Hawaiian said it would acquire about $720 million in total deposits, for which it would pay a 5.25 percent premium, or about $38 million, and about $457 million in loans, plus other assets, at book value.
First Hawaiian, based in Honolulu, said the deal includes 25 bank branches in Oregon, 4 in Washington and 1 in Idaho -- all but 1 of the 31 branches included in the original divestiture package.


Doctors Offer Some Support To Kevorkian
For the first time since Dr.
Jack Kevorkian began his crusade for doctor-assisted suicide in 1990, a small group of doctors today offered him some organized support, proposing 10 guidelines that they hoped would win acceptance  for the practice by regulating it.
"This took a lot of time, effort and verbiage, but we are now in unanimous agreement on these," said Dr.
William Kimbrough, an Ann Arbor psychiatrist who served as spokesman for the group of eight Michigan doctors calling themselves Physicians for Mercy.
Dr.
Kevorkian, who was with the group when it proposed its guidelines today, is a founding member of Physicians for Mercy.


Dispute Leads Bosnian to Quit Films
The young Bosnian director Emir Kusturica, deeply embittered by the dispute surrounding his recent award-winning movie about the collapse of Yugoslavia, announced today that he was abandoning film making.
The movie, "Underground," won the top prize at this year's Cannes International Film Festival.
In a brief statement issued to the Paris daily Liberation, Mr.
Kusturica did  not spell out the reasons for his decision, but he is known to have been shaken  by charges from Bosnian Muslims and some French intellectuals that "Underground," his fifth feature film, contained pro-Serb propaganda.


AT&amp;T OFFERS NEW SERVICES ON CELLULAR PHONES
The AT&amp;T Corporation started a new wireless technology that plans to offer services to businesses and consumers over their cellular phones that they can get with regular phones -- including caller ID and written messages.
"The IS-136 technology will allow our customers to truly rely on their portable devices and  control their communications," said Nicolas Kauser, chief technology officer for AT&amp;T Wireless Services.
Perot Systems, a data-processing company in Dallas owned by billionaire Ross Perot, is AT&amp;T's first customer for the new technology.
No financial details were available.
IS-136 is expected to become widely available elsewhere in 1996, AT&amp;T said.


E.T. Bachmann, 84, Lutheran Historian, Pastor and Teacher
Dr.
E.
Theodore Bachmann, a Lutheran theologian and church historian, died on Wednesday at the Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick, N.J.
He was 84 and lived in Princeton Junction.
In nearly six decades as a pastor, Dr.
Bachmann showed a deep concern for the unity of his church and its mission work.
He had an international career as a teacher, writer and administrator.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Samuel Goldwyn Stock Climbs Sharply
Shares of the Samuel Goldwyn Company rose yesterday on rumors that the indebted independent movie studio has found a buyer.
Shares of the company jumped 56.25 cents, or 12 percent, to close at $5.0625  on the American Stock Exchange.
Earlier, the shares peaked at $6.12.


Vanguard Forces Arriving in the Balkans
Vanguard units of the 60,000 NATO troops who are to enforce the American-brokered peace in Bosnia arrived in Croatia and Bosnia today.
In Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, three camouflaged British C-130 Hercules transport planes descended from the gray, overcast skies today to deliver the first 28 NATO soldiers, including two Americans, to the city.


Louise W. Kahn, 85, Benefactor of Arts
Louise Wolff Kahn, a patron of the arts and education in Dallas and elsewhere, died on Nov. 27 in the Presbyterian Hospital of Dallas.
She was 85.
She had lived in Dallas since 1937, but also kept a home in Manhattan, where she was born.
She graduated from Smith College, then pursued a career in advertising, retailing and interior design in New York before moving to Dallas.
There, she worked at Neiman Marcus as the personal secretary to its president, Stanley Marcus, a boyhood friend of her husband-to-be, Edmund J. Kahn, who made a fortune in real estate, cotton and oil.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Long-Bond Yield at 6.02%; Stock Indexes at Records Treasury securities prices rallied for the fourth straight day, pushing the yield on the bellwether 30-year bond below 6 percent at one point.
It ended at 6.02 percent on traders' expectations that the Federal Reserve would cut interest rates this month. [Page D20.]


Hard Lesson in Gambling and the Law
Class 4-W's teacher, Christopher Warnock, was not in school this morning.
He  was in jail, waiting to be arraigned on charges of taking part in a football betting ring that took in millions of dollars.
So the 20 children in his fourth-grade class had an unexpected lesson from the school psychologist and the social worker, the kind of unplanned lesson that has become more common as arrests of teachers have made the news.


Forte to Sell Restaurants and Savoy Hotel Stake
Forte hotels of Britain acted today to repel a hostile bid of L3.3 billion, or $5.1 billion, from the Granada Group P.L.C. by disclosing plans to spin off its restaurants and dispose of its stake in the Savoy hotels.
Forte P.L.C. will float the restaurants as an independent arm that analysts valued as high as L1 billion -- $1.54 billion.
It plans to sell or distribute to stockholders its 68 percent stake in Savoy, a luxury hotel group.


Arakis Energy President Quits Under Fire
The president of the Arakis Energy Corporation resigned today, in a move that analysts said was a reaction by the beleaguered oil company to recent negative publicity.
Arakis, which is trying to raise money to develop oilfields and build a pipeline in the Sudan, the strife-torn African nation, said in a statement that  Terry Alexander had resigned as chairman, president and director.
Mr.
Alexander  founded Arakis and remains the company's biggest shareholder, with about a 9.4 percent stake.


U.S. Judge in Colorado to Hear Bombing Case
Judge Richard P. Matsch, the Chief Judge of the Federal District Court in Colorado, was named on Monday to preside over the trial in the Oklahoma City bombing case.
He replaced Judge Wayne E. Alley ofFederal District Court in Oklahoma City.
Judge Matsch was appointed by Judge Stephanie K. Seymour, Chief Judge of the  United States Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit, in Denver.
He is scheduled  to hold the trial, which is to begin in May, in Lawton, Okla., but has before him requests from the defendants, Timothy J. McVeigh and Terry L. Nichols, to move the trial out of the state.


Lions Keep Their Playoff Hopes Alive
They have the best offense in the National Football League and are playing with great confidence.
And with a soft schedule ahead, the Detroit Lions can almost start thinking about the playoffs.
Tonight, the Lions took care of immediate business.
With Scott Mitchell throwing three touchdown passes and Herman Moore making big catches, the Lions defeated the Chicago Bears, 27-7, for their fourth straight victory.


Remembering as a Duty Of Those Who Survived
ALL RIVERS RUN TO THE SEA Memoirs


Treasury Prices Are Fueled By Hopes of Rate Reduction
Treasury bond yields continued to fall yesterday -- actually slipping below 6 percent briefly -- amid continuing expectations of further interest rate cuts by the Federal Reserve.
The yield on the long bond hit its lowest level since November 1993.
The price rally, now in its fourth day, was fueled by short-coverings, when prices of securities, which move in the opposite direction from their yields, broke above some key technical levels.


Two Men Held in Purse Thefts
The spotting of a stolen car has led to the arrest of two Newark men in a series of purse snatchings, the Essex County Prosecutor's office said yesterday.
The two men, Jose Rodriguez and Jose Zeno, who were charged with snatching the purses of nine women from Nov. 19 to Nov. 30, have also been accused of assaulting an F.B.I. agent and a United States marshal.
Last Friday, when officers chased a stolen white Oldsmobile believed to have been used in the purse snatchings, the suspects rammed an unmarked police car, injuring the agent and the marshal, prosecutors said.


A Glimpse of Home


Haselrig Is Suspended By N.F.L. for Violating Substance-Abuse Policy
The Jets' noble experiment to rehabilitate Carlton Haselrig ended today when  the National Football League suspended him for at least one year for failing to  comply with its substance-abuse policy.
Neither the league nor the Jets would say whether the suspension was issued because Haselrig had missed a mandatory test during Thanksgiving week or he had  tested positive.
In either case Haselrig would be suspended because he was a repeat offender.
The 29-year-old former Pro Bowl lineman had three prior violations as a member of the Steelers and sat out all of last season.


Israeli Sergeant Indicted
An army sergeant was indicted today on charges that he smuggled weapons from  his military base and gave them to the confessed assassin of Yitzhak Rabin, Yigal Amir, and Mr.
Amir's brother, Hagai.


CHRONICLE
ARLO GUTHRIE and ALICE BROCK, the woman he immortalized in his epic song "Alice's Restaurant," were deluged by admirers on Saturday at a book signing at  the Bookstore in Lenox, Mass.
Mr.
Guthrie is the author of "Mooses Come Walking," a children's book published by Chronicle Books, and Ms.
Brock did the illustrations.


Preening and Whirling In an Old-Fashioned Revue
Ivy Grows," which the Donna Uchizono Company presented on Saturday night at  Dance Theater Workshop, was divided into two works -- "Polynesian Shorts (A Polynesian Review Revue)" and "Quietly Goes a Giant Jane" -- that were separated by a brief pause. Each piece in turn was subdivided into smaller segments. What  Ms. Uchizono choreographed was, in effect, a modern-dance equivalent of an old-fashioned Broadway revue.
But she lacked the savvy of those producers who knew how to arrange satirical sketches, torch songs, ballads and novelty acts so that their revues had variety and contrast.
"Ivy Grows" just crept aimlessly along like a weed.


Chairman To Step Down In G.M. Shift
Marking the end of a brief but critical era at the General Motors Corporation, John G. Smale, the outside director who led a board room coup in 1992 and became chairman, said yesterday that he would voluntarily step down from the post on Jan. 1.
The board of directors named John F. Smith, Jr., the president and chief executive, to the post of chairman and elected Harry J. Pearce, an executive vice president, to the board and elevated him to vice chairman.


World News Briefs;Agency Losing U.S. Aid For Developing Nations
The United States announced today that it is pulling out of a United Nations  agency whose mission is to encourage industry in developing nations.
The United States supplies about one fourth of the $31 million annual budget  of the agency, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, whose annual conference began on Monday.
The move is bound to cause a financial crisis.


The Knicks' Christie Pressures for Trade
Doug Christie, getting antsier by the day because he is not playing for the Knicks, wants out of New York so badly that his agent, Brad Marshall, has scheduled a news conference next Sunday afternoon to follow a meeting with General Manager Ernie Grunfeld and possibly Coach Don Nelson.
Christie has played sparingly during the Knicks 12-4 start, and has informed the team that he wants to play or be traded.
The Knicks have made inquiries to several teams, but have made their intentions clear: They will not be forced by a player's agent to make a deal that does not make sense to them.


Newark Crime High, Study Says
Newark ranks as one of the 10 worst cities for crime and infant mortality, according to a study of the nation's 100 largest cities released yesterday.
Newark was the seventh poorest city, and had the fourth highest rate of infant mortality, with 19.1 deaths for every 1,000 births, the study by the National Public Health and Hospital Institute found.
The percentage of households headed  by women -- 41.8 percent -- placed it third, more than twice the national average of 16.5 percent.


2 On-Line Banking Champions at Crossroad
After more than a decade of false starts and stumbles, it appears that electronic banking may finally gain wide acceptance in 1996.
But two of the champions of on-line banking, once allies, are trying to persuade bankers to follow different paths.
Intuit Inc. said yesterday that it planned to expand its home banking services to the global Internet by the middle of next year, adding a new avenue for participating banks and financial institutions to reach potentially millions of new consumers and small businesses.


Union Capitulation Shows Strike Is Now Dull Sword
Eighteen months after beginning one of the biggest and longest strikes of the 1990's, Caterpillar Inc. workers will soon be back making the company's giant yellow earth movers.
By their own admission, they gained nothing by their walkout and, indeed, still face losing valued rights and benefits.
Over the weekend, about 80 percent of the 8,700 strikers voted to reject Caterpillar's last offer.
But their union, the United Automobile Workers, still  a rich and muscular giant within the depleted American labor movement, ordered them back.
The union had spent $30 million, all for naught, defending them.
Caterpillar never flinched.


The Bull, Under Fire;Merrill Lynch Faces a Barrage Of Orange County Lawsuits
One year and more than 10 lawsuits later, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company is in the crosshairs of legal sharpshooters as a result of the Orange County bankruptcy.
Merrill's own shareholders are suing it.
So are Orange County bondholders.
The county itself wants $2 billion.
Even a group of Orange County widows and their children have clamored for money from Wall Street's biggest brokerage firm.
To fight back, Merrill, which has denied any wrongdoing, has amassed an all-star defense team.
The firm has spent about $40 million on legal fees so far, analysts say, with millions yet to come for litigation that could drag on for years.
Novel legal theories are emerging.
Merrill remains the most profitable firm on Wall Street and its municipal bond business is strong, but the firm is far more vulnerable on the legal front than any of its rivals that did business with the county.


Ducks Are No Match For Mighty Rangers
If the Rangers are to challenge the Devils' hold on the Stanley Cup next spring, they might need something like the Crash Line that the Devils use to change momentum of games.
The New Jersey combination of Mike Peluso, Randy McKay and Bobby Holik forechecks with energy to force turnovers and create scoring chances and was a key to the Devils' championship.


Supreme Court Roundup;National Enquirer Faces Trial On Invasion-of-Privacy Issue
The Supreme Court refused today to consider whether California courts could allow damage suits for invasion of privacy over news articles that, while accurate, in a jury's view lacked sufficient "social value" to be "newsworthy."
Without comment, the Justices turned down an appeal by The National Enquirer, the defendant in an invasion of privacy lawsuit brought by the mother of an illegitimate son of the actor Eddie Murphy.
The magazine disclosed the existence of the mother and a 2-year-old boy, Christian Edward Murphy, and the financial arrangements that Mr.
Murphy had made for his son.


Anne Scheiber's Gift
With the season of holidays and gift-giving comes the story of Anne Scheiber, a 101-year-old recluse who spent her retirement quietly turning a $5,000 nest egg into a $22 million stock portfolio.
She then left the entire fortune that she had accumulated over half a century to Yeshiva University, to establish scholarships for needy women students there.
"Here's a woman who for 101 years was childless and now becomes a mother to a whole community," said the president of the university.


LEADERS OF A.M.A. CRITICAL OF PLAN TO ALTER MEDICAID
Leaders of the American Medical Association, who endorsed Speaker Newt Gingrich's plans for Medicare eight weeks ago, today expressed grave concern about Republican proposals for Medicaid and said Congress should preserve a Federal guarantee of health insurance coverage for low-income people.
Trustees of the association said they had not endorsed the Republicans' bill, the Medicaid Transformation Act of 1995, submitted to President Clinton last week as part of a wide-ranging measure to balance the budget.
The bill would replace the current Medicaid program with lump-sum grants that the states could  decide how to spend on health care for low-income people.


Mets Call Up Assistant G.M.
The Mets, who have reshaped themselves on the field by not hesitating to dip  into their farm system, plugged a front-office vacancy yesterday in the same way.
Steve Phillips, the organization's director of minor league operations since 1991, was promoted to assistant general manager.
The appointment, announced by General Manager Joe McIlvaine, fills the spot left by Gerry Hunsicker, who departed last month to become general manager of the Houston Astros.
Jack Zduriencik, who has spent most of the last 14 years in scouting posts with the Mets and Pittsburgh Pirates, will succeed Phillips as minor league director.


Korea Reckons With Its History
President Kim Young Sam of South Korea is guiding his country to a much-needed reckoning with its troubled past.
As he does so, he must be careful  not to abuse the process by exploiting it for his own political protection.
The  repudiation of history in any country ought not to be undertaken lightly, or for venal reasons, particularly a nation as new to democracy and as burdened with deformed history as South Korea.
In less than a month Mr.
Kim's Government has arrested the country's last two Presidents, Chun Doo Hwan and Roh Tae Woo.
The two men, in succession, ruled Korea from 1980 to 1993.


Case Against Teacher Describes Double Life
Christopher Warnock had a reputation as a dedicated teacher of fourth-grade students, but the police said he also had a successful side job: working as a bookmaker for a sophisticated mob-run gambling operation that was shut down over the weekend in Westchester.
Yesterday at Mr.
Warnock's school in Mount Vernon, N.Y., his students were learning a new lesson from the school psychologist: how someone is innocent until proven guilty.
And as Mr.
Warnock sat in jail, students recalled their teacher as an engaging instructor who often incorporated football concepts into their lessons.


Westin Hotels Begins a Review
Westin Hotels and Resorts said yesterday that it had begun a review of its account, which has been at Cole &amp; Weber in Seattle for the last five years.
The  billings were estimated at $16 million.
Sue Brush, a Westin spokeswoman in Seattle, confirmed a report of the review  this week in Adweek, adding that it was prompted by the sale of the company earlier this year to the Starwood Capital Group and Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company as  well as by the hiring of a new chairman and chief executive, Jurgen Bartels.


Gramm Is Seeking 'Emergency' Cash
Senator Phil Gramm of Texas has sent some supporters a letter asking for "emergency donations" to cover a "cash shortfall" that threatens his campaign for the Republican Presidential nomination.
"The consequences of this shortfall are so threatening, I have no other choice but to ask for your help again," Mr.
Gramm wrote in a Nov. 17 letter to his "Steering Committee."


Executive Changes
CITIBANK N.A., New York, named Douglas E. Smee senior vice president, responsible for sovereign-risk management.


Johannesburg Journal;Sitcom's Ticklish Idea: Will South Africa Laugh?
Billy and Kobie Dwyer, an Afrikaner couple, are in a panic.
Ike Maloi, their  most valued black employee, has just demanded a 20 percent stake in their furniture business.
No one in the Dwyer family has the nerve to tell Grandpa, an uninhibited racist. (Even when Grandpa thinks all Ike wants is a raise, his response is "Shoot him.")


Comedic First Returns, 20 Years After the Act
It began nearly 20 years ago, on Dec. 31, 1975, to be exact.
HBO's first "On  Location" comedy special, starring Robert Klein, changed the very nature of comic acts on television.
For the first time, stand-up routines were unedited and uncensored.
The performers could say pretty much what they wanted to say.
In the cases of Roseanne and Tim Allen (courtesy of Showtime), routines were transformed into full-fledged and enormously successful sitcoms.
The stand-up act became a hardy staple of cablevision.
Well, Mr.
Klein is back on the schedule in an "HBO Comedy Hour" called "It All Started Here" (the next showing is at 1:05 A.M. tonight).
The program, taped at the Forum Theater in Metuchen, N.J., is his sixth stand-up special for HBO.
Changes?
You bet.
He used to project a campus wise-guy-in-sweater sort of persona, but now he's older and considerably crabbier.
The hair and the eyebrows look suspiciously darker.
The sweat during his routines is now quite visible.
So?
So he can still be insightful and very funny, not to mention outrageous in terms of political correctness.


Officers Exonerated in Chase
Local police did not violate the State Attorney General's guidelines for high-speed chases on Sunday when they pursued a stolen dairy van through Englewood, Leonia and Palisades Park before it crashed into a church van, injuring two people, officials said yesterday.
Two patrol cars reached speeds of 65 miles per hour on a major shopping street, where the speed limit is 25 m.p.h., but Charles R. Buckley, the Acting Prosecutor for Bergen County, said this was "not an exceedingly high speed under all the circumstances."


Out of the Barroom Onto Pay-Per-View
Watched my first "Toughman World Championship" last Saturday night.
Fool that I am, I paid $19.95.
Unfamiliar with "Toughman"?
It is a first cousin to boxing, but closer to barroom mauling by brawny flailers like Richard (Petunia) Tabor and Jim (the Stump) Buffo, who faced off in madcap bouts of no longer than three one-minute rounds for a grand prize of $50,000.
"Toughman" was deluxe tacky, produced as if Ed Wood had advanced from directing "Plan 9 From Outer Space" to dirt-floor boxing.
The fighters were summoned by the promoter Art Dore as if they were on "The Price Is Right" ("Watermelon, come on down!") and the camera often panned large expanses of empty seats in the Asheville (N.C.) Civic Center.


By Design;Where the Swimsuits Are
With temperatures dipping below 40 degrees, some imagination is required to start thinking about a swimsuit purchase.
But it's a necessary precursor to taking off for shores both warm and sunny.
The newest suits are less skimpy than last year's and reflect ready-to-wear trends, like bright colors and shine.


This Concierge Slams the Door on Foes
The wind sprints ended more than 10 minutes before, but the mountainous man was still breathing hard.
After lumbering between the sidelines of Baruch College's 67-year-old gym, Sean McGee stood against the wall, his chest rising and falling and sweat flowing down his cherry-red cheeks.
Suddenly, Coach Ray Rankis yelled his name.


6 News Groups Seek to Lift Seal On Testimony in Tobacco Case
Six news organizations asked a Mississippi judge today to make public the recently recorded pre-trial testimony of a former tobacco company executive who  is said to have evidence of illegal activities by his former employer and other  tobacco companies.
The executive, Jeffrey S. Wigand, the former head of research at the Brown &amp;  Williamson Tobacco Corporation, began making his disclosures last week in a deposition in Pascagoula, Miss.
The deposition is part of the pre-trial evidence gathering in a case in which the State of Mississippi is demanding that tobacco  companies compensate it for what the state says is the impact of smoking-related health problems on the its Medicaid budget.
Mr.
Wigand's testimony was sealed at the request of Brown &amp; Williamson, which said Mr.
Wigand might disclose trade secrets and information protected by the relationship of lawyers to their clients.


Businesses Fight Payroll Tax
Business leaders in Jersey City descended on City Hall yesterday with signed  postcards from more than 1,000 local businesses opposed to a proposed payroll tax.
Peter T. D. Murphy, president of the Hudson County Chamber of Commerce, said local business operators feel "a sense of betrayal" because the city's Republican Mayor, Bret Schundler, supports the tax.
But Tom Gallagher, a spokesman for the Mayor, said it is needed because the value of the city's taxable property has declined 18 percent since the Mayor took office in 1992.
The payroll tax, which would raise an estimated $20 million a year, comes up for a final City Council vote tomorrow night.


Observer;A Little Hospital Stay
I spent five, six or seven days in the hospital.
This is supposed to be one of life's hilarious events.
You've seen it in the movies.
Or worse, television.
They take your clothes and make you wear a flimsy garment affording the world a  full backal view.
So long, Dignity.
Why this is funny is unclear.
If you watch "N.Y.P.D. Blue" you eventually see the full backside of everybody in the cast, and who laughs?


Taiwan Wouldn't Gain From Independence
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal's frustration at the "Western submission" to the "Chinese diplomatic blockade" of Taiwan does not serve any purpose (column, Dec. 1).


Chrysler Sues Iacocca Over Takeover Plan
The Chrysler Corporation sued Lee A. Iacocca today, asserting that its former chairman divulged confidential information to Kirk Kerkorian while Mr.
Iacocca was still a consultant to Chrysler.
"Iacocca has breached his fiduciary duties owed to Chrysler by disclosing confidential information about Chrysler to Kirk Kerkorian, a notorious corporate raider," said the lawsuit, which was filed in circuit court in Oakland County, Mich.


Chess
It may be a portent of things to come that the two players who left Gary Kasparov in the dust and went on to win the Credit Suisse Masters International  Tournament in Horgen, Switzerland, were Vasily Ivanchuk of Ukraine and Vladimir  Kramnik of Russia.
Those two grandmasters have been mentioned most often, along  with Viswanathan Anand, as having the best chance to capture the world championship.
In Horgen in late October, Kramnik had a qualitatively superior performance to Ivanchuk.
While Ivanchuk was the only player to defeat Kasparov, the champion conducted that game as though he were daydreaming.
Kramnik, on the other hand, outplayed one opponent after another with trenchant positional attacks.


Harbaugh Is Out After Knee Surgery
Jim Harbaugh, the National Football League's top-rated quarterback, underwent arthroscopic surgery today to remove damaged cartilage from his right knee.
He will be out at least one week, Coach Ted Marchibroda of the Indianapolis Colts said.
Harbaugh was injured in the third quarter of Sunday's 13-10 loss at Carolina.
Marchibroda said either Paul Justin, who relieved Harbaugh on Sunday,  or Craig Erickson would start at Jacksonville this week.


No East Side District
To the Editor:
Douglas Lasdon and Sue Halpern (Op-Ed, Nov. 30) are incorrect in stating that residents of Manhattan's Upper East Side "tried to create a special private district in order to hire 500 security officers."


Corrections
An article on Saturday about a Federal inquiry into the surgical group that employed the husband of Faith S. Hochberg, the United States Attorney in Newark  who has been nominated for a Federal judgeship, misstated the Senate's recent record in confirming judicial candidates.
In recent months the Judiciary Committee has approved a number of nominees, but the full Senate has not acted on any.


For Spectators, There's Early Disappointment in Atlanta
Since June, some 337,000 Americans have requested tickets to the Olympic Games in Atlanta next summer, but only about 249,000 of them will actually receive tickets and most will receive only about half of what they requested.
Mail-order ticket sales ended last Friday, and the Olympic committee has been besieged with complaints.
About the only way to get tickets now -- the committee says tickets remain for half the events -- is to wait for telephone sales to begin in February and settle for the leftovers.


As Abuse Case Details Emerge, A Memo Harshly Assails Agency
Six months before Elisa Izquierdo was killed, the Child Welfare Administration received two formal complaints of her maltreatment, but dismissed both as unfounded after incomplete investigations, two government officials said yesterday.
In the first incident, a caseworker investigated an anonymous letter alleging that the 6-year-old's mother, Awilda Lopez, had shorn Elisa's hair and confined her to a dark room.
In the other, a caseworker investigated a doctor's  report that Elisa's shoulder had been fractured, and that her mother had not brought her for treatment until four days later.


Agencies, still in a slump, get predictions of stronger spending.
THE leading forecaster of advertising spending has slightly trimmed his estimates for 1995 and 1996.
Yet he maintains that "the role of advertising is re-emerging" in the American consumer marketplace.
Robert J. Coen, senior vice president and forecasting director at the McCann-Erickson U.S.A. unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies, said he expected next year to be the third in a row in which "advertising should significantly outpace" the growth of the economy.
Large marketers will continue  to shift dollars from promotional efforts aimed at retailers into advertising campaigns directed at shoppers, he added.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about a police crackdown  on driving offenses in New York City misstated the occupation of John Shin, who  described traffic problems in midtown Manhattan.
He is a store manager, not a delivery-truck driver.


Suddenly a Minor Deity: Don Shula No Longer Owns Florida
During the early 1980's at the Orange Bowl, a sign was affixed each Sunday to a spot in the upper deck.
In large block letters, it proclaimed "Shula is god,"  and about the only argument it ever generated around town concerned whether the  letter "g" should be upper or lower case.
Those were the days when Don Shula, coach of the Dolphins, still owned South  Florida.
He was omnipresent, if not omnipotent.
His face, with the trademark jutting jaw, was on billboards all over town.
He had an expressway named after him.
There were serious suggestions that he could not be defeated if he ran for  governor.
Shula always laughed such notions off.
First, why would he want to take a step down in stature and, second, why would he ever want something as fickle as polls to dictate his fate?


Making Room on the Couch for Culture
THE patient seemed psychotic, complaining in a listless ramble, "My soul is not with me anymore -- I can't do anything." Seriously disturbed, she had been taken to a psychiatric hospital by her relatives.
The psychiatrist who interviewed the woman discovered the problem had begun when she got bad news from her native Ecuador: an uncle she was close to had died unexpectedly.


INSIDE
Second Thoughts


In U.S. Peacekeeper Arsenal, Weapons Honed for Bosnia
The 20,000 American troops who roll into Bosnia in the days and weeks ahead will be armed with an array of advanced technology and tactics tailored for the  Balkan mission, from speedier U-2 spy plane pictures to stealthy anti-sniper teams to tanks specially equipped for blowing up land mines, American military officials say.
Some equipment has never been used in an actual mission, like a new camera on the Apache attack helicopter that will transmit aerial photographs of the cease-fire zone to a command post within 90 seconds.
And proven tactics will be  adjusted for the Bosnia mission.
Psychological-operation troops, for example, will prepare leaflets, radio broadcasts and posters in Serbo-Croatian advising residents that the NATO force comes in peace but will indeed defend itself.


Giants Want Reeves To Stay
The Giants want Coach Dan Reeves back no question about it.
The Mara family is willing to be patient.
The Giants want to put Reeves's remarks about not staying after his contract is up two years from now behind them.
They are willing to start over.
"Of course we want Dan back," said John Mara, the team's executive vice president and general counsel.
"We think Dan is an excellent coach, and we realize some things are said out of frustration. But nothing has been decided yet. We're still going to sit down at the end of the year and try to work things out. I think we can."


Unusual Rescue Team, U.S. and Mexico, Tries To Save Rare Parrot
A TOWERING limestone cliff that is the unlikely home to a rare species of parrot is being preserved by the Mexican Government, with help from the United States Government and environmental groups on both sides of the border.
The unusual joint response by the two nations could help protect the maroon-fronted parrot, an endangered, pigeon-sized bird found only in a remote,  high-altitude region of northern Mexico where the weather sometimes gets cold enough for it to snow.
Nearly all other parrots live in warm or even tropical climates.


Man Dies in Salvage Operation in Newark
A man who was part of a salvage crew trying to refloat a work boat in the Port of Newark was killed last night when he was trapped under the craft, the authorities said.
The man and three other workers, employees of Bob's Diving Service in Newark, were working on the Turmoil, a 38-foot work boat that was suspended from a crane, said Lieut. (j.g.) Charles Fosse, a Coast Guard spokesman.
At about 6 P.M., a cable holding the boat snapped, tossing the four workers into Newark Bay.


Confession Offers Details in Triple Murder
A suspect in the murder of his former girlfriend and two of her family members told the police in chilling detail how the girl had hired him to kill her overly strict father, but how he turned the gun on her instead, according to court papers released yesterday.
The suspect, Lamar Sanchez, 18, said the girl, Arelis Batista, 18, thought he was joking when he aimed a rifle at her face.
But moments later, he killed her, according to the confession the authorities said Mr.
Sanchez made.


LAYNE INC. TO BUY DIAMOND DRILLING OPERATION
Layne Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to buy the Christensen Boyles Corporation in a deal valued at $40 million.
Layne, a drilling company based in  Mission, Kan., said it would issue 1.8 million shares, pay $9 million in cash and assume $15 million of debt in the transaction.
Layne's stock rose 12.5 cents yesterday, to $9.375, in Nasdaq trading.
Christensen Boyles provides diamond drilling services.


Ira Wallach, 82, Screenwriter And Author of 'Muscle Beach'
Ira Wallach, who wrote the novel "Muscle Beach" and collaborated with Peter Ustinov on the screenplay for "Hot Millions," died on Saturday at Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 82 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was pneumonia, said his wife, Lillian.


Frederic Waldman, Conductor And Teacher, Is Dead at 92
Frederic Waldman, an enterprising conductor who for more than 30 years presented programs of forgotten works by great composers of the past as well as  premieres of contemporary works, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 92.
Mr.
Waldman was a powerful presence on the New York music scene from the early 1950's, when he was music director of the Juilliard Opera Theater, through 1985, when he retired as director of Musica Aeterna, the ensemble he founded in  1957.


Galileo Nears Jupiter's Gaseous Turmoil
Over the last six years, while traveling 2.3 billion miles, the Galileo spacecraft has flown by Venus once and Earth twice, passed within camera range of two tiny asteroids, observed huge fragments of a comet crashing into Jupiter  and endured the most intense interplanetary dust storm ever measured.
The plucky spacecraft has had its setbacks, like a jammed antenna and balky tape recorder, and more than once engineers here have come close to despair, uncertain that their spacecraft would survive in any useful condition to reach its ultimate destination.
Yet it has. At long last, Jupiter!


Market Place;Last Big Wall St. Bear Defects to Optimists
The last of Wall Street's prominent bears has turned cautiously bullish, concluding that "a fundamental shift" in the way investors evaluate shares probably means that stock prices will be far higher than he had thought possible.
"The powerful 1995 stock rally is not a bubble, but rather a signal that the  valuation paradigm has changed for the third time in 40 years," wrote David Shulman, chief equity strategist for Salomon Brothers, in a report released yesterday.


Whitman Strongly Endorses Programs for Affirmative Action
Already at odds with the Republican Party's leadership for her support of abortion rights, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman put more space between herself and  the party's conservative wing today by strongly endorsing affirmative-action programs.
Mrs.
Whitman said New Jersey had benefited socially and economically because  of public and private programs that take race and sex into account in hiring and promotion decisions.
And she warned that the debate over the programs, taking place primarily in the upper ranks of her own party, "may ultimately threaten the progress we have made" toward equality.


URS SHARES GAIN ON NEWS OF GREINER ACQUISITION
The URS Corporation said yesterday that it would acquire Greiner Engineering  Inc. for about $72.8 million in cash and stock.
URS, a San Francisco-based design and construction management concern, said the combined company would have revenues of more than $330 million and would be the fifth-largest transportation engineering company in the United States.
Shares of Greiner, based in Irving Tex., rose $3.625, or 39 percent, to $12.875 yesterday.
URS's shares were up 12.5 cents, to $7, on the New York Stock Exchange.
URS said it did not expect the acquisition to have a significant impact on its 1996 earnings.


Taking Mumbles Out of Subways
Kiss the gargling dragons goodbye.
Modern technology is promising an end to the Transit Authority's decades-old, far-from-systemwide, so-called public address system -- the one that seems to be staffed by creatures with a degree in gibberish.


At Big Kidney Chain, Deals For Doctors, Ruin for Rivals
The administrator at National Medical Care thought nothing of it when he told a doctor at its kidney dialysis clinic here that the company paid the insurance  bill for the clinic director's Rolls-Royce.
But the medical partners of the director, Dr.
Arnold Roland, were incensed to hear about it.
National Medical did not pay their car insurance.
They started asking questions about Dr.
Roland's financial relationship with the company.


Cortines to Be U.S. Aide
Ramon C. Cortines, who quit as New York City Schools Chancellor after clashing with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, will become a special adviser to Education Secretary Richard W. Riley, the Secretary said today.
Mr. Cortines will focus on urban issues and school improvement, Mr. Riley said.


APPLE COMPUTER TO SHOW OFF MULTIMEDIA PIPPIN
The Apple Computer Corporation's chief executive, Michael H. Spindler, said yesterday that the computer maker would introduce a multimedia device next year, first in Japan and later in the United States.
At the annual Personal Computer Outlook conference in Burlingame, Calif., Mr.
Spindler demonstrated the device,  called Pippin, which is a hybrid between a television-based computer game player and a stripped-down but speedy computer, and is expected to sell for about $500.
Apple has licensed its Pippin technology to a Japanese game maker, the Bandai Company, which would market the system in Japan under its logo.


U S West Moves to Block Time Warner's Revamping
Opening a new front in its legal battle against Time Warner Inc., U S West sought yesterday to block Time Warner's recent restructuring.
In an amendment to its lawsuit against Time Warner, U S West said the shake-up would damage its own partnership with the company.
U S West, a regional telephone company based in Englewood, Colo., purchased a 25.5 percent stake in Time Warner's film studio, cable systems, and Home Box Office in 1993.
The three divisions were placed into a limited partnership, Time Warner Entertainment.


Taiwan Wouldn't Gain From Independence;World Will Suffer
To the Editor:
I am writing to commend American journalists like A. M. Rosenthal who point out just how obsequious the United States has been behaving before Communist China (column, Dec. 1).


Irish Peace Talks Won't Succeed Yet
To the Editor:
Re "A Break in the Irish Impasse" (editorial, Nov. 30): You are wrong to claim it is "Britain's unreasonable insistence" that the Irish Republican Army hand in some of its weapons that is the main impediment to progress to all-party talks.


SCIENTIST AT WORK: Christiane Nusslein-Volhard;'The Lady of the Flies' Dives Into a New Pond
They knew that Dr.
Nusslein-Volhard, along with her co-winners, Eric Wieschaus of Princeton University and Edward Lewis of the California Institute of Technology, richly deserved the honor for the work they had done in elucidating the earliest stages of embryonic growth by using the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster.
People had been predicting Dr.
Nusslein-Volhard's Nobel for years, and nobody could doubt the importance of her contributions or the ferocity of her intelligence and drive.


Nets' United Stand on Coleman: Goodbye and Good Riddance
Jayson Williams was Derrick Coleman's best friend on the Nets.
But Williams admitted today that trading Coleman to the Philadelphia 76ers was the best thing that could have happened for all concerned.
"I think getting rid of Derrick was an addition by subtraction," Williams said.
"If a man is not happy doing his job, he's not going to do it well. Derrick wasn't happy being here and he let everybody know it.


Taiwan Wouldn't Gain From Independence;Tibet and Tourism
To the Editor:
Pico Iyer (Op-Ed, Dec. 3) asserts that China is trying to obliterate Tibet's  culture and turn the territory into a site for tourists.


On My Mind;Bottom Line in Hong Kong
At midnight on June 30, 1997, Hong Kong passes to rule by Communist China.
But for a particularly important elite group on the island the future is just about here, arriving more swiftly every day.
The members of this elite are moving forward just as swiftly to meet it.
These are the men whose power comes from the old fortunes and new business dynasties that under the British turned Hong Kong into a money mine.
They believe that their commercial holdings will survive and grow in the rising Chinese empire as well as they did in the British empire that will vanish when its flag is lowered here that midnight.


When Fashion Marries Music
Rachel Hunter, the model married to the rocker Rod Stewart, explained to her  interviewer, Jon Stewart, on one of the video clips shown at the VH1 Fashion and Music Awards Sunday night, why models and musicians often couple.
"We're compatible because we have similar life styles," she said.
Jon Stewart was sympathetic.
"Yes," he said, "if you're married to the assistant manager at Woolworth's, it's very tough to see each other."


Dollar Slips as Mark Advances, Especially Against the Franc
The dollar fell yesterday as the German mark rose against other European currencies, scoring its biggest gains against the French franc as a result of labor strikes in France.
"As the situation in France deteriorates, people are buying the mark, and that's an anti-dollar move," said David DeRosa, director of currency trading at the Swiss Bank Corporation in New York.


Man Charged In Needle Case Fled Hospital
A homeless man charged with stabbing a child with a hypodermic needle on a subway train last week escaped from a psychiatric hospital in 1993, walking away from the Rochester Psychiatric Center despite a long criminal history, according to law enforcement officials and a spokesman for the State Office of Mental Health.
Angel Coro, 51, who has a record of arrests for crimes ranging from disorderly conduct to assault that date back to the 1960's, was sent to the Rochester center in 1987 after he was charged with burglary but found not fit to stand trial.
In April 1993, Mr.
Coro disappeared and was classified as an escapee who was a threat to himself and others.


25-Year Checkup Shows Gains in Air Quality but a Decline in TrashDisposal
In 25 years, New York City has made significant gains in improving its air quality and the cleanliness of its waterways, but the quality of its drinking water has slipped, and disposing of the city's garbage is a persistent problem,  according to a report by a leading environmental advocacy group.
The report by the Natural Resources Defense Council, "New York City's Environmental Vital Signs: A 25-Year Checkup," compiled findings from 75 governmental and independent studies to paint a broad picture of the city's environment since the first Earth Day, in April 1970.


A Blend of Jazz, Flamenco and Crossover Dreams
Ballet Hispanico aims to please, a rare and lovely thing in dance these days.
And the company, now celebrating its 25th year, entertains with class and with a respect for the traditions of its past.
Those were the messages on Friday night, when it presented the second of three programs being offered this anniversary season, which runs through Sunday at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea).
Tina Ramirez, who founded and directs this good-looking and skillful group, casts a wide-ranging net for repertory.
George Faison's "Cafe America," performed to music by Ruben Blades and Julio Iglesias, takes a look at the bittersweet dreams of three men trying to cross the border into the United States in a rattletrap that has died on them as the dance begins.
Mr.
Faison quickly sets the scene, with the help of his set designer, Pepon Osorio, and the dusty but cheerful little car from which the men tumble at the start.


Firearms Deer Season Opens
Relatively warm weather drew some 115,000 hunters to New Jersey forests as the six-day firearms deer season opened yesterday, officials of the State Division of Fish, Game and Wildlife said.
About 12,000 whitetail deer are expected to be killed by week's end, the A.P. reported.


Foreign Business to Put $6.3 Billion in Mexico
For the second time in a week, President Ernesto Zedillo convened a group of  business executives at the presidential mansion today to announce hefty new foreign investments in Mexico.
Last Wednesday, 30 of the heaviest hitters in Mexican business -- men like Carlos Slim Helu of Telefonos de Mexico and Claudio X. Gonzalez of Kimberly-Clark -- announced that their companies would collectively invest $6.2  billion in 1996.


Alberto-Culver And BBDO to Part
The Alberto-Culver Company said yesterday that after a decade it had agreed to part company with BBDO Chicago, a unit of the Omnicom Group that has handled  accounts like VO5 hair-care products, Molly McButter seasoning and Static Guard  spray.
The billings were estimated at $12 million.
Dan Stone, a spokesman for Alberto-Culver in Melrose Park, Ill., confirmed a report of the change this week in Adweek, adding that the company was deciding whether to conduct a review or reassign the brands to one of the other agencies  it uses.
They are Lois/U.S.A. and E. Morris Communications in Chicago and Partners &amp; Shevack in New York.


B.A.T. Unit Picks Interpublic Agencies
The Farmers Insurance Group of Companies, a unit of B.A.T.
Industries, said yesterday that it had named C-E Communications and Campbell-Ewald Advertising, sibling shops in Warren, Mich., to handle its consolidated account, with billings estimated at more than $30 million.
Jeffrey Beyer, a spokesman for Farmers Insurance in Los Angeles, said the agencies, owned by the Interpublic Group of Companies, were awarded the account  without a review.
C-E Communications has published a consumer magazine for Farmers Insurance.
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Los Angeles, a unit of True North Communications, previously handled the advertising portion of the account, Mr.
Beyer said.


Barings Focus May Shift to Higher-Ups
For Nicholas W. Leeson, the trader who was sentenced to six and a half years  in prison in Singapore on Saturday for his role in the collapse of Barings, the  case is now largely over.
For some of the executives who oversaw his derivatives trading at the British investment bank, it may be just beginning.
Prosecutors in Singapore, where Mr.
Leeson ran the Barings trading desk, have provided few details of their investigation other than to say that it is continuing.
But their agreement to a plea deal with Mr.
Leeson under which they  effectively dropped nine of the 11 charges against him in return for his cooperation suggested that Mr.
Leeson had provided information that could lead to further prosecutions.


Japan Economy Expanded Only Slightly in 3d Quarter
Japan's economy expanded only slightly in the third quarter, the Government reported today, and economists said the nation was still struggling to recover after four years of slow growth.
The Economic Planning Agency said gross domestic product rose two-tenths of 1 percent in the quarter from the prior three months, or at an annual rate of six-tenths of 1 percent.
That was slower than a revised expansion of six-tenths  of 1 percent in the second quarter from the first quarter.


Gains in the Metro-North Settlement
New York City's northern commuters won a reprieve yesterday from the selective strike tactics that plagued the Metro-North railroad last week.
A tentative contract agreement with the teamsters local that represents 697 track  workers spared riders the daily anxiety of wondering whether the union would pick their rail line for the job action of the day.
The union was wise to test the public's tolerance no further, and to accept at least some modest gains in productivity.


A. H. Belo Plans A Media Purchase
The A. H. Belo Corporation agreed in principle today to buy the daily newspaper in Owensboro, Ky., in the first of what could be a string of publishing acquisitions for the Dallas media company.
Belo, which publishes The Dallas Morning News, said it planned to buy The Owensboro Messenger-Inquirer from the Hagler family.


Morgan Stanley Unit for Wealthy to Grow
Morgan Stanley &amp; Company intends to expand its private-client business aggressively over the next few years, adding several hundred brokers and increasing by billions of dollars the amount of money it manages for these generally wealthy individuals.
In pursuing such a strategy, senior Morgan Stanley executives said yesterday, the Wall Street firm, a unit of Morgan Stanley Group Inc., is seeking to build a business with more stable earnings than those of its core businesses, debt and equity underwriting and mergers and acquisitions advisory services.
The expansion of the private-client business also would allow Morgan Stanley to market on a wider scale many of the same, or similar, financial products that it now sells to institutional customers, the executives added.


Europe Has Few Doubts on Bosnia Force
Except in Germany, the European debate about sending troops to join the NATO  peacekeeping force in Bosnia was over before it started in most other countries.
Nearly every other European country already had troops there with the United Nations force, which NATO will replace after the signing of a peace treaty here, expected 10 days from now.
"France has lost 54 soldiers in Bosnia, and almost 600 have been wounded," Defense Minister Charles Millon said recently, explaining his Government's willingness to join the NATO force.
France led an effort last summer to give the United Nations soldiers more artillery firepower and ground reinforcements, and  Mr.
Millon said that the heavily armed NATO force was the best chance yet of allowing peace to take root in Bosnia.


After a Lifelong Courtship, Spurning the Needle
For much of his life, James Hemphill wished himself dead.
Existence as a heroin addict is worse than no existence at all, he said, recalling how he had spent more than 40 of his 63 years at the mercy of the drug.
"Many times I had picked up needles and said, 'Maybe this will be the one that will do it,' " Mr.
Hemphill said, and the crevices of his face deepened in a wince.
One day, when a friend died of an overdose right beside him, Mr.
Hemphill could only think to himself: "I wonder where he got that stuff?"


ResultsPlus
COLLEGE BASKETBALL


Stocks Rise Broadly, With Dow Up 52.39
The stock market enjoyed a broad rally yesterday, with all three major indicators rising more than 1 percent and scoring new highs.
The biggest percentage gain was made by the Nasdaq composite index, which gained 14.48 points, or 1.37 percent, closing at 1,069.79.
Unlike the other two  indicators, which were at records last Wednesday, the Nasdaq's last high was reached on Sept. 11, when it stood at 1,066.56.


Salinas Denies New Charges By Mexico
Former President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, in a highly unusual written broadside, has rejected accusations he was complicit in corruption and murder, claiming to be the victim of a whisper campaign by another former Mexican President.
Shattering many of the unwritten rules of Mexico's political system, Mr.
Salinas broke out of a nine-month silence with a lengthy statement accusing former President Luis Echeverria of waging a "tremendous political struggle" against him.
He hinted that Mr.
Echeverria, who governed Mexico from 1970 to 1976, could have inspired the assassination in March 1994 of the ruling party's  presidential candidate.


Pillowcase Rapist' Freed by California
A man linked to 200 sex crimes in Southern California in the 1970's was released from prison today even though officials still consider him dangerous.
"He suffers from a mental disorder which makes him a danger to others and for which treatment is not available outside prison," said Christine May, a spokeswoman for the Department of Corrections.
"But he has served his maximum time in prison. He remained in prison for his entire parole period."


Stand-Up Phone Routines


AMERICAN GREETINGS TO BUY AUSTRALIAN CARD UNIT
The American Greetings Corporation has signed an agreement to buy the assets  of the John Sands Group, the biggest greeting card company in Australia and New  Zealand.
Terms of the cash transaction were not disclosed in the companies' announcement Sunday.
John Sands, which makes and distributes greeting cards, is  a unit of Amcor Ltd. of Melbourne, and has been a licensee of American Greetings designs.
The acquisition could add $100 million in sales for American Greetings in 1997 but would have minimal impact on 1996 earnings, the company said.
American Greetings, based in Cleveland, had 1995 earnings of $148.8 million on sales of $1.87 billion.


Peru Arrests U.S. Woman, 26, Linking Her to Guerrilla Group
A 26-year-old New York woman has been arrested in Lima, Peru, on suspicion of aiding a band of Marxist revolutionaries who were captured last week in a siege  that left three guerrillas and a police officer dead, Peruvian authorities said  last night.
The woman, Lori Helene Berenson, was arrested on Thursday before the police moved into an affluent Lima neighborhood and laid siege to what was described as a hideout of the pro-Cuban Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement, a group smaller and less well known than Shining Path, whose activities have been blamed for 30,000 deaths since 1980.


WALLACE COMPUTER'S TAKEOVER DEFENSE UPHELD
Wallace Computer Services can use its "poison pill" to fight the Moore Corporation's $1.38 billion hostile takeover bid, a Federal judge in Delaware ruled yesterday.
United States District Court Judge Murray Schwartz denied a request by Moore to strike down the takeover defense, but he also dismissed Wallace's counterclaim that a merger with Moore, which is based in Toronto, would violate United States antitrust laws.
Wallace, based in Chicago, has rejected Moore's overtures for four months, even though about 73.5 percent of Wallace's shares have been tendered to Moore's $60-a-share offer.
Wallace stock  closed at $58.25 yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, a gain of 37.5 cents.
Moore needs 80 percent of the shares to defeat the poison pill; it urged Wallace shareholders to meet that requirement before Wallace's annual meeting on Friday.


Giuliani Faces Dip in Support, New Poll Finds
Halfway through his term, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani now has the approval of only about a third of the city, the lowest rating since he took office, according to a Marist poll released yesterday.
The poll, taken among 612 city residents last week, shows a sharp drop in the Mayor's popularity since the last Marist poll in April.
At that point, 44 percent gave the Mayor a good or excellent rating, compared to 35 percent last week.
A year ago, 51 percent gave their approval.


Too Popular for Its Own Good
In television, most hit series are like dogs, at least in terms of life spans.
If a show reaches 10 or 11 years, it's a senior citizen.
But five years works out to a robust 35, the prime of prime-time life.


NEWS SUMMARY
International
A3-12


Clinton's Role for Northern Ireland Talks: Restoring the Focus on the Big Picture
In the aftermath of the near-euphoria created by President Clinton on his visit to Northern Ireland and to Dublin last week, hopes have never been higher  among ordinary people and officials for lasting peace in the North since sectarian violence erupted there in 1969.
There are still serious obstacles to be faced in the coming months as officials try to work in a new "twin-track" framework.
It was announced by the Irish and British Prime Ministers last Tuesday in London, after intense White House pressure to do so before the President's arrival on Wednesday.


Brooklyn Mother Charged With Beating Crying Baby
Just 10 days after Elisa Izquierdo, 6, was found fatally beaten in her Manhattan apartment, a Brooklyn mother has been arrested for punching her 4-month-old son into semiconsciousness and scalding his hands with hot water because he would not stop crying, the police said yesterday.
The mother, Natasha Melvin, 20, of 781 Washington Avenue in Prospect Heights, has been charged with the attempted murder and assault of her son, Joshua, who is being treated at Methodist Hospital for a skull fracture and burns.
He is listed in critical but stable condition.


As Larger Cities Gain Ground on Ills, Smaller Ones Lose
Increases in violent crime, infant mortality the spread of AIDS and other urban problems have begun to recede in some of the nation's largest cities, while they are continuing to rise in smaller cities, a new report by a public-health research organization said today.
The report, issued by the nonprofit National Public Health and Hospital Institute, was based on census information, Federal crime statistics and health-care surveys from the nation's 100 largest cities.
It found, among other  things, that from 1980 to 1990, the number of children living in poverty increased nationally by 12 percent, while in the 25 largest cities, the ranks of poor children increased by 9.4 percent.


Congress and White House Barter Over Support for U.S. Mission
The Clinton Administration said today that it was willing to accept a proposal from Congress that Washington provide for training and arming the Bosnian Muslims, as long as the United States does not directly provide the arms itself.
In preparation for debate in the Senate as early as Wednesday, Republicans today were hammering out a resolution that would restrict American involvement in Bosnia to military matters only and that would provide for the arming of the  Bosnian Muslims by the time American troops withdraw from the NATO peacekeeping  force in a year.


GRAPHIX ZONE AND STARPRESS PLANNING A MERGER
The CD-ROM publishers Graphix Zone Inc. and Starpress Inc. said yesterday that they expected to merge in a deal worth about $39 million.
Ron Posner, chairman of San Francisco-based Starpress, said Graphix Zone would exchange about 4.4 million shares of common stock for all of Starpress.
The transaction was worth about $39 million based on Graphix Zone's closing share price of $8.875 on Friday in Nasdaq trading.
But its shares dropped $1.375, or 15.5 percent, to $7.50 yesterday.
Charles R. Cortright, president of Graphix Zone, said the combined company would have about 55 CD-ROM titles with another 45 titles under development for release by the end of 1996.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball


Woman Killed by Q Train
A woman died yesterday after she apparently jumped in front of a northbound Q train pulling into the Herald Square subway station in Manhattan, the police said.
The incident occurred around 4:20 P.M. in the station at 34th Street and the Avenue of the Americas, said Doram Tamari, a police spokesman.
"Several witnesses stated that she jumped in front of the train," Mr.
Tamari said.
"As a preliminary matter, there is no indication that she was the victim of a crime. The Police Department did not release woman's identity or her age.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL REPORT
St. Francis


Lab Pleads No Contest In Deaths of 2 Women
A medical laboratory accused of reckless homicide for misreading the Pap smears of two women who later died of cervical cancer entered no contest pleas today, avoiding a trial in the case.
As part of the settlement between the laboratory, Chem-Bio Corporation, and prosecutors, Judge David Hansher did not immediately enter a verdict against the company and allowed the laboratory to appeal certain elements of the case, including the basic question of whether a corporation can be charged with homicide.


Then There Were 27: Opaque Playoff Picture
The National Football League season is winding down and playoff fever is picking up.
Only three teams -- the Jets, Jacksonville and Arizona -- have been  eliminated from playoff contention with only three weeks left in the regular season.
That means 27 teams still have a shot at the playoffs, although teams like the Giants (4-9), Washington (4-9), Cleveland (4-9), Houston (5-8), New England  (5-8) and Cincinnati (5-8) are nothing more than mathematical aberrations at this point.


Free Doses of Experimental AIDS Drug
Abbott Laboratories said today that starting next month it would give away doses of its experimental AIDS drug ritonavir to 2,000 people worldwide who are  in late stages of the disease.
Americans will compete for the drug through a lottery and can sign up immediately.
Patients outside the United States will be chosen by doctors instead of through a lottery.


Degrees of Separation;At York College, Race and Generation Etch Tensions
On a crisp morning this fall, administrators bedecked in blue satin doctoral  gowns and matching mortarboards celebrated the founding of York College in South Jamaica, Queens, with lofty speeches in the school's sprawling auditorium.


Foreign Aid or Handout?
To the Editor:
Why is it that when President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia or any other world leader comes to the United States looking for financial help or better trade relations, you call it foreign aid, investment and loans, but in a Dec. 1 news article on the Cuban leader Fidel Castro's visit to China, you say Mr.
Castro is "perhaps eager for a new source of handouts"?
Could you explain the difference?


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday about O. Roy Chalk, whose business interests included real estate, airlines, bus companies, newspapers and a rail line, referred incorrectly in some editions to the timing of his sale of the Spanish-language newspaper El Diario-La Prensa to the Gannett Company.
It was in 1981, not 25 years ago.


Only Education Can End Cycle of Child Abuse
To the Editor:
Richard Rhodes (Op-Ed, Dec. 1) is right that social agencies suffer from a family-centered view of child welfare, but there are many other factors that keep child abuse alive.


Kentucky Fried Reopens
Kentucky Fried Chicken reopened its franchised restaurant yesterday in New Delhi an hour after it won a court battle against the city government.
The chain, owned by Pepsico Inc., and a handful of other international chains have been made targets by Indian conservatives who object to unrestricted foreign investment and the introduction of "junk food." The New Delhi High Court overturned a city ordinance that canceled the restaurant's license three weeks ago.
(AP)


Saratoga May Run In September
Saratoga racing until Labor Day?
The idea is being pushed by Kenny Noe Jr., chairman of the New York Racing Association, who is convinced that the summer season upstate would be enhanced by extending it into September.
An announcement could come as early as today in  Albany, where a racing association news conference has been called.


The Mac's High Road to the Internet
MACINTOSH users were stung by a recent report, paid for and supervised by the Microsoft Corporation, which concluded that Windows 95 users are more productive, more accurate and better looking than Macintosh or OS/2 users.
The results seem to contradict a similar study conducted several years ago, paid for and supervised by Apple Computer Inc., which concluded that Macintosh operating system (Mac OS) users were more productive, more accurate and of higher moral character than Windows users.


Logistics of Pataki's Proposal to Dismantle Lilco
A board appointed by Gov.
George E. Pataki has developed a plan to dismantle  the Long Island Lighting Company.
Here is a description of the proposal and its  impact.
The Plan


Shortcut to Vegetables
Winter vegetables like squashes and sweet potatoes are usually associated with long cooking.
But if cut into small pieces, they can be cooked quickly.
Winter-Vegetable Medley 8 ounces sweet potato or yam 8 ounces thin-skinned white or yellow potato 2 teaspoons canola oil 2 large cloves garlic 16 ounces butternut squash 4 ounces peeled baby carrots Several sprigs fresh sage to yield 2 tablespoons chopped 1/8 teaspoon salt Freshly ground black pepper to taste 2 tablespoons no-salt-added chicken or vegetable stock 2 medium apples.


Finding Refuge, and Now Recovery, in Writing
When she was 5, and when she was 35, it was the writing that pulled her through.
As a girl in Brooklyn, a friendly game of hide-and-seek ended abruptly  when a handyman in her building cornered her and demanded that she take off her  clothes.
Donna C. dodged his advances, ran back to her apartment and wrote a poem.
As a mother and wife in an abusive marriage, Ms.
C. clung to her pen and paper again, scribbling her sorrows in the pages of her journal.
In 30 years, she has filled nearly 40 books with poetry and prose and sad songs to herself.


Illness and Illiteracy: A Perilous Combination
Researchers have found that a disturbing number of patients are unable to read basic written medical instructions, a potential threat to their health.
Of 2,659 patients studied at two large public hospitals, nearly 30 percent had inadequate functional literacy.
The percentage was much higher among elderly patients.


Corrections
An obituary on Dec. 4 about Jurgen Wattenberg, who organized a daring escape  from a World War II prisoner-of-war camp in Arizona, referred incorrectly in some editions to the role played by a Royal Canadian Air Force officer in a similarly audacious, and larger, breakout from a German P.O.W. camp that inspired the movie "The Great Escape." The officer, C. Wallace Floody, who died  in 1989, was a mining expert who had a significant part in the tunneling operation.
He was not in command of the escape.
The leader was Roger Bushell, a  Royal Air Force officer who was executed after his recapture by the Germans.


Municipal Arts Society Names President
The Municipal Arts Society, a century-old leader in efforts to preserve the city's finest architecture and to promote rational development, has chosen a former New York City commissioner of sanitation, Brendan Sexton, as its new president.
Mr.
Sexton, vice president for governmental affairs at the Rockefeller Group, a real estate and telecommunications corporation, replaces Kent L. Barwick, who  resigned to become president of the New York State Historical Society.


President, Yielding to G.O.P., Will Offer Plan Erasing Deficit
Acceding to Republican demands, the White House said today that by week's end it would give Congress a proposal to erase the Federal budget deficit in seven years, and offered a detailed description of how it would cut projected spending on Medicare, one of the most crucial elements of the plan.
The development was a genuine if faint sign of movement in a political logjam that has blocked a balanced-budget accord for close to a year.
But as budget talks resumed today after a bitter five-day standoff, negotiators on each side continued to charge that the other was blocking progress toward an agreement.


Shift Is Sought In Financing For Hospitals
A task force appointed by Gov.
George E. Pataki yesterday recommended sweeping changes in the way health care is financed in New York State, proposing that the state stop setting the rates that insurers pay hospitals to care for their patients.
The proposal follows a growing trend across the country, as states that had once sought to contain the growth of health-care costs by setting prices have decided to let market forces perform that role.


Recruiting In Shadow Of Bosnia
UNLESS you know exactly where it is, you can walk past the United States Army recruiting station near Lincoln Center without giving it so much as a glance.
It blends into the background at Amsterdam Avenue and 66th Street, dwarfed by Martin Luther King Jr.
High School across the street and no more conspicuous than the hairdresser's shop next door.
No sir, said Sgt.
First Class Abelito Solis, the station commander, young men and women are not in the habit of dropping in to sign up.
He and his three fellow recruiters really have to pursue them at the 12 high schools and 2 colleges in their district.


Bartok, All In a Hard Day's Work
The Emerson String Quartet can play the six Bartok quartets splendidly, as it proved in a Deutsche Grammophon recording in 1988.
It can even play these grand, gnarled creations well in a single concert, as it has done several times, notably in 1981 at Alice Tully Hall, to observe the centennial of the composer's birth, and on Sunday afternoon at Avery Fisher Hall, to observe the 50th anniversary of his death.
These events have been justly acclaimed not only for the quality of the performances but also for the light they shed on Bartok's compositional development (true, a function that records serve as well).
And much of the large crowd on Sunday responded in kind to the players' concentrated intensity and stamina.


No Headline
On any given day, if a legislator or a governor has to choose between someone in a nursing home or a disabled person needing home services and a child who sometime in the next six months should see a doctor, the child won't prevail.
He doesn't vote." -- DONNA  CHECKETT, chairwoman of the National Association of State Medicaid Directors [B12:1.]


Vermeer Paintings Drawing Crowds


Sony's Tokyo Leadership Is Cast Into Hollywood Role
Just a year ago, Sony Pictures of America vowed to overhaul its studios and start making profitable movies after its Japanese parent took a staggering $2.7  billion write-off on the Columbia and Tri-Star studios.
Even by Hollywood's standards, Sony's lavish spending, for lots and offices, executive buyouts and failed films, had seemed extraordinary.
The abrupt resignation today of Sony's top American executive, Michael P. Schulhof, a former physicist, made it evident not only that the pledge failed, but that for the first time the Sony leadership in Tokyo would play a more muscular role in operating the studios.


HUTCHINSON OF FRANCE TO BUY DANAHER UNIT
The Danaher Corporation said yesterday that it would sell its Fayette Tubular Products Inc. unit to Hutchinson S.A. of France for $155 million.
Fayette, which had revenue of $175 million in 1994, makes air-conditioning equipment for automobiles.
Danaher, which is based in Washington, makes tools, environmental controls and transportation products.
The company had sales of about $1.3 billion last year.
Hutchinson, which has annual revenue of roughly $1.6 billion, makes rubber and other materials for the automotive, industrial and consumer markets.
It is a subsidiary of Total S.A., which is based in Paris.
Danaher announced the deal after the close of stock trading.


How to Decide What Science to Cut
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 3 editorial endorses a National Research Council panel recommendation to favor universities over Government laboratories when parsing out science funding cuts.
Scientific advances reported in your pages are replete with instances of contributions by Government scientists, and of collaborations  between Government and university scientists, in space medicine and the environment, to name two.


Mother, 18, Charged In Newborn's Death
An 18-year-old was charged last night with killing her newborn daughter inside her family's apartment in East Harlem, the police said.
The teen-ager, Violeta Castellanos, who the police said had kept her pregnancy hidden, delivered a full-term baby around 3:30 A.M. on Monday inside her bedroom in her family's apartment at 2177 Third Avenue near 119th Street.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Vote Set on Busing Resolution
Last month, Robert H. Robinson, the president of the Bergen County chapter of the N.A.A.C.P., said he was opposed to forced busing, a position that put him at odds with the national organization.
Tonight, the Bergen County Board of Freeholders will vote on a resolution to endorse Mr.
Robinson's stance.
Several  proposals that would create a regional school district and require some students to be bused from predominantly white towns are being weighed as state officials  try to desegregate Dwight Morrow High School in Englewood.
James Sheehan, a freeholder who is chairman of the board's education committee, said the resolution is meant to demonstrate that opposition to busing should not be equated with racism.


The Doomsday Clock Is Alive and Ticking
To the Editor:
"How Many Minutes to Midnight 50 Years After the A-Bomb's Birth?" (Week in Review, Dec. 3) left me wondering where The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists and its subscribers have been since the end of the cold war.
Given that the nuclear nations have "tested" hundreds of nuclear weapons aggressively against their own people for the last 50 years -- not to mention France's atomic bombing of the South Pacific, which continues to this day -- I think the magazine's doomsday clock should long ago have been moved forward beyond its misleading midnight threshold.


Foreign Affairs;The Clinton Gamble
In the wake of President Clinton's vigorous diplomatic efforts to bring the war in Bosnia to a close, his foreign policy is getting a second look, with a lot of analysts concluding about the Clinton foreign policy what Mark Twain once said of the music of Wagner: It's not as bad as it sounds.
In the midst of this revisionist mood, the journal Foreign Affairs will publish next month a provocative analysis by Prof.
Michael Mandelbaum, who teaches at the Johns Hopkins school of international studies and argues that the Clinton foreign policy really is as bad as it sounds.
His thesis is that the Clinton policy is congenitally flawed because it never identified U.S. national  interests abroad after the cold war, but instead tried to conduct foreign policy by "the standards of Mother Teresa," trying to "turn American foreign policy into a branch of social work."


Brooklyn Fire Kills Girl, 8; Woman Hurt
An 8-year-old girl was killed and a 61-year-old woman was critically injured  last night when a fire roared through their apartment building in Brooklyn, fire officials said.
The fire started before 6 P.M., inside an apartment on the top floor of 1190  Park Place, a three-story building several blocks east of Prospect Park, said Firefighter George Semidey, a spokesman.


Dance in Review
Mixing Modern Dance of the West With Eastern Forms and Rituals Tao's Dance Theater Taipei Theater


Orsulak Signs With Marlins
Joe Orsulak has helped the Mets beat Florida so often that the Marlins decided today to sign the free-agent outfielder to a two-year deal worth $1,275,000.
"He's been known as the Marlins' killer," General Manager Dave Dombrowski said.
"He has broken our backs many times."
Orsulak, 33, will add strength to the Marlins' bench, filling in when Gary Sheffield, Jeff Conine, Greg Colbrunn or Devon White are given days off, Dombrowski said.


Poor Service for Waiters
To The Living Section:
Having worked in the restaurant industry for more than 10 years, I have been  a witness to many accidents described by Suzanne Hamlin in her Nov. 8 article, "Dangers Abound for Restaurant Employees." Not mentioned, though, is a peril many restaurant employees must contend with on a daily basis: illogical owners and managers.


Journal;Municipal Bond
Tonight in swank dining rooms up and down Manhattan, the city's ruling class  -- those ubiquitous celebrities and just-plain-rich people you can't escape in the style pages and gossip columns -- will toast the New York Public Library's 100th anniversary in 100 separate dinners.
Tickets are $350.
The toast, to be read at each dinner at 9:30, is by Toni Morrison.
The apres-coffee entertainment ranges from a discussion of Proust to a cabaret recital by Karen Akers.
You can't be blamed for thinking that this glittering centennial fund-raiser  smacks of "Bonfire of the Vanities." It all sounds a little too-too.
But the truth is otherwise.
The New York Public Library has earned the right to a night  of elitism in its own egalitarian cause.
In a city where class divisions are widening, where museums charge as much as movies and where public education is in peril, the library remains not only an institution that works but one that still upholds the old, tarnished faith that a great city might deliver great services to all its citizens.


Ex-Clinton Adviser Is Told Not to Answer Whitewater Queries
Asserting the lawyer-client privilege for the second time in a week, the White House today ordered a former adviser to President Clinton not to answer questions from the Senate Whitewater committee about a November 1993 meeting of  Mr.
Clinton's top personal and Government lawyers and other officials to discuss the Whitewater affair.
The adviser, William Kennedy, former White House associate counsel, repeatedly declined to answer questions from the senators about the meeting or notes he took at it.
Other aides involved in the meeting were three White House  officials -- Bruce Lindsey, Bernard W. Nussbaum and Neil Eggleston -- and three  lawyers who have worked on the personal and financial interests of the First Family -- David Kendall, James Lyons and Stephen Engstrom.


APS HOLDING AGREES TO BUY A MAKER OF AUTO PARTS
The APS Holding Corporation of Houston said yesterday that it had reached a definitive agreement with the British industrial company GKN P.L.C. to acquire Parts Inc., a distributor of aftermarket automotive parts, for $80 million.
Parts Inc., which is based in Memphis, had sales of about $236 million in 1994.
The deal is expected to close in late January.
APS announced the deal after its  stock closed at $20.75, up $1 a share, in Nasdaq trading.


Gift to Midtown (and Beyond) From Sisters of Christian Charity


Market Place;An also-ran in the technology sector begins to show a pulse.
THESE are tough times for investors looking for undervalued stocks in the booming technology sector.
But one company that has largely missed out on the recent party and is starting to look attractive to some analysts is the Data General Corporation.
The company, which is based in Westboro, Mass., was a darling of Wall Street  in the 1970's and early 1980's, when it was a leading seller of minicomputers.
But in the late 1980's, as corporations abandoned such proprietary systems in favor of so-called open systems computers that run a larger variety of off-the-shelf software, Data General was hit hard.


Molitor Joins Twins With $2 Million Pact
PAUL MOLITOR returned home yesterday, agreeing to a $2 million, one-year contract with the Minnesota Twins with a $2 million player option for 1997.
"Every night when I lay down, I kept saying 'Minnesota,' Molitor, who grew up in St. Paul, said at a news conference.


CHRONICLE
Dr.
EDWARD O. WILSON, who has won two Pulitzer Prizes for nonfiction, is about to add another major award to his resume: the Audubon Medal from the National Audubon Society.
He is to receive the prize, a tribute to achievement in conservation and environmental protection, tomorrow at the society's annual dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria.
A biologist and naturalist, Dr.
Wilson is the Pellegrino University Professor at Harvard University and curator in entomology at the university's Museum of Comparative Zoology.
He has spent the last year advising members of Congress, who he wants to reauthorize and strengthen the Endangered Species Act.


Promised Land?
How much land did God promise Israel?
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin lost his life for his willingness to bargain away land that, his assassin believed, was a part of the divine promise.
The national debate that has followed, as the new Prime Minister, Shimon Peres, works to fulfill Mr.
Rabin's plan, might do well to include some discussion about what the Bible has to say about that divine promise.
According to one line of biblical interpretation, the homeland promised to the Jews is no more than the modest portion of ancient Canaan assigned by God to Judah, the fourth son of the patriarch Jacob by his first wife, Leah.
According  to Joshua 15:1-12, Judah was to receive roughly the territory lying between the  Dead Sea and the Mediterranean.


Earnings Up at Siebe
The engineering company Siebe P.L.C. said yesterday that its pretax profits jumped 20 percent in the six months through Sept. 30, despite a slowdown in some United States and European markets.
The company, based in Windsor, England, said its earnings were L144.2 million ($221.6 million) and its revenue was up 18 percent, at L1.2 billion ($1.84 billion).
The gains were led by the process controls unit.
(Reuters)


Unfunny Legal Ads
To the Editor:
Re your Nov. 29 Our Towns column on legal advertising: Legal ads that use sex to attract clients hurt the public.
Fashion and fun do not mix with people's legal problems.
Practicing law is serious business, and most practitioners know  they make a name for themselves by doing excellent legal work for the clients who have retained them and by working for their community.


Sri Lanka's Army Raises Flag in Rebel Capital
The Sri Lankan Army raised the country's flag over the center of the city of  Jaffna today, capping a fierce 50-day offensive that drove Tamil rebels from an  urban stronghold that had been their capital for five years.
The flag-raising ceremony was televised live across Sri Lanka, where the drive to recapture the country's second-largest city has had deep emotional and  political resonance.


GOODYEAR CHOOSES A NEW CHIEF EXECUTIVE
The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company said yesterday that Samir F. Gibara, its president and chief operating officer, would become chief executive, effective on Jan. 1.
Mr.
Gibara, 55, will take over from Stanley C. Gault, who is also chairman of the Akron-based tire company.
Mr.
Gault, 69, will remain chairman until June 30.
The company's board said it intended to name Mr.
Gibara chairman  next June.
Mr.
Gibara was named president and chief operating officer April 10.
Mr.
Gibara, a Harvard M.B.A. born in Cairo and fluent in several languages,  is a 30-year Goodyear veteran whose experience includes executive posts with Goodyear in Canada and Europe.


Former Official Now Faces Fewer Charges
A Federal judge on Monday dropped seven charges of lying against former Interior Secretary James G. Watt, but upheld 18 other charges involving Mr.
Watt's lobbying at the Department of Housing and Urban Development after leaving office in October 1983.
Judge Royce C. Lamberth of Federal District Court threw out seven counts alleging that Mr.
Watt made false statements in Congressional testimony and personally or through his lawyer in response to a Federal grand jury subpoena for his records.
Prosecutors had agreed that five of the counts had to be dropped.


France's Turmoil Center Stage, The Dollar Is Generally Lower
The dollar fell against leading European currencies yesterday as traders took profits while hoping for a resolution of the broad strikes hobbling France.
Traders lacked significant economic data or other reasons to push the dollar  up against the German mark, especially given the reluctance to risk losing profits booked so far this year.
The dollar also failed to benefit from a rally in the American stock markets.


9 Arrested in Fight at West Side High School
A melee involving scores of students broke out about noon yesterday in a basement auditorium at a Manhattan high school, and by the time it was over, 9 students had been arrested and at least 10 injured, the authorities said.


Raising Police Recruit Standards Would Restore Public Faith
To the Editor:
"Higher Standards for Police Recruits" (editorial, Nov. 28) notes that "improving recruitment standards seems so sensible that the public might wonder  why it was not done earlier." Indeed.


Ready for Sticky Pudding?
EVERY 10 years or so, a new dish appears on the culinary horizon, and within  a short time it becomes a national craze, the gastronomic equivalent of the Hula-Hoop.
In the United States a recent example was tiramisu, the Italian coffee-flavored cake smothered with mascarpone.
After nearly a decade of coursing through the nation's arteries, this much-imitated dish seems to have finally reached the saturation point.
The ultimate proof came last summer in Times Square, where a window sign at the Howard Johnson's restaurant announced:  "Yes we serve tiramisu cake!"


VALUE HEALTH PLANS TO ACQUIRE MEDINTELL SYSTEMS
Value Health Inc., a provider of managed health care, said yesterday that it  would acquire the Medintell Systems Corporation, which markets a pharmacy information management system for hospitals.
Value Health will issue about one million shares of common stock to finance the purchase of Medintell, a privately held company based in Minneapolis.
The shares of Value Health rose $2.125 yesterday, to $28.375, on the New York Stock Exchange, so the deal would be worth about $28 million at yesterday's closing price.
Medintell, founded in 1993, has exclusive licenses for certain software from the Mayo Clinic to develop pharmacy management products.
Value Health is based in Avon, Conn.


Florida Executes Molester-Killer of a Young Boy
A man who molested and killed a 6-year-old boy 14 years ago died in the electric chair today in Florida's second execution in less than 24 hours.
The convict, Phillip Atkins, 40, was condemned for the kidnapping and murder  of Antonio Castillo, whom he had picked up in their Lakeland neighborhood, driven to a wooded area and molested.
When Antonio threatened to tell his parents, Mr.
Atkins beat him to death with a steel pipe and his fists.


Lemieux Struts Stuff Against Islanders
Mike Milbury preaches simple hockey.
Tonight, though, there was only one thing that was both plain and simple: Mario Lemieux is as good as they get.


A Big Band, Luxury Class
The saxophonist Jorge Anders led a big band at the Blue Note on Monday night; it was a solid, swinging orchestra based on the mainstream tradition of the 1950's and 60's.
Ten years ago, Mr.
Anders might be leading an exception.
But the big band, in all its various manifestations, has been undergoing such a renaissance recently that the show was ultimately just about the sophistication  of good writing and performing, the pleasure of orchestral opulence.
And Mr.
Anders likes his band to be opulent, with thick reed passages, and precise yet full trumpet and trombone parts.
He arranges his compositions cleverly; they always maintained an unaffected naturalness.
One piece had a pointillistic stop-time section, played by just a few members of the orchestra,  to support a trombone solo.
Another had a melody that bounced around the sections, and during "Double Date," a trombone played the tune, peeking out from behind the full band.
It wasn't particularly challenging music, but it was well-made, fully able to perform its duties.


Red Storm Is 29 Minutes Short of Good
Off to an encouraging start, St.
John's unveiled a patient, unselfish offense tonight and, for once, the Red Storm resembled a team rather than an awkward collection of players.
The noodly center, Zendon Hamilton, delivered 10 of St.
John's first 15 points, and the Red Storm took an 18-14 lead on a contortionist move and a free  throw by Felipe Lopez.


Jets Big on Giveaways, But Don't Point Fingers
Every football coach will tell you that his job security can be obliterated by finger-pointing players.
Last year, finger-pointers helped end the coaching tenures of Rich Kotite with the Philadelphia Eagles and Pete Carroll with the Jets.
Now Kotite coaches  the 3-10 Jets, who have a good defense and an unproductive offense.
To his credit, his defensive players, instead of complaining, are encouraging the offense.


Blast Rocks Russian Deputy's Office
An explosion blew apart the office of a far-right member of the Russian Parliament this evening, less than two weeks before the parliamentary elections.
Nobody was hurt in the attack.
The legislator, Nikolai Lysenko, had left his  seventh-floor office in the Parliament building only moments before the explosion.


Study Ties Binge Drinking To Fraternity House Life
Living in a fraternity or sorority house is by far the strongest indicator of binge drinking in college, a new study by the Harvard School of Public Health reports.
Eighty-six percent of fraternity residents and 80 percent of sorority women are binge drinkers, the report said -- that is, they had five or more drinks in  one sitting at least once in the two weeks before the survey was done.
This compares with 45 percent of men not affiliated with fraternities and 36 percent  of women.


Former Bear, Stearns Executive Creates a New Investment Fund
John C. Sites, Jr., who built Bear, Stearns &amp; Company's mortgage business into a premier Wall Street franchise, has formed the Daystar Special Situations  Fund, a limited partnership that will invest in what it considers undervalued companies, particularly those in financial trouble or even in bankruptcy.
Ever since Mr.
Sites, 43, resigned from Bear, Stearns in July as a director and executive vice president, there had been speculation about what he would do  next.
A popular Wall Street executive who has for several years been among the highest-paid people in the securities industry, Mr.
Sites had frequently been mentioned a candidate for several top jobs at banks and brokerage firms.
Mr.
Sites, however, repeatedly insisted that he wanted to work closer to home and devote more time to charity.


Dewdrop Reigns in the Land of Sweets and Dreams
Debuts by up-and-coming dancers are a regular feature of the New York City Ballet's "Nutcracker" season and Jennie Somogyi, a member of the corps, performed with unusual dazzle when she took on the role of Dewdrop on Sunday night at the New York State Theater.
As the leader of the Waltz of the Flowers, she danced the allegro part that Balanchine invented to complement the adagio role of the Sugarplum Fairy.
In true Balanchine style, Dewdrop's choreography requires both speed and musicality.
But Ms.
Somogyi also added the kind of physical power that is rarely seen in young dancers.


Nutritional Advice
To The Living Section:
I am an American Dietetic Association registered dietitian and I am angry ("Additives in Advice on Food?" Nov. 15).
I never tell my clients to eat at McDonald's, spoon sugar on cereal or fry in palm kernel oil.
Give us credit for  knowing how to help members of the public meet their individual nutritional goals without singing the praises of fast foods, sugar, livestock and dairy.


CBS Must Clear the Air
Now that Westinghouse runs CBS, the new management should set the record straight on the deliberations behind the decision by "60 Minutes" not to broadcast its interview with Jeffrey Wigand, the tobacco industry whistleblower.
CBS lawyers said they blocked the airing of the interview to avoid a multibillion-dollar lawsuit by Mr.
Wigand's former employer, Brown &amp; Williamson, with whom he had an agreement not to disclose confidential information.


U.S. Pesticide Kills Foreign Fruit Pickers' Hopes
Half a lifetime ago, when Mario Brito Dumas was a young man with a bride and  a peasant's head of modest dreams, he tended the lush banana plantations outside Naranjal.
If he had any plan, it was the common one that keeps a man toiling through his best years: to make enough money to raise a family.
But a few years after his first son was born in 1972, Mr.
Brito's plantation  began using a pesticide both miraculous and terrible.
It killed off a microscopic worm that would prevent the bananas' export to the United States, but it also killed pigs, frogs, birds and other creatures that drank water running from the field.


STOCK FALLS AS ACCLAIM ENTERTAINMENT REVISES PROFIT
Acclaim Entertainment Inc., a producer of video games and publisher of comic  books, said yesterday that it was revising its latest quarterly profit downward  by 63 percent to account for revenues it had recorded on products it had not shipped.
Acclaim's stock fell 35 percent in Nasdaq trading, dropping $6.875 a share, to $12.625.
The company said it would not record $10.5 million in net income and $18 million in revenues that had been reported in the quarter that ended on Aug. 31.
The company said those revenues and profits would be realized  in subsequent quarters as products are shipped.
After the revision, the company  earned $6.1 million, or 11 cents a share, on revenues of $133.49 million.


A Case for Strawberries
To The Living Section:
The California Strawberry Commission represents the more than 600 strawberry  farmers in the state.
We are deeply disturbed by the article and graphic under the headline "Do I Dare to Eat a Strawberry?" (Nov. 22).
Our top concern is that the copy was taken verbatim from a report issued by the Environmental Working Group, which is known for manipulating Government data to suit its own agenda.


Mets Remain Optimistic Despite Biggio's Rebuff
The Mets consider themselves to be in a "terrific and enviable" position heading into the 1996 season, in the words of the team vice president Dave Howard, because of the players they have.
But the club apparently will never know how much more enviable its position might have been if it had been able to  add Craig Biggio for next season.
Instead, the free-agent All-Star second baseman seems destined not to sign with the Mets.
On the day the Mets learned that they were losing Joe Orsulak, their free-agent outfielder, to the Florida Marlins, their hopes of signing Biggio faded drastically yesterday.


First Bank Confirms a Large-Scale Buyback of Its Stock
First Bank System Inc. confirmed yesterday that it had begun buying back its  stock in large amounts immediately after announcing an agreement early in November to buy First Interstate Bancorp for about $10 billion in stock.
Wells Fargo &amp; Company, which is waging a hostile bid for First Interstate, raised the issue of the buybacks in recent weeks, contending that First Bank, which is based in Minneapolis, had "artificially inflated" its stock price.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Jump in Prison Population
The number of inmates in state prisons more than doubled in the last decade,  swelling the institutions to 47 percent above intended capacity, a top corrections official testified yesterday at the first meeting of the new Study Commission on Parole.
Stanley Repko, planning director for the Corrections Department, added that  the county jail population grew even faster.
The Associated Press reported that  Mr.
Repko gave two reasons for the increases: more parole violators' being sent  back to prison and mandatory sentencing laws requiring inmates to spend more time behind bars.


Pilgrims and Puritans
To the Editor:
Re "No Puritans at the Feast" (letter, Nov. 28):


It's Plain on Holtz's Face: Notre Dame Is for Life
Notre Dame Coach Lou Holtz doesn't know when his coaching career will end.
He does know where it will end.
Holtz and Notre Dame officials have reached an open-ended agreement that allows him to continue coaching for as long as he wants, provided the program continues to meet university standards.


Student Group Accuses Yale of Usury for a 12% Loan Rate
In its latest effort to portray Yale University as being unfair to students,  the Graduate Student Employees Organization has accused the university of usury  for charging a 12 percent annual interest rate, the highest in the Ivy League, for loans to more than 200 students each year.
Yale says that the loan program, the Yale Student Loan, is offered as a "last resort" for undergraduate and graduate students who have exhausted all other loan options, and that the interest rate is appropriate because such loans have  the Ivy League's highest default rate, nearly 10 percent.


Gene From Ulcer Bacteria Can Increase Cancer Risk
Some bacteria that cause ulcers and intestinal inflammation have a gene that  can spur a breakdown of the stomach lining that in turn increases the risk of cancer, researchers said today.
The bacterium, Helicobacter pylori, is known to be an important cause of stomach ulcers around the world and has previously been linked to certain relatively rare stomach cancers.
But because the bacterium is present in many people who never develop cancer, scientists have wondered what role it may play  in the disease.


SPECIAL PLEADERS: A look at lobbying.;Defying Odds, New Yorker Saves Milk Subsidies
The huge budget package Congress approved and sent to President Clinton last  month would reduce Federal aid to farmers who grow corn, cotton, rice, wheat, peanuts, sugar and almost all other farm products that now benefit from Government subsidies.
But largely because of the relentless stand of Representative Gerald B. H. Solomon, a Republican from upstate New York, all the provisions involving the dairy industry were stripped from the legislation, letting milk producers retain their subsidies.


At the Nation's Table: New Oxford, Pa.;Those Happy People? Steak Lovers, Of Course
Vernon Lehr was pretty sure he knew what he was doing in 1960 when he built the Pixie, a single-story white brick bar and restaurant (with a 16-unit motel in back) along Route 94 north of Route 30 in south-central Pennsylvania.
Both roads carried a lot of trucks, and truckers liked to dig into thick, juicy steaks that wouldn't set them back a week's wage.
So did the locals from New Oxford and other hamlets between Harrisburg and the Maryland border.
But to be safe, Mr.
Lehr put the Pixie's liquor license in the name of his companion, Margaret Stough.
That way, she could run the place if he had to go back to fixing televisions to earn a living.
He never had to.


Allen Becomes the Raiders' Chief Nemesis
Watching the Raiders and the Chiefs scrap here on Sunday was like watching two teams turned inside out.
There have been so many defections from one side to the other that the colors were blurred.
You had coaches who switched sides and players who jumped to the other ship, making this rivalry seem surreal.
The intensity of this rivalry has not been matched by anything now in pro football.
And what a series -- through 74 games, the record stands at 36-36-2.
The Chiefs have the upper hand, having beaten the Raiders in 12 of the last 13 games and 6 consecutively.
The biggest switch between the teams is Marcus Allen, the running back who for so long was a huge part of the Raiders' identity.
The consummate Raider.


Cuts in Products And Staff Set At Rubbermaid
Rubbermaid Inc., often named among the nation's most admired companies, said  yesterday that it needed to make major changes in how it manufactures and distributes its thousands of plastic products for households and businesses.
Abandoning what it described as "incremental" efforts to cope with slow sales growth and plunging profits, Rubbermaid said it would drastically cut back on the variety of its product line, reorganize its distribution and production systems, and cut its worldwide work force by 1,200 employees, or 9 percent.


French Clash On Cultures
History shows that often the French cannot think about the future before bringing the present crashing down around them, as Prime Minister Alain Juppe must have known before proposing to reshape the deficit-ridden French state to fit 21st-century financial realities.
The response from France's powerful public-sector labor unions has been a series of paralyzing transport strikes that will not stop until the Government withdraws proposals to reshape the national health and pension systems and the money-losing railways, labor leaders say.
But the Government says it cannot give in and let them collapse.


The Sound, the Fury and the Facts on Chromium
A REPORT that chromium picolinate, a widely used dietary supplement, can damage chromosomes has touched off a sometimes furious debate between the authors of the paper and critics of their studies.
The scientific study was published this week in The Faseb Journal, a scientific publication of the Federation of American Societies of Experimental Biology.
But early news of the findings, including an article in The New York Times, prompted such a strong response from critics that the scientists published a response to critics along with their original paper.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 6 about reaction among Jews in New York to the assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel referred incompletely to Yossi Yaffe, who asserted that he could "understand the frustration the young man who killed Rabin must have been feeling." While Mr.
Yaffe identified himself as a member of the Lubavitch sect in Brooklyn, he spoke as an individual, not as a spokesman for the movement.
The movement has condemned Mr.
Rabin's assassination as "despicable."


Dance in Review
For the Sake of Movement, Gathering and Scattering Catherine Tharin and Bernadette Knaeble Merce Cunningham Studio


Corrections
An article yesterday about Mexico misstated the term of former President Luis Echeverria.
He governed Mexico from 1970 to 1976.


Gramercy Park Woman Is Held as a Rebel in Peru
As she was growing up near Gramercy Park in Manhattan, Lori Helene Berenson stood apart from many teen-agers: she served food in soup kitchens, chose summer jobs over summer camp, and threw herself into classical voice training and folk  music.
She was always curious about Latin American culture and sympathetic with the  downtrodden, family and friends said, but Ms.
Berenson was not someone who spoke of politics.
The word Marxism, they say, never came up, not when she was an A student at La Guardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, not when she was studying anthropology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
And the notion of violence repelled her.


Senate Approves Tough Limits On Lawsuits by Shareholders
The Senate voted today to give its final approval to a measure that would discourage lawsuits by shareholders who say they were defrauded by corporate officers, accountants or stock brokers.
The bill, a product of negotiations between representatives from both houses  of Congress, was approved by a vote of 65 to 30.
On Wednesday, it is to be taken up by the House, where it is expected to receive similarly quick and decisive approval.


All Sides Attack Plan to Equalize Opportunity to Learn
New Jersey's main educational organizations representing teachers, school boards and affluent school districts, and a public interest group on behalf of the poor, all criticized a new state plan for school financing today.
They argued during legislative hearings that it would dilute the caliber of the best  public schools, fail to meet court orders to create equal schools statewide and promote a property tax rollback.
"If you embark down the path outlined by the department, it will be yet another journey to certain unconstitutionality," said Paul L. Tractenberg, the Rutgers University law professor who has led the 25-year court battle to force New Jersey to offer equal education in its richest and poorest districts.


Chief of RJR Nabisco Gives Up Control
The RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation announced yesterday that Charles M. Harper, its chairman and chief executive, had given up day-to-day control of the company and that Steven F. Goldstone, who was named president in October, had been chosen to succeed him.
Mr.
Harper's abrupt decision to step down as chief executive is effective immediately.
He will remain as chairman and will be a member of the board.


WINE TALK
MORE sparkling wine is sold in November and December than in the other 10 months combined, and that's unfortunate.
Even if we accept the fact that sparkling wines are for celebrations, there have to be other times in the year when there is something worth celebrating.
Weddings once made a difference; June used to be a good sparkling-wine month.
But that was when everyone got married in June.
Now, it's a year-round sport.


No Fare, and No Handcuffs
The New York City Police Department has changed its policy of arresting all subway fare beaters, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said yesterday.
Mr.
Bratton said that the objective of the original fare-beating sweeps by the police -- imprisoning offenders found to be professional criminals or scofflaws with outstanding warrants -- would continue.
But if a quick background check determines that a fare-beating suspect has no criminal record, he will only receive a summons.


Personal Health
IT is that time of year again when most people race from store to store and comb through stacks of catalogues searching for the perfect gift for everyone on their holiday lists.
For some shoppers the task is particularly challenging because the recipient has a physical disability that renders inappropriate many  popular gifts, like in-line skates, books, CD's, board games or tickets to a play or concert.
For example, what might you get for the parent or grandparent who enjoys reading but whose vision is now seriously impaired, or the friend who loves to cook but is now limited by arthritic pain in her hands, or a special person who  uses a wheelchair or must stay in bed?


Giuliani Backs Transfer Of State Jobs Out of City
Other New York City politicians have blasted Gov.
George E. Pataki's decision to move up to 500 state jobs out of the city, calling it "geographical patronage" at the City's expense.
But Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced yesterday that he had no quarrel with the move, noting that it would save money  for the state.
Asked about the plan at a City Hall news conference, the Mayor took the occasion to describe in detail the new cordiality between the two chief executives, who only last fall were at each other's throats.
The Governor, Mr.
Giuliani said, has surprised him by being eminently fair to New York City and the result has been an unusually cooperative relationship.


Lazarus Promoted At Ogilvy &amp; Mather
Shelly Lazarus, president of the North American operations of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide in New York, was promoted yesterday to the new position of president and chief operating officer of Ogilvy Worldwide.
She becomes the agency's No. 2  executive, behind Charlotte Beers, chairwoman and chief executive.
Ms.
Lazarus, 48, will report to Ms.
Beers and be responsible for the operations of the 272 Ogilvy Worldwide offices.
"Shelly is the ideal candidate to help shape the path for continued growth," Ms.
Beers said.


I.R.S. Expects Increase in Filing by Phone
Up to 23 million taxpayers nationwide will be able to replace tax-filing paperwork with a six-minute telephone call next year, the Internal Revenue Service said today.
Taxpayers who now use Form 1040EZ will be able to call the agency's computer  and enter their tax information via touch-tone telephone.


Late-Autumn Walk on a Quiet Beach


Thomas L. Washington, 58, Head of Rifle Group
Thomas L. Washington, a Michigan conservationist and outdoorsman who for the  last 18 months was the sometimes embattled president of the National Rifle Association, died yesterday at a hospital in Dearborn, Mich.
He was 58 and had been hospitalized since he had a heart attack while hunting deer on Nov. 16.
Although he was long outspoken in his belief that the Constitution should and does guarantee a right to own guns, Mr.
Washington, whose unpaid N.R.A. position was largely honorary, was not always as outspoken as some N.R.A. members would have liked.


Yankees Draw Oh-So Close To Making Martinez Trade
Two days after General Manager Bob Watson and the agent for Wade Boggs reached a contract agreement, the Yankees officially announced that the five-time batting champion would return to New York.
Now the question is, will Tino Martinez follow him into the lineup, perhaps as early as today?
The news yesterday that Boggs had signed a two-year, $4 million deal with a club option for the third year was expected, and that drained the transaction of some impact.


Testifying to the Ravages of Granddad's War
Twice the age and perhaps twice as wise as when she started writing fiction in the late 1960's, Pat Barker now understands why her first three books were never published.
"I was writing things that I shouldn't have been trying to write," she recalled.
"I was writing sensitive middle-class lady novels, and it's not what I am."
At the time, of course, she had good reason to believe she had joined the English middle classes.
She had a degree in history and economics from the London School of Economics, she was married to a university professor, she was herself a teacher and she had given birth to the first of her two children.
Her  working-class roots had seemingly disappeared.


Needle-Stabbing Robbery
A 25-year-old man was stabbed with a hypodermic needle by another man who robbed him of $20 and a wallet on the Lower East Side early yesterday, the police said.
The victim, whose name was not released, said the man stabbed his right hand at Avenue B and East Eighth Street, the police said.
The police added that there was no indication of a connection with a syringe stabbing of a girl, 6, by a homeless man in midtown last weekend.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Dec. 1
Nov. 24
Dec. 2
1995
1995
1994 Gasoline production, daily
7.8
7.6
8.2 Distillate production, daily
3.4
3.5
3.3 Gasoline stocks
195.6
191.7
215.0 Distillate stocks
135.1
134.5
145.2 Crude imports, daily
7.5
7.6
6.5 Product imports, daily
1.5
1.8
1.4 Crude stocks
317.3
318.9
339.2 Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.5 Refinery utilization (%)
93.7
91.7
94.9


Know Any Wine Lovers You'd Like to Offend?
ONE mark of a great Champagne is the quality of its bubbles.
In a Krug or a Bollinger or a Dom Perignon, the bubbles are tiny and keep coming until the glass is empty.
In fact, the best champagne glasses are tall, narrow flutes, designed expressly to highlight the bubbles.
A Philadelphia concern specializing in what it calls "utensils for the epicure" is featuring something called a champagne whip this gift-giving season.


COMPANY BRIEFS


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:


PRAXAIR TO REVIEW CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION ABOUT CBI
Praxair Inc. signed a confidentiality agreement yesterday with CBI Industries that grants Praxair the right to review certain nonpublic information about CBI.
Praxair, which is based in Danbury, Conn., said the agreement provided that neither Praxair nor any of its affiliates could acquire any CBI securities before Jan. 15, 1996, except under special conditions.
Praxair proposed buying CBI in October after CBI, which is based in Oak Brook, Ill., broke off merger talks between the companies.
Praxair began a $2.1 billion hostile tender offer on Nov. 3, and it said that as of Friday, holders of 1.6 million of CBI's 38 million shares outstanding had accepted the offer.
Praxair and CBI both make industrial gases.


Little Sign of Austerity in Rail Pacts
Since becoming chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority in May,  E. Virgil Conway has often spoken of the need to trim costs from the sprawling network of subways, buses and commuter railroads.
He has promised that billions  of dollars in savings will be wrung from the system in the next few years and warned that much of that will have to come from labor.
But there is little evidence of that new austerity in the four-year deals that have been struck with Metro-North's labor unions, the authority's first major labor agreements under Mr.
Conway, who was appointed by Gov.
George E. Pataki.
It may be, as some M.T.A. officials suggest, that Metro-North was the trimmest operation and that the true tests lie in the upcoming talks with Long Island Rail Road and Transit Authority unions.


Brown's Lesson: Eat Your Vegetables and Hush
What kind of vegetables are good for you?" Dave Brown asked the class.
About the only thing more difficult than getting hit by a 250-pound linebacker is keeping the attention of some 30 fourth graders.
But there was Brown, in Room 322 at Public School 163 on Manhattan's Upper West Side yesterday, squeezing his 6-foot-5-inch frame into a chair that looked as if it were built for Tiny Tim and simply mesmerizing the 9- and 10-year-old children.


Knicks Beat Mavericks Going Away
Of course, the Knicks were thinking about tonight's showdown against the Chicago Bulls.
Of course, it was easy to overlook last night's opponent, the slumping Dallas Mavericks.
So the result was a sporadic game -- sparkling plays one moment, careless turnovers the next.
Fortunately for the Knicks, their defense was constant, and it allowed them to outlast Dallas, 92-87, making the team's late-night plane ride to Chicago much more pleasant.


Courtaulds-Hoechst Pact
Courtaulds P.L.C., a British chemical company, said yesterday that Hoechst A.G. would own 72 percent of their joint venture to make polypropylene films.
The venture, which still requires the approval of Courtaulds shareholders, would give Hoechst the option, after three years, to buy the 28 percent stake held by  Courtaulds.
The German and British concerns are combining their polypropylene-film factories into a single venture that will hold about 20 percent of the European market.
(Bloomberg Business News)


The Rolling of the Green


U.S. Lists Retailers That Shun Goods From Exploited Workers
The Labor Department today issued a list of 31 clothing retailers that make sure they do not buy goods made by exploited workers.
The department said those on the list complied with United States labor laws  and monitored the work practices of the contractors from which they buy clothing.


Angels Sign Wallach
TIM WALLACH, who has averaged more than 16 home runs and 70 runs batted in over a 15-year career with Montreal and Los Angeles, agreed yesterday to a minor league contract with the California Angels.
The 38-year-old third baseman will report to the Angels' spring training camp as a nonroster invitee with a chance  to earn $500,000 if he makes the team.
AP


Racal Electronics Buying British Rail Phone Unit
The military and communications company Racal Electronics P.L.C. said yesterday that it had agreed to pay L133 million ($204 million) for British Rail's national telephone network.
British Rail Telecommunications, which reported a pretax profit last year of L17.6 million ($27 million), was put up for sale in May as part of the privatization of Britain's rail network.
Its communications network will give Racal a data link passing through most major British cities along British Rail tracks.
Racal, which supplies the electronic terminals for the British lottery, also reported that its pretax profit jumped 28 percent, to L30.1 million ($46 million), in the six months that ended on Sept. 30 and that revenue rose 5 percent, to L505.6 million ($776 million).
(Reuters)


Postal Service Earns Record Net Income Of Over $1.7 Billion
The United States Postal Service finished the 1995 fiscal year with profits of $1.77 billion on revenue of $54.9 billion, Postmaster General Marvin Runyon told the agency's governing board today.
A year earlier the service lost $914 million.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Blue Chips Extend Rally; Treasury Bonds Retreat Blue-chip stocks extended their record-setting rally to a third consecutive session, as the Dow industrials surged 37.93 points, to 5,177.45.
Drug, health care and oil issues were strong.
But the technology-heavy Nasdaq composite index retreated from its Monday high, slipping 3.90 points, to 1,065.89. [Page D8.]


French Seize 19 Suspects In Bombings
The police arrested 19 people today in early morning raids on Islamic militant groups in Paris, Lyons, Toulouse and Tours.
Justice Ministry officials said the arrests are part of a continuing campaign to dismantle networks of Muslim militants of North African origin believed by the police to be behind several terrorist bombings in France since July.


Boeing Gets Jet Order
Air Berlin, a German charter-tour operator, has placed an $86 million order with the Boeing Company for two 737-400 jets.
The jets will seat 167 passengers  each, Boeing said on Monday.
Air Berlin is a member of Boeing's airline advisory board, guiding the manufacturer as it designs the next incarnation of 737's -- the 600, 700 and 800 series.


Record Rally Continues in Blue-Chip Stocks
Blue-chip stocks extended their record-setting rally to a third consecutive session yesterday.
But the technology-heavy Nasdaq composite index retreated from the high it set on Monday.
"We are in the middle of replacing leadership," said Louis Ehrenkrantz, president of Ehrenkrantz King Nussbaum, a securities firm in New York.
"This proves there is something called the law of gravity."


School-Lunch Discord Stalls the Welfare Bill
Republicans today stepped up the pressure on President Clinton to sign their  welfare bill but acknowledged that the legislation was now delayed by a bitter dispute among Republicans themselves over the future of the national school lunch program.
Leon E. Panetta, the White House chief of staff, said last month that Mr.
Clinton would veto the legislation, in part because the President believed that  it would cut too much from projected spending on social welfare programs.


Bausch &amp; Lomb Plans 3-Year Cost Cutting
Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc. said yesterday that it would cut costs by $50 million over a three-year period because of a disappointing outlook for earnings.
The cuts, which will focus on administrative costs, will include some layoffs, and a freeze in executive salaries, Daniel E. Gill, the company's chairman, said in an interview yesterday, although he added that the company would "work to minimize layoffs" and did not say how many people would be involved.
Mr.
Gill also said that he would ask Bausch &amp; Lomb's board to cut his  salary, $1.6 million for 1995, by $160,000, or 10 percent.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL


The Great Remake Factory
In remaking "Sabrina," the 1954 comedy that starred Audrey Hepburn as the chauffeur's daughter who entrances two rich brothers, Paramount Studios, as well as the producers and the director of the new film, settled quickly on the first  person to be cast.
It was Harrison Ford.
The joke around town was, Harrison Ford as Sabrina?


PATAKI PROPOSING TO BREAK UP LILCO
Under a complex plan endorsed by Gov.
George E. Pataki, a state utility board has proposed dismantling the Long Island Lighting Company to reduce electric rates by up to 12 percent.
Financing would come from a $4.5 billion bond sale, the largest in the history of the municipal bond market.
The Republican Governor's unusual plan, which relies less on government than  proposals made by Democrats have, calls for Lilco to sell its natural gas operations and its power plants to private companies.
The state utility board, the Long Island Power Authority, would then take over Lilco's transmission lines and hire another company to operate them.


Robert Parrish, 79, Film Editor-Director, Dies
Robert Parrish, an Academy Award-winning film editor whose career in motion pictures took him from childhood acting in Chaplin's "City Lights" to the director's chair, died on Monday at Southampton Hospital on Long Island.
He was  79 and lived in Sag Harbor.
Besides being an actor, editor and director, Mr.
Parrish was a raconteur and  writer whose recollections of his long career in Hollywood and abroad and wide range of friends among the most prominent names in film nourished two volumes of well-received memoirs.


FOOD NOTES
Organic Baskets for a Cause


Sneezing Season Is Early, and Hospitals Reflect It
The season of sneezing, aching and coughing is hitting New York a bit early this year, sending a surge of patients to hospitals in the city.
The emergency room at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center has seen "respiratory viruses and flu-like symptoms in spades," said Dr.
Alexander Kuehl, the emergency room director.
He said Sunday was the emergency room's busiest day of the year, with 154 patients, up from the usual average of 90 to 120.


Snider Is Still at Bat
To the Editor:
Duke Snider, the former Brooklyn Dodgers slugger, received only a $5,000 fine and probation for failure to declare income from autographing baseball cards at  memorabilia shows (news article, Dec. 2).
The day after sentencing, the Duke was at another big show, at the Meadowlands in New Jersey, signing his John Hancock  for fans.
The judge should have banned him for life from these shows.


JEANS MAKER INCREASES COST-CUTTING PLAN
The VF Corporation, which makes Lee Jeans, said yesterday that it would expand its corporate reorganization to cut costs further.
The move will reduce earnings in the fourth quarter by $150 million.
The original reorganization, announced in October, was expected to result in a charge against earnings of $80 million, to cover the cost of closing an undisclosed number of plants, as the company moved to reduce domestic production.
The broader cuts are expected to yield annual savings of about $80 million, up from original estimates of about $40 million, the company said.
VF is based in Wyomissing, Pa.


Sony Music May See Shifts After Executive's Departure
For the Sony Corporation of America, music has been an oasis of calm in a storm of corporate losses and reorganizations.
But with Michael P. Schulhof's departure yesterday as chief executive of Sony's American holdings, Sony Music may now be in for changes as well.
In addition to his corporate duties, Mr.
Schulhof served as chairman of the music division.
That title will go to Norio Ohga, the chairman of the Sony Corporation, who will also become chairman of Sony Pictures Entertainment.


Times Plans Northeast Edition And a Reduction of 190 Jobs
Boston early in 1997, the paper's publisher, Arthur Sulzberger Jr., said yesterday.
Executives of The New York Times Company also said they plan to cut the paper's total staff of 4,000 by 190 positions next year as part of an effort to control costs.


Man Found Guilty of Raping His Wife
Every year, the Manhattan District Attorney's office brings a few dozen cases against men accused of raping their wives.
In all but a few cases, the men are not convicted, often because the woman decides not to pursue the case.
But on Monday, one of the cases prevailed, in part because the woman was upset that her husband never expressed any remorse over the attack.


Liekoski to Columbus
A former United States Olympic team coach, TIMO LIEKOSKI, was hired as coach  of the Columbus Crew of Major League Soccer yesterday.
In 1994, Liekoski guided  the United States to the second round of the World Cup.
AP


There Is No Blame for Budget Deficits
To the Editor:
Quoting selected experts, you say (news analysis, Dec. 3) that neither political party "has clean hands" on the issue of Federal budget deficits.
This  narrow view of history and public policy is misleading.


PLAINS RESOURCES TO BUY ASSETS FROM MARATHON OIL
Plains Resources Inc. agreed yesterday to buy oil and gas assets in Illinois, Missouri and Indiana from the Marathon Oil Company for $46 million in cash and stock.
Plains Resources, based in Houston, said the purchase included three oilfields operated by Marathon, which produce about 4,500 barrels of oil a day,  and other oil and gas interests.
Plains will pay $41 million in cash and $5 million in stock for the assets, which include Marathon's geological, geophysical and engineering data base for the region.
Marathon, the Houston-based oil unit of the USX Corporation, will retain all of its refinery,  retail distribution, pipeline and trucking assets, Plains said.


At the Plate, a Burger at a Time
OUT came the hamburgers, and Robert Earl beamed.
"We're willing to put our burger up against any competitor," said Mr.
Earl, who has already given the world 29 Planet Hollywoods and will inaugurate the first Official All Star Cafe, a 650-seat homage to professional sports, in Times Square on Dec. 18.
"The bun is fantastic," Mr. Earl said. "Zabar's."


Whitewater Evasions, Cont.
The present inquiry by the Senate Banking Committee into the Whitewater mess  has not been exciting, but even so it has been highly instructive, and not just  for Whitewater junkies.
At the very least the hearings have reinforced the impression that the White House and its loyalists in key government agencies went to puzzling lengths to hobble legitimate investigations into those long-ago events in Arkansas and the death of Vincent Foster, the White House counsel.
The hearings have also reaffirmed that Hillary Rodham Clinton's associates seem incapable of producing candid answers to questions about the events following the Foster suicide and the handling of the Whitewater documents in his office.
They served the committee a stew of evasions and memory lapses that can  only further undermine public confidence in the Administration's integrity.


Griffey Sheds Metal Plate
KEN GRIFFEY Jr. had a four-inch metal plate and seven screws removed yesterday from the left wrist he fractured last May 26 while crashing into the Kingdome wall, forcing him to miss two and a half months.
Dr.
Ed Almquist said he expects the Seattle Mariners center fielder to be fully recovered by spring training.
AP


Refs' Contract Awaits Signing
An official timetable for the return of National Basketball Association referees was being delayed until today, when the new labor agreement was expected to be signed.
The referees on Monday voted by 27-26 to accept the league's contract offer,  and they are expected back to work next week.
Fred Slaughter, the agent who represents the referees, however, was in Los Angeles yesterday.
He is expected to sign the new contract today in Manhattan.


Freud Show Delayed Amid Criticism
For the second time in a year, academics have become embroiled in a dispute over the fairness of a museum exhibition in Washington meant to be both scholarly and popular.
On Monday the Library of Congress put off a major show of its holdings from the archives of Sigmund Freud.
The decision, the library says, was based on the  inability to raise enough money, but critics of Freudian therapy say they suspect that their complaints about the planned exhibition were finally heard by the library.


Comedy Central Account in Review
The Comedy Central cable television network said yesterday that it was talking to several New York agencies about its account, which has been at Korey  Kay &amp; Partners in New York for the last two years.
The billings were estimated at $3 million to $5 million.
Tony Fox, a spokesman for Comedy Central in New York, which is a joint venture of Time Warner Inc. and Viacom Inc., confirmed reports of the review this week in trade publications.
He said it was prompted by management changes at the network and added that Comedy Central wanted an agency that would work closely with its in-house team.
Korey Kay will participate in the review, he added, but he declined to disclose the others involved.
A decision is expected in the next two weeks.


Porsche Reports Profit For 4-Month Period
Porsche A.G., the German sports car maker, said yesterday that it made a profit in the first four months of its 1996 fiscal year as new 911 models contributed to a 14 percent rise in sales.
The company did not say how much it had earned, noting only that it had "black figures in our profit accounts" and that it expected the full-year result to be "a bit" better than the profit of 2.1 million marks ($1.46 million) reported for the previous fiscal year, which ended July 31.
Porsche said production rose 7 percent in the four months, to 6,000 Porsche  911 models, the only model being sold now that the 928 and 968 have been phased  out.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Airwave Auction Is Started by the F.C.C.
Federal regulators today began the largest auction of airwave licenses to date, offering sections of radio frequency devoted to specialized mobile services like dispatch, paging, phone and messaging services.
The Federal Communications Commission, which is overseeing the multi-day sale, said it took in $7.8 million in high bids, with a total of 1,763 bids placed.
It was the most bids ever in the first round of an F.C.C. spectrum auction.


A Soldier's Duty
To the Editor:
Re your Dec. 3 coverage of President Clinton's trip to Baumholder, Germany, and Maureen Dowd's column the same day, I am dismayed by the comments of some Bosnia-bound soldiers and their families.


Jaguars Release Givins
ERNEST GIVINS signed with the Jacksonville Jaguars, intent on reviving his career and gaining support for the Pro Football Hall of Fame.
Instead, he didn't even make it through a season with the expansion team.
Givins, the leading receiver in Houston Oilers history, was released yesterday by the Jaguars.
AP


Real Estate;The office building in lower Manhattan that housed Delmonico's changes hands for $3 million.
TIME EQUITIES INC. and a group of private investors have paid $3 million for  the 1891 office building in lower Manhattan that was the home of Delmonico's, the restaurant credited with introducing haute cuisine to the United States in the mid-19th century.
The 12,500-square-foot, wood-paneled and elegantly decorated restaurant, at 48-56 Beaver Street, two blocks south of Wall Street at South William Street, is vacant.
But Francis Greenburger, the chairman and chief executive of Time Equities, said he hoped to find a restaurateur willing to bring 21st-century cuisine to the once-fashionable 19th-century site, where Charles Dickens dined on such fare as agneau farci a la Walter Scott.


Injection Into Fetus Wards Off Usually Fatal Blood Disease
Doctors have spared a baby from being born with a devastating blood disease by injecting his father's bone marrow into him in the womb.
The procedure was done on a fetus found to have the rare disorder, called X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency, in which the blood cells that provide immunity to infection are defective.
The disorder is usually fatal by the age of 2.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt


Family's Sordid Existence Brings Calls for Change
The seven children, ages 4 to 16, lived in a cramped, fly-infested hovel on the second floor at 5 North Third Street.
Their pregnant mother and her boyfriend, the police said, smoked crack around the children.
And they clearly indulged squalor.
Today, the kitchen table, the stove, and the sink were piled with dirty dishes and pans containing chunks of old fried food.
In the two tiny bedrooms, heaps of clothes a foot or two deep surrounded the ripped mattresses.
Near one bed, apparently the one used by the mother, was a big plastic pail containing what appeared to be urine, an inch-deep.
A few feet away was a pail brimming with garbage.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Mmm-mmm, Even Better!
The Campbell Soup Company is offering a $2,500 reward to help a man recover jewelry lost last month when he accidentally donated a soup can to a food drive  without realizing it was being used as a jewelry safe, the A.P. reported yesterday.
The reward matches one offered by the man, Tom Cummins of Austin, Tex., said Lisa Dougherty, a company spokeswoman.
TERRY PRISTIN


Duvall Journal;Latest Northwest Flood Takes Toll in Patience
After living in his scuba-diving wet suit for days on end and commuting back  and forth to his house in a rowboat, the dairy farmer on the river has turned philosophical.
"Florida has its hurricanes, California has earthquakes and mud slides, so I  guess we shouldn't complain about being underwater every now and then," James Roetcisoender said today, standing atop his farm's patch of high ground, surrounded by a lake that used to be the Snoqualmie River.
His boat was tied to  his second-floor sun deck.
"But it does get depressing," he added.


Sports of The Times;The Garden Courts New Performers
THE Garden.
These are still the most magical words in basketball.
Ask Michael Jordan and Reggie Miller, who come to the Garden with a killer gleam.
Ask the college players who consider the Garden part of their education.
Should there be any minimum age for playing in the Garden -- or other big-time arenas around the country?
The question is asked because Madison Square Garden is increasingly getting involved in high school basketball.
For the past three years, the Garden has held a tripleheader championship for boys and girls in the city's public schools.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Massacre Trial Wraps Up
A man dismissed from his job at the Ridgewood Post Office plotted for 20 months and armed himself with automatic weapons, grenades and a ninja sword before murdering four people there in 1991 in retaliation, a prosecutor told a Bergen County jury yesterday.
"This is a premeditated, calculated and preplanned crime," the prosecutor, Sharyn Peiffer, said during closing arguments in the trial of Joseph M. Harris.
Mr.
Harris's lawyer, Wakeley S. Paul, said his client had been driven to kill by voices induced by his paranoia and schizophrenia, the A.P. reported.


Metro Digest Inside
Beginning Today the Metro Digest, formwerly printed on page B1, will be found inside.
Today, page B3.


Olympics Add Snowboarding
The International Olympic Committee executive board approved today the addition of snowboarding as a medal sport for the 1998 Winter Games in nearby Nagano.
Snowboarding, a hybrid sport that combines elements of surfing and skiing, is popular in North America and Europe and is rapidly catching on in Japan as well.
It joins curling and women's ice hockey as new medal events for the Nagano Games.
After more than a year of negotiations, Nagano organizers agreed to include snowboarding on the condition that the I.O.C. and international ski federation help cover the extra costs.


Guatemala Journal;Left's Hero Is Home (but Then, He's Long Dead)
He was an icon of the Latin American left and an early victim of the cold war.
But more than 40 years after being ousted in a coup sponsored by the Central Intelligence Agency, and nearly a quarter of a century after he died in  exile, Col.
Jacobo Arbenz Guzman has finally come home.
"So that we may advance toward national reconciliation," as President Ramiro  de Leon Carpio put it, Arbenz's remains were exhumed from a cemetery in El Salvador and returned to Guatemala and a hero's welcome on Oct. 20.


A Global Pavarotti Scrapbook
Luciano Pavarotti, one of the premier tenors and stage personalities of this  century, turned 60 in October, an age bound to daunt more ordinary opera stars.
He is indeed hitting performance snags, most recently, after an artistic shipwreck on the shoals of high B's, a failure to appear for the final act of "La Fille du Regiment" at the Metropolitan Opera.
But with the canny maneuverings of his longtime agent, Herbert Breslin, and his favorite music adviser, Tibor Rudas, Mr.
Pavarotti's enormous presence, complete with tablecloth-size white handkerchief and megawatt smile, continues to work marketing miracles.
His "Three Tenors" acrobatics with Placido Domingo and Jose Carreras attract international television audiences estimated at half a billion viewers.
And then come the CD and video sales.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Nov. 27 about C/net, an on-line computer magazine, omitted the name of one owner of the USA Networks, which holds a stake in C/net.
The owner, along with Viacom Inc., is MCA Inc.


Charles Gillett, 80, the Creator Of the 'Big Apple' Ad Campaign
Charles Gillett, who was credited with creating the Big Apple tourism campaign when he was president of the New York Convention and Visitors Bureau, died on Monday at his home in Great Neck, L.I.
He was 80 and also lived in Palm  Beach, Fla.
The cause was a heart attack, the bureau said.


Ethics Complaint Accuses Indiana Congressman
Representative Louise M. Slaughter, Democrat of New York, filed a complaint with the House ethics committee against a Republican freshman today, saying he forged a document used at a hearing of a subcommittee he heads and made a false  statement on the House floor.
The target of the complaint is Representative David M. McIntosh of Indiana, who is among a group of House Republicans backing legislation that would prohibit nonprofit groups that receive Federal grants from lobbying the Government.
The complaint was signed by Nan Aron, president of the Alliance for  Justice, a coalition of civil-rights and public-interest lobbying groups.


In an agency consolidation, BBDO takes charge of Bayer's efforts to fill the world's medicine chests.
THE German drug and chemical company Bayer A.G. has named BBDO Worldwide in New York to handle advertising for nearly all its consumer products around the world.
The billings involved in the consolidation -- the second by a multinational marketer in less than a week -- were estimated at $235 million of  the total worldwide billings of $275 million that Bayer plans to spend in 1996 on what the company calls its consumer care business.
The decision, announced yesterday by Bayer in Leverkusen, Germany, gives BBDO the accounts of American medicine-chest staples like Alka-Seltzer antacids, Alka-Seltzer Plus cold medicines and Phillips' Milk of Magnesia laxative, to be  added to blue-chip brands it already handles like General Electric, Pepsi-Cola and Visa.
BBDO is also being assigned Bayer brands not marketed in this country, like Autan and Baygon insecticides.


Soybeans Up on Drought Fears
Soybean prices surged on the Chicago Board of Trade yesterday as concern grew that a lack of rain was harming Brazil's crop, the world's second largest.
Wheat prices also rose strongly on concerns over low rainfall.
The Commodity  Research Bureau index of 21 commodities gained 1.03 points, to 244.09.


ABC and NBC Look Ahead To Rival All-News Channels
After 15 years as the only all-news television network, CNN is suddenly attracting a host of competitors.
On the same day that ABC officially announced plans to start a competing 24-hour cable news service in early 1997 in partnership with its local and affiliated stations, NBC executives sent word to that network's affiliates that  NBC would announce a 24-hour all-news channel "in the near future" to be "rolled out in 1996."


The Birth of Barbarism, Which Was Born a Twin
BLACK SEA By Neal Ascherson Maps. 306 pages. Hill &amp; Wang. $23.


Redoing Hospital Fees
A task force appointed by Governor Pataki has recommended letting market forces, rather than the state, govern rates that insurers pay hospitals.
The proposal, which would represent a sweeping change in the way health care is financed in New York State, reflects a nationwide trend aimed at providing economic incentives to contain medical costs.
Article, page B1.


Man Held in Needle Attack Had Two Previous Escapes
The homeless man charged with stabbing a child with a hypodermic needle on a  subway train last weekend had already escaped twice from the Rochester Psychiatric Center before he walked away from that state mental hospital for a third and final time in 1993.
Despite the earlier escapes and a criminal record, the man, Angel Coro, had enjoyed the right to leave the hospital grounds and move with a degree of freedom on them, before his 1993 escape, officials said.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;More Money, Fewer Voters
Only 38 percent of New Jersey's eligible voters turned out for last month's elections -- a smaller proportion than ever before -- yet a record $10 million was spent on Assembly races, a public advocacy group reported yesterday.


Seoul Ex-President and 7 Businessmen Are Indicted in Bribery
South Korean prosecutors today indicted former President Roh Tae Woo, who presided over a major part of the transition to democracy, on charges of accepting at least $370 million in bribes.
Seven of South Korea's most prominent business leaders were also indicted, on charges of paying bribes to Mr.
Roh.


Conferees Agree to Keep Limits On Cable TV Rates for 3 Years
Members of a House-Senate conference committee retreated today from plans to  eliminate cable television rate regulations, agreeing to keep current rules in place for three more years.
The decision, reached in back-room negotiations before the lawmakers meet in  a public session on Wednesday, marks a big concession to Democratic lawmakers.
It means that cable customers will avoid what would have been virtually certain  increases in cable rates under bills passed by the House and Senate last summer.


FRANCE TO REJOIN MILITARY COMMAND OF NATO ALLIANCE
France announced today that it would resume active participation in NATO's military wing almost three decades after Charles de Gaulle pulled the country out of the alliance's military command and ordered American forces out of France.
The decision came as NATO Foreign and Defense Ministers formally approved the deployment of about 60,000 troops to enforce a tenuous peace in Bosnia, the country where French visions of European emancipation from American political and military leadership were proved empty during more than three years of war.


Jets' Haselrig Is Still Missing
James Ecker, Carlton Haselrig's Pittsburgh-based attorney, said yesterday that he had talked "to everyone under the sun" and had not been able to locate the Jet offensive lineman, who has been missing since last week.
"I'm extremely concerned about his health and well-being," Ecker said.
"This  is the first time I've never been able to find anyone who doesn't at least have  a clue to a missing person's whereabouts."


Oregon Mail Primary Sets Up Senate Race
Voter turnout was up, and the state saved more than a million dollars today in the nation's first mail-in Congressional election.
In primary elections for the seat of Senator Bob Packwood, the Republican who resigned under accusations of sexual and official misconduct, voters chose Representative Ron Wyden over Representative Peter DeFazio in the Democratic race and Gordon Smith, the State Senate President, over two Republican opponents.


Replacing the Oklahoma Bomb Judge
The bomb that destroyed a Federal building in Oklahoma City last April and killed 169 people also shattered an important building a block away -- the Federal courthouse where Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols are scheduled to stand trial next May.
Can a judge whose own space in that building was heavily damaged fairly preside over the trial?
Obviously not, most people would say.
But it was far from obvious to Judge Wayne Alley, who maintained that no reasonable person would question his impartiality.
"We disagree," the U.S.
Court of Appeals said last week.
On Monday, the court's chief judge reassigned the case to Chief Judge Richard Matsch of the Federal court in Denver.
It was a healthy, necessary action that will improve chances for a trial that is not only fair but seen as fair.


Britain Sells Last Shares In British Petroleum
The British Government sold its remaining 1.8 percent stake in the British Petroleum Company yesterday.
It was the last of a majority holding acquired in World War I at the initiative of Winston Churchill.
The Government sold its last 101 million shares to the investment bank SBC Warburg, a part of the Swiss  Bank Corporation.
Warburg, in turn, placed the stock with institutional investors.
Dealers said the shares were sold for 513 pence each ($7.89), which would value the Government's stake at about L520 million ($800 million).
The Government paid L2 million in 1914 for a two-thirds stake in the company, in a move meant to secure oil supplies for the Royal Navy.
The Government began gradually reducing its holding in the late 1970's.
(Reuters)


France's Pain
Like the Republican Congress in Washington, the French Government has proposed huge spending cuts to reduce the Federal deficit.
Only Paris would accomplish its surgery over about two years, rather than the seven the Republicans plan.
Little wonder, then, that France's public employees have gone on strike, crippling Paris for almost two weeks by shutting down mass transit and reducing  telephone and mail service.
Yesterday at least 30,000 workers and their supporters marched through the city in an effort to force the Government to back down.


Yashin Loses Grievance
ALEKSEI YASHIN's claim that he was a free agent under terms of the National Hockey League's collective bargaining agreement was dismissed by an arbitrator yesterday.
Yashin, a 22-year-old Russian, remains under contract to the Ottawa Senators.
The center has refused to play for Ottawa this season, and set off a furor when he played four games for Moscow's Red Army team in the Russian League this fall, violating the International Ice Hockey Federation's agreement to honor N.H.L. contracts.
AP


On TV, Russian Party Is More Equal Than Others
The most arresting political ads flooding Russian television right now do not divulge who the candidate is or what party is being promoted.
Instead, a series  of heart-warming vignettes broadcast on the state-controlled network, ORT, gauzily suggest that, while it isn't quite paradise, life here isn't really so bad after all.
Funnily enough, that is the message that the pro-Government party Our Home Is Russia is desperately trying to sell to disgruntled voters.


Bonner to Play in Italy
ANTHONY BONNER, a former forward with the Knicks, has joined the Italian league champion, BUCKLER BOLOGNA, replacing the injured ORLANDO WOOLRIDGE.
Last  season, Bonner averaged 3.8 points a game for the Knicks after three seasons with Sacramento.
AP


Slovak Language Law
To the Editor:
I have followed the debate in your pages on the new language law in Slovakia, and I find repulsive any such restriction that limits the free use of any language, whether of Spanish in the United States or of Hungarian or any other language in Slovakia.


TRIMBLE NAVIGATION STOCK FALLS ON HALT OF SHIPMENTS
The stock of Trimble Navigation Ltd. fell yesterday on news that the company  had temporarily halted shipments of a satellite navigation system to the American Mobile Satellite Corporation.
Trimble, which is based in Sunnyvale, Calif., said late on Monday that the halt was caused by delays in American Mobile's development of a gateway used to send data from Trimble's Galaxy/GPS land mobile satellite communications terminals to American Mobile's satellite systems.
Trimble's terminals are used by trucking companies, railroads and others for tracking their fleets by satellite.
The halting of shipments will cut Trimble's earnings in the fourth quarter by about 12 cents a share, the company  said.
Last year, earnings in the period were 15 cents a share.
The shares of Trimble fell $2.875 yesterday, to $17.875, in Nasdaq trading.


Whine and Dine: Perils of Eating Out;When a Customer Leaves A Right Hook, Not a Tip
SEVERAL years ago, a tall man in his late 30's, his necktie secured around his head like a sweatband, leaped from his chair at the Union Square Cafe, yelling, "What kind of restaurant doesn't have baked potatoes?"
Danny Meyer, the principal owner of the restaurant, famed for its northern Italian cuisine, instructed the waiter not to serve the apparently inebriated patron any more alcoholic beverages, enraging him even further.
"He put his chest in my face and said, 'You can't cut me off!' " Mr.
Meyer recalled.


Sports of The Times;Not All N.F.L. Greats Are Given Their Due
TEN days ago, as Dan Marino was breaking another one of Fran Tarkenton's passing records -- this one for most touchdowns thrown in a National Football League career -- Tarkenton, as one might imagine, was immersed in past glories.
Those glories, however, had nothing to do with heaving footballs into end zones.
He was checking out Michelangelo's David and the Colosseum in Rome, and the Palazzo Popadopoli in Venice.
And the Old Scrambler was doing it in one place, yet.
It was in a Barnes &amp; Noble bookstore in Atlanta, where Tarkenton, now 55, and his family may often be found browsing on Sunday afternoons.
He was looking for  a gift book about Italy.


UNITS OF FRETTER FILE FOR BANKRUPTCY PROTECTION
Fretter Inc., a retailer of home entertainment products, said yesterday that  eight of its subsidiaries, including Silo stores, had filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
The filing in the United States Bankruptcy Court in Delaware came after the closing of nearly all of the chain's stores, in 22 states.
Fretter's battle against competition from other home electronics retailers has been made more difficult by the debt it took on nearly two years ago to acquire Silo from Dixons Group P.L.C., a British retailer that owns 30 percent of Fretter.
Fretter's other retail businesses include the Fred Schmid Appliance and TV Company, Fretter, Dash Concepts and Yes.


Stocks Rise in Japan
Japanese stocks closed above 19,000 here today.
At the close of trading, the  benchmark Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 188.33 points, or 1 percent, at 19,067.86.
On Tuesday, the Nikkei slipped 17.84 points.


With One Disease Nearly Erased, Assault Is Planned on Another
Armed with a new confidence that it is possible to wipe out diseases that have plagued humans for centuries, international health and development officials announced today a final assault on one debilitating tropical malady, river blindness, even as they celebrated the imminent demise of another, Guinea  worm disease.
United Nations health organizations, the World Bank and private groups announced a 12-year international program to control and eventually wipe out river blindness in Africa, an effort they said should save millions from the blindness and disfigurement of the disease formally known as onchocerciasis.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14


Roxie Roker, 66, Who Broke Barrier In Her Marriage on TV's'Jeffersons'
Roxie Roker, a star of the long-running CBS television series "The Jeffersons," died on Saturday, her publicity agent said.
She was 66.
Her family, including her son, Lenny Kravitz, the rock guitarist and singer,  declined to release further details, said the publicity agent, Cynthia Snyder.


CHRONICLE
A triumph of tenacity: Thirty-two years ago, the pianist LEON FLEISHER was at the height of a brilliant career when he lost the use of his right hand to what  is now recognized as repetitive stress syndrome.
But over the years he persisted, seeking various forms of treatment and performing compositions for the left hand.
Tomorrow evening, the 67-year-old Mr.
Fleisher will have his first recital in New York, at Carnegie Hall.
He will  play a variety of compositions for the left hand, including three written for him by Leon Kirchner, Jean Hasse and Robert Saxton.


Supreme Court Roundup;Court Hears Arguments on Race in Redistricting
The Supreme Court came face to face today with the implications of its recent decisions that cast a constitutional cloud over legislative districts drawn to increase black representation, and even over the Voting Rights Act itself.
After more than two and a half hours of argument over whether new Congressional districts in Texas and North Carolina were impermissible racial gerrymanders, the question remaining was whether Justice Sandra Day O'Connor would blink.
Her equivocal position on an issue that has otherwise split the Court makes her vote crucial to the outcome of the two cases, as well as to the  Court's continuing debate over the role of race in politics.


Tearful Service Ends Mourning Period for Rabin


Rykoff-Sexton Announces Accord to Purchase US Foodservice
Rykoff-Sexton Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to buy US Foodservice Inc. for at least $270.5 million in another sign of the rapid consolidation in the food industry.
Rykoff-Sexton, a food distributor based in Lisle, Ill., said it would pay $25 a share in stock, or $220 million, for each of US Foodservice's 8.8 million shares outstanding.
The company will also pay about $50.5 million to redeem US Foodservice preferred stock.
In addition, Rykoff-Sexton will assume or refinance about $350 million of debt.


Maxwell's 35 Points Can't Stop The Pacers
Pacers 108, 76ers 91


Book Notes
An Expensive Success


Judge Upsets Plea Agreement in Slaying of Child
The state's first scheduled capital punishment case in decades has overcome a hurdle after a judge ruled that a plea bargain made with a suspect in the slaying of a child does not have to be honored.
Justice Harold J. Hughes of State Supreme Court decided on Monday that a plea agreement with the suspect, Larry Whitehurst, made in exchange for his assistance in locating 7-year-old Rickel Knox, does not have to be enforced.


INSIDE
Roh Indicted in South Korea


Complaints by Indians Lead to Bans on a Beer
Crazy Horse, a 19th-century leader of the Oglala Sioux, never posed for a picture.
Sitting for a portrait was a practice of the white invaders.
He wanted  no part of their ways.
Crazy Horse also disdained the whites' custom of drinking alcohol and spoke out against the damage he saw it doing to his people.


Rabin's Killer Charged With Murder, 2 Others With Conspiracy
Prosecutors filed charges of premeditated murder against Yitzhak Rabin's confessed assassin today as Israel marked the end of the 30-day mourning period  for the slain Prime Minister.
In addition to the murder charge against Yigal Amir, indictments filed by the District Attorney at Tel Aviv District Court also charged Mr.
Amir's brother Hagai and their friend Dror Adani with conspiring to kill Mr.
Rabin and to attack Palestinian Arabs.


Pataki Urges Less Secrecy On Abuse
Gov.
George E. Pataki said yesterday that he will press for legislation to ease a state confidentiality law concerning child welfare investigations even if that means paying a penalty by losing $1.5 million in Federal aid to the state.
Governor Pataki said that some measure of information about child welfare investigations must be made public when a case like Elisa Izquierdo's exposes flaws in the system so that people can be held accountable for mistakes.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 26 about the renovation of Grand Central Terminal misspelled part of the name of an architectural firm that helped design the station.
It was Warren &amp; Wetmore, not Westmore.


Injection Into Fetus Wards Off Usually Fatal Blood Disease
Doctors have spared a baby from being born with a devastating blood disease by injecting his father's bone marrow into him in the womb.
The procedure was done on a fetus found to have the rare disorder, called X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency, in which the blood cells that provide immunity to infection are defective.
The disorder is usually fatal by the age of 2.


Perot Party Gains a Seat
Ross Perot's Reform Party in California has its first elected official: a veteran Assemblyman, Dominic Cortese, has switched to it from the Democratic Party.
The move will let him avoid a March 26 primary election in a State Senate race next year.


White House Documents Reveal Similarities to G.O.P.'s Plans forMedicare
The White House proposals to revamp Medicare, the Federal health insurance program for the elderly, are in some respects remarkably similar to those in the Republican budget bill passed by Congress, according to documents obtained from  the Administration.
Both promise Medicare beneficiaries a variety of new insurance options, including coverage through health maintenance organizations and health plans organized by doctors and hospitals.
But the White House proposal would allow more growth in Medicare spending than the Republicans would, and President Clinton appears more willing to use Government regulation to protect beneficiaries against erosion in the quality of care.


Making the System Work In Kidney Patients' Favor
Each time patients receive kidney dialysis at Kaiser Permanente in Los Angeles, they see something rarely found in most American dialysis clinics: a doctor.
At other clinics, part-time doctors drop by for a few hours a week, leaving treatment largely in the hands of poorly supervised technicians and low-level nurses.
But Kaiser's dialysis unit in Los Angeles is staffed full time by at least two of its six kidney specialists, as well as by registered nurses, dietitians and social workers.


Teaching Emotional Self-Control;Defusing Violence Is part of Curriculum in New Haven
East Rock School abuts the sidewalk with a forbidding, windowless wall, suggesting a defensive posture against the dangers of the neighborhood.
But inside, the tone is warmer: the walls are hung with banners proclaiming, "Parents, teachers, students together," and, "East Rock Welcomes You," part of a citywide campaign to get parents and neighbors to drop by, help out and get involved in their schools.
Down the hall in Sue Fineman's classroom, Life Skills, an experiment, is in progress, giving children lessons in the emotions.
The aim is to help them understand and control responses like aggressiveness and impulsiveness.


Treasuries Stay Above 6% on Yield
Prices of Treasury securities fell yesterday for the first time in five sessions, as yields again tested the 6 percent level but failed to stay below it.
"The market's failure to crack 6 percent was a signal to take profits." said  Tony Crescenzi, director of fixed-income trading at Miller, Tabak, Hirsch &amp; Company, a New York brokerage firm.


White House Says It Can Avoid a Debt Crisis for Weeks
Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin said today that the Administration had found new, though legally untested, methods of keeping the Government solvent "at least through January," giving the Clinton Administration considerably more  breathing room in its budget standoff with Congress.
While Mr.
Rubin would not discuss how long he could drag out his delicate fiscal balancing act, other Administration officials said that Treasury and Justice Department lawyers had been meeting daily to devise a legally defensible strategy for sidestepping the Congressionally set $4.9 trillion limit on Federal borrowing well into the spring.
"A lot of it is open to challenge, because the U.S. Government has never had to do this before," one official said.
"But we think we've got some ideas that will work."


A Premiere, a Birthday and an Invention
On Friday night the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center presented the New York premiere of a beguiling work by Toru Takemitsu, Japan's most renowned living composer.
But the premiere that threatened to steal the attention from Mr.
Takemitsu, whose 65th birthday was being honored, was not a new piece but a newfangled addition to the concert grand piano.
This event was touted as the "first world premiere performance" on a piano fitted with a "lower lid," an invention of the  pianist and conductor Daniel Revenaugh.


Dole Forced to Delay Resolution on Bosnia
Unable to rally some fellow Republicans, the Senate leader, Bob Dole, postponed debate on a resolution to support President Clinton's decision to send troops to Bosnia.


Balancing a Man and His Music
Durable works of art are like trains traveling through history, picking up passengers along the way.
"Die Meistersinger," to give an extreme example, arrives in the present filled to capacity and weighted down by accumulated baggage.
Wagner's opera can never again be as it began: a huge, sunlit celebration of art and love in 16th-century Nuremberg.
Too much has happened in  between.
Patrons of the Metropolitan Opera were left to sort out truth from implication when Otto Schenk's two-year-old production returned in excellent condition to the house on Monday night.
It is not easy.
The moral tone of "Die Meistersinger von Nurnberg" will be forever colored by a composer whose dubious  attitudes toward individual human beings and whole classes of them are openly repugnant to us a century and a quarter later.
These attitudes attach themselves in particular to the opera's comic nemesis, Beckmesser, and have promoted a performing tradition of Semitic caricatures: hand-wringing transpositions of Fagin the Jew into music.


Corrections
A caption in Science Times yesterday with a drawing of the Galileo spacecraft referred incorrectly in some copies to the point at which a probe that will plunge into Jupiter's atmosphere separated from the spacecraft.
It was 48 million miles from Jupiter, not 48.


Tourists Shun Trips to France
Airlines serving France and the United States said yesterday that their flights are operating normally despite the deepening strike in France.
But the number of empty seats has increased, and travel agents who specialize in France  say the strike is hurting their business.
Both groups agree that travel to France will suffer badly if the strike is not settled by mid-December, the traditional start of the holiday travel season.
"In the last couple of days we've had a lot of cancellations and people deferring their trips," said Jeanne Westrope of Pegasus Travel in Washington.
"Bookings for France were already weaker than usual for this time of year, because of the terrorism threat. Now they're worse."


When Cuts Affect Children's Health
The waiting room of the South Bronx Children's Health Center was filled the other day with parents scrambling after squealing children.
Three-year-old Tiffany Lopez had an ear infection, her second this fall.
Steven and Anthony Borrero, 18-month-old twins, were coughing and feverish.
Josabeth Diaz, who is 16, had come for a checkup.
These children are from poor and low-income families, and the Federal Government mandates coverage for all their visits, as well as for a range of other health care from dental work to diagnostic testing.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Professors Cleared of Bias
A Federal jury has cleared two Trenton State College professors of discriminating against a colleague.
Mohamoud M. Ismail, a tenured assistant professor of anthropology, had accused Howard Robboy, the former chairman of his department, of making denigrating remarks about him because he is a black Muslim and posting offensive cartoons in public areas.
Mr.
Robboy said that when Mr.
Ismail complained about some of the cartoons he had posted, he took them down and apologized.
Both Mr.
Robboy and Eugenia Shanklin, an anthropology professor, denied Mr.
Ismail's accusations that they had blocked him from being promoted for several years.


Metro Digest


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: The Curtain Drops on a Career at Sony;Trouble at American Entertainment Operations Prompts a Resignation
It may have been only a matter of time.
Michael P. Schulhof, the head of the Sony Corporation's American operations resigned under pressure yesterday, apparently unable to inspire confidence in Sony's Japanese management that he was doing enough to revive the company's businesses in the United States.


Ford Sold 4.2% Fewer Vehicles in November
The Ford Motor Company reported a 4.2 percent drop in car and light- truck sales in November today, the weakest for the month among the Big Three auto makers.
Ford's domestic car sales fell 14.5 percent from a year earlier, due in large part to a 27 percent decline in sales of its all-new 1996 Taurus sedan.
The report confirmed to analysts that November was a disappointing month generally for the automotive industry.


G.O.P. Opposition Forces Dole to Delay Vote on Bosnia
Unable to convince a group of fellow Republicans that Bosnia is worth the loss of one American life, Senator Bob Dole, the Republican leader, today postponed until next week Senate debate on a resolution supporting President Clinton's deployment of American troops.
Among those breaking with Senator Dole are his second-in-command, Senator Trent Lott of Mississippi, and Senator Alfonse D'Amato of New York, perhaps his  chief political backer in the Senate.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Boston College


Student Group Accuses Yale of Usury for a 12% Loan Rate
In its latest effort to portray Yale University as being unfair to students,  the Graduate Student Employees Organization has accused the university of usury  for charging a 12 percent annual interest rate, the highest in the Ivy League, for loans to more than 200 students each year.
Yale says that the loan program, the Yale Student Loan, is offered as a "last resort" for undergraduate and graduate students who have exhausted all other loan options, and that the interest rate is appropriate because such loans have  the Ivy League's highest default rate, nearly 10 percent.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Theft Charge in Schools Case
The former chief financial officer for the Cranford Board of Education was indicted by a Federal grand jury yesterday on charges of stealing $167,000 in cash from 1991 to 1994, most of it money that schoolchildren had paid for milk and juice.
Jeanette Flora Nixon, of Mendham Township, is charged with depositing the proceeds of milk sales and money from school activities into her own checking account, said Kimberly Guadagno, an assistant United States attorney.


Waters's Autopsy Offers Few Clues
An autopsy has failed to determine what caused the death of the 17-year-old son of Charlie Waters, an Oregon assistant football coach who was an All-Pro defensive back with the Dallas Cowboys.
Cody Waters, a senior at Marist High School where he played soccer and football, died in his sleep Sunday night.
Frank Ratti, deputy medical examiner for Lane County, said the autopsy conducted Monday did not provide any clues, but further tests would be conducted.


Top Schoolboy Prospect Pressed About the Pros
Tim Thomas, the top senior schoolboy big man in the country, stood at the center of a mob of reporters at a Madison Square Garden restaurant yesterday.
He was poised to answer questions about the Super 6 Classic scheduled at the Garden next month, about the coming season at Paterson Catholic High School or about his list of colleges.
But the first questions that were posed pertained to whether he would take his game straight to the National Basketball Association as Kevin Garnett, a big man from Farragut Academy in Chicago, did this season.


Faux Token Beats the Subway Fare Rise
Every time Transit Authority officials figure they have found the perfect technology to outwit fare beaters, they get outfoxed again.
Tokens from former toll roads in Connecticut once fit nicely, as did the ones for the Garden State Parkway.
Then there was the Jamaican 1-cent coin.
The latest token trick, transit officials say, is a 20-peso piece from Colombia, a brass-colored coin worth about 2 cents.
A handful of the coins began appearing in turnstiles a week ago.


Securities Reform Bill Still Protects Investors
To the Editor:
"Overdrawn Securities Reform" (editorial, Nov. 30) acknowledges the need for  curbing frivolous securities lawsuits.
But you are wrong to call the bill's safe harbor provision "ambiguous." The provision, protecting good-faith predictive statements in corporate reports from frivolous legal attack, was examined by the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Study Ties Binge Drinking To Fraternity House Life
Living in a fraternity or sorority house is by far the strongest indicator of binge drinking in college, a new study by the Harvard School of Public Health reports.
Eighty-six percent of fraternity residents and 80 percent of sorority women are binge drinkers, the report said -- that is, they had five or more drinks in  one sitting at least once in the two weeks before the survey was done.
This compares with 45 percent of men not affiliated with fraternities and 36 percent  of women.


Family Commits Ex-Card
LUIS SHARPE, a former offensive lineman with the Arizona Cardinals who was wounded by gunfire last week in an a Phoenix neighborhood noted for heavy drug traffic, has been committed to a substance-abuse clinic by his family.
AP


Southwest Air to Cut Flights in February
The Southwest Airlines Company said today that it would cut 16 flights from its schedule in February because the strike at the Boeing Company had delayed the delivery of new jets.


Sports of The Times;A Mission Is Reaffirmed in the Nation's Capital
BY 11:30, the players had boarded the team bus and settled into a familiar seating routine: National Team coaches in front, players in back.
Yesterday, the seating plans were scuttled by camera crews and photographers who came to capture yet another hectic day of the team's fullcourt press across America.
Since taking two days off at Thanksgiving, the National Team has been in Washington State, Kansas, Tennessee and the District of Columbia.
As of Sunday,  the team had played three games, traveled 6,000 miles and been in nine airports.
And yesterday was another full day.


Fed Weighs New Evidence Of Slowdown
Economic growth is slowing in the United States, two new reports said today,  putting new pressure on the Federal Reserve to reduce interest rates and on Congress and the White House to reach a budget deal.
The Commerce Department announced this morning that its index of leading economic indicators had fallen by half a percentage point in October, the steepest drop since April and the seventh drop in the last nine months.
The slide in October was larger than most economists expected and prompted some to warn of a recession if the Federal Reserve did not reduce short-term interest rates soon.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
VARIOUS ARTISTS: 'DEF JAM -- THE FIRST 10 YEARS' Def Jam/Polygram, four CD's ($50)


Behind Sony Ouster, One Excess Too Many
Of all the perceived financial excesses that led to the ouster on Tuesday of  Mickey Schulhof, the one that apparently most dismayed his Japanese bosses at the Sony Corporation and seemed to be the final straw was the continuing drain on the balance sheet by Peter Guber, the movie executive that Mr.
Schulhof had ostensibly forced out more than a year ago.
There were other extravagances, it is true, like a fleet of corporate jets and antiques and hugely expensive credenzas that filled opulent offices at Sony  Studios.
There were fresh flowers daily in executive suites, private chefs and hundreds of thousands of dollars spent on restoring old studio movie posters and other artifacts.
Not to mention the tens of millions of dollars that Michael P.  Schulhof, the president and chief executive of the Sony Corporation of America,  spent settling the contracts of various executives hired just two or three years earlier only to depart.


A Fall Cleanup at the Boat Yard


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
SANTANA: 'DANCE OF THE RAINBOW SERPENT' Columbia/Legacy; three CD's ($50)


2 Teams Report Natural Defenses Halt AIDS Virus in Lab
Two groups of scientists are reporting that they have identified long-sought  chemicals produced by the immune system that in laboratory experiments have stopped the AIDS virus in its tracks.
AIDS researchers said the discoveries, reported in papers released yesterday  afternoon by two major scientific journals, could have profound implications for the prevention and treatment of infections with the human immunodeficiency virus, which causes AIDS.


Israel Strives for Peace Because It Must
To the Editor:
Re "The Consensus That Plagues Israel" (Op-Ed, Dec. 2): Cynthia Ozick's language is so poetic that it can too easily confuse and bypass reality.
She insinuates that the Oslo negotiation and the assassin's bullet "have their origins in an identical predisposition."


Tweaking Tradition for the Holidays
IN October, Langdon Clay, 46, a photographer known for elegant interiors and  grand gardens, and his wife, Minnie Maude, 42, moved into a sprawling house on Cassidy Bayou Road in Sumner, Miss., that was built in 1910 by Ms.
Clay's grandfather.
The couple found themselves rummaging in what is known in the South as the "plunder room."
There, in what Yankees might less artfully call the "junk room," the two spelunked with flashlights through the strata of four generations of family stuff.
Among their exhumations were taxidermy specimens from Granddaddy's hunting conquests in British Columbia.


Why Bosnia Intervention Is Justified
To the Editor:
According to Secretary of Defense William J. Perry, the Pentagon cannot estimate the number of casualties that NATO ground forces may suffer in Bosnia because there is no historical model for an operation of this nature.
There are, however, similarities between the war in Bosnia and at least one other historical event.


Lawyer Sought In Ethics Case On Gingrich
After nearly a year of internal debate, the House ethics committee today voted unanimously to hire a special counsel to look into charges against Speaker Newt Gingrich.
In a letter to the Speaker, the committee said it would hire a lawyer to help it examine whether he violated tax laws by raising tax-exempt money for Kennesaw State College in Georgia and using it to teach a political course there.


Study Challenges Beliefs on Conception Period
Conception is most likely when intercourse occurs on the day of ovulation or  the five days before it, Government scientists have found in a study that challenges some previously held beliefs.
In the study of 221 women, the biggest surprise was that no conception occurred after ovulation, the release of the egg from the ovary.


World News Briefs;French Set Last A-Test For February, Not May
France will conduct its last nuclear test in February, months earlier than planned, Defense Minister Charles Millon said today.
France has conducted four tests at a remote South Pacific atoll since September, when it broke a three-year moratorium.
It has pledged to sign a nuclear test ban treaty as soon as six to eight tests are completed.


Judge Sets Date for Trial In Rabin Case
A court in Tel Aviv today set Dec. 19 as a trial date for the confessed killer of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin as attention shifted to his possible line of defense.
Arraigned this morning at the Tel Aviv District Court on charges of premeditated murder, the assassin, Yigal Amir, was represented by two lawyers who live in Jewish settlements in the West Bank.
One of them said the defense would not use political arguments, but did not specify an alternative strategy.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
VARIOUS ARTISTS: 'THE REAL MUSIC BOX -- 25 YEARS OF MUSIC ON ROUNDER RECORDS' Rounder; nine CD's ($40)


Russian Jet With 97 Aboard Missing in Far East
An Aeroflot plane with 97 people aboard disappeared from radar screens early  today in Russia's Far East and is presumed to have crashed.
The plane, a Tu-154, was en route from Yuzhno, on Sakhalin Island, to Khabarovsk on the mainland when it lost radio contact, said Vasily Yurchuk, spokesman for the Emergency Situations Ministry in Moscow.
There were 89 passengers, including a baby, and a crew of 8, he said.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Ex-Clerk Tied to Bank Theft
A former clerk at the National Westminster Bank in Cherry Hill and her boyfriend were indicted yesterday by a Federal Grand Jury on charges of embezzling $498,000 in cash.
Dorothy Blackwell, 42, of Cherry Hill, received cash deposits from the Eastern Music Systems Corporation in 1989 and 1990 and deposited them into the checking account of her boyfriend, Charles McNeil, 65, of Jersey City, said Faith S. Hochberg, the United States Attorney.
TERRY PRISTIN


New Route To Majors For Cuban Defectors
A Miami-based agent has found a way to beat the system, and two Cuban pitchers will be the first to benefit.
Osvaldo Fernandez and Livan Hernandez defected from the Cuban national team during the summer, but they did not take the routine route to professional baseball.
Instead of seeking asylum in the United States, as other Cuban defectors had, Fernandez and Hernandez gained resident status in the Dominican Republic.


Despite New Faces, Rivalry Is the Same
Last night started a new battle between old enemies.
And despite some different characters in the fray, the Knicks-Chicago Bulls rivalry looked the same in many ways -- compelling and intense, with the Bulls leaving the Knicks frustrated again in Chicago.
The Knicks and the Bulls have held each other in contempt throughout the 1990's, with even the head coaches trading barbs in the past.
But both teams have changed so much since last season, there was no way to compare the past with the present.


U.S. Agrees to Return Documents Soldiers Confiscated in Haiti
Moving to eliminate an irritant in its relations with Haiti, the United States has agreed to return tens of thousands of documents that American soldiers confiscated more than a year ago from Haiti's most notorious paramilitary group and from the military headquarters, Administration officials  said today.
The papers, the existence of which became known last month, were taken in September and October 1994 after American troops landed in Haiti to restore its  ousted President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, to power.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
STEVE WINWOOD: 'THE FINER THINGS' Island; four CD's ($60)


New Jersey Daily Briefing;1% Payroll Tax Approved
The City Council voted, 5 to 4, yesterday to impose a 1 percent tax on payrolls of at least $2,500 per quarter.
An estimated $18.5 million would be raised under the new tax, which opponents charged would stifle job growth.
But Mia Scanga, a homeowner who said rising property taxes had been driving her neighbors out of town, noted that Jersey City businesses paid neither occupancy  nor earnings taxes that they would in New York City.


Army Stress Control Unit Mobilizes, Too, to Seek Out Peacekeeping'sHidden Toll
A freezing wind whistled down from Pikes Peak, pistol shots crackled at a firing range, and Maj.
Kathryn Gaylord recited the Army's recipe for coping with stress during a Bosnia winter: "Three hots and a cot."
Three hot meals, plenty of bed rest, counseling and, if possible, immediate return to duty prescribed Major Gaylord, a psychiatric nurse who expects to go to Bosnia next week with a 24-member Army Combat Stress Control unit based here.


CHRONICLE
Western society could learn a great deal from the Bushmen of the Kalahari Desert, in the view of GLORIA STEINEM.
Tonight Ms.
Steinem will be one of four hosts for a reception honoring JOHN HARDBATTLE, a leader of the Bushmen of Botswana.
"He has no title because it is  a nonhierarchical culture," Ms.
Steinem said yesterday.


Pretax Profit for Bass Rises 8.5% for Year
The British brewer Bass P.L.C. reported yesterday that it had an 8.5 percent  rise in its pretax profit for the year that ended Sept. 30.
Bass's pretax profit of L599 million, or $921.5 million, was slightly higher than had been forecast.
A year earlier, the company earned L552 million before taxes.
Sales rose 2 percent, to L4.54 billion, or $6.98 billion.
The gains came mainly from its Holiday Inn Worldwide hotel chain and Bass Taverns, its group of roughly 3,900 British pubs.
Bass Brewers, the beer unit, posted modest profit gains; Britvic Soft Drinks posted good sales and profit.
(AP)


Preservation Vs. Commercialization
To the Editor:
In his article "Who Owns the Blues?" [Nov. 26], Phil Patton once again brings to light a cultural/commercial phenomenon that has been present in American history for at least two centuries: the white co-opting of black culture for commercial purposes.
Isaac Tigrett and Dan Aykroyd may defend their  creation of the House of Blues by saying they were "on a mission from God." In fact, they are perpetuating a long tradition of white commerce latching onto black art as a means of making the money that black artists so richly deserve and have been denied.


I.B.M. Plans to Add Java Software Language to Its Arsenal
For much of the last decade, I.B.M. has been criticized for missing opportunities by stubbornly sticking to its own home-grown software rather than  embracing de facto industry standards like the Microsoft Corporation's Windows operating system.
Yesterday, the tables appeared to have turned.
The International Business Machines Corporation announced that it was licensing Sun Microsystems Inc.'s new Java software language, which is rapidly emerging as a new standard for developing interactive software for the Internet.


2 More Ventures for Mexico Long Distance
Mexico has granted long-distance telecommunications concessions to a joint venture between the Mexican conglomerate Alfa S.A. and the AT&amp;T Corporation and  to Unicom S.A.
The Alfa and AT&amp;T venture was formalized in October, with the Mexican steel and petrochemical conglomerate controlling a 51 percent stake and AT&amp;T holding 49 percent.


A Party for the Books


Coffee Prices Decline Sharply Amid Signs of Falling Demand
Coffee prices fell sharply on the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange in New York yesterday on signs of larger crops at a time of falling consumption.
On other commodity markets, soybean prices surged for a second day, while lumber price also rose.
The Commodity Research Bureau's new index of 17 commodities, which does not include lumber, fell 0.49 point, to 243.59.


Camby Sparks UMass Victory
They may meet again early next summer, on draft day, when the lure of the National Basketball Association could persuade 6-foot-10-inch Tim Duncan of Wake Forest and 6-11 Marcus Camby of Massachusetts to end their college careers after their junior seasons.
The next time they see each other on a basketball floor, their meeting will be another stop along the road.
But for one noisy evening, a rare meeting of gifted, young big men featured a pair of centers, each one wearing uniform No. 21 and a look that was both impassive and misleading.
For Camby and UMass, the 60-46 victory maintained a perfect record and solidified an early No. 3 ranking in both major polls.
For Duncan and Wake Forest, the evening was one to forget.


Well, Somebody Likes It
To the Editor:
Do I get the impression that Herbert Muschamp doesn't like Trump International very much?
Somebody does: we have sold $52 million worth of apartments in a very, very, very short period of time.
Mr.
Muschamp's taste, fortunately, does not coincide with that of lots of very smart (and rich) people.


Two Advance in Race to Succeed Packwood
Gordon Smith, the Republican president of the Oregon Senate, and Ron Wyden, an eight-term Democratic Congressman, emerged the winners on Tuesday from the nation's first mail-in Congressional primary elections.
They will be the candidates in a general election next month, also by mail, to fill the vacated seat of Senator Bob Packwood, a Republican forced by an ethics scandal to resign.
Mr.
Smith, the 43-year-old owner of a frozen-food company, won 64 percent of  the vote to defeat his closest Republican rival by 3 to 1.
Mr.
Wyden, 46, had a  difficult race against another Democratic Representative, Peter A. DeFazio, but  captured 51 percent of the vote, to Mr.
DeFazio's 44 percent.


Sun-Maid Chooses Young &amp; Rubicam
The Sun-Maid Growers of California in Kingsburg, Calif., said yesterday that  it had named the San Francisco office of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. to handle the account of its Sun-Maid brand of raisins, which had been at Hal Riney &amp; Partners in San Francisco for the last two years.
The billings were estimated at $2 million.
Y.&amp; R. San Francisco, which handles other food accounts like Diamond walnuts, was awarded the Sun-Maid account without a review.


Resorts Try to Make Things Tougher
It all happened in skiing slowly and almost imperceptibly.
New snow-making machines spilled their white wonder onto the slopes year after year.
Alpine runs got straighter and wider.
And groomers finished off the trails to look like a finely pressed pair of corduroy jeans.
Skiers seemed to love it -- lots of turning radius, no ruts to catch edges, and a chance to go fast, fast, fast.
But now some say they're bored.


Stocks Reach Record, With Dow Near 5,200
Blue-chip stocks continued to set records yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average coming within a fraction of finishing above the 5,200 level during a seesaw session.
With blue chips gaining for the fourth straight trading day, the Dow jumped 21.68 points, to 5,199.13, after crossing 5,200 during the day, notching its 68th record close of the year.
It first topped 5,100 on Nov. 29, just eight days after it passed the 5,000 mark.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
FRANK SINATRA: 'THE COMPLETE REPRISE STUDIO RECORDINGS' Reprise; 20 CD's ($500)


Editors' Note
An article on Jan. 25, 1992, headlined "U.S. Linked to Iraq Scud Launchers,"  by Seymour M. Hersh, reported that a Congressional subcommittee was investigating allegations against the Terex Corporation made by Dr.
Richard C. Fuisz, an American businessman.
The gist of the article could be read to charge Terex with supplying Scud missile launchers to Iraq before the Persian Gulf war, a charge neither The Times nor Mr.
Hersh intended.
This resulted from an inaccurate headline, erroneous changes made to the content and emphasis of the article in the course of the editorial process, and the inclusion of information supplied by Dr.
Fuisz that Terex asserts is false.
Terex vigorously denied the charge and instituted a libel suit against Mr.
Hersh and Dr.
Fuisz.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
'AS LONG AS I'M SINGING: THE BOBBY DARIN COLLECTION' Rhino; four CD's ($60)


It's a Mixed Beginning For Bradley
Before Shawn Bradley played a single second as a member of the Nets, he nearly cost his team a point.
A technical foul was called on the 7-foot-6-inch acquisition from Philadelphia while he was on the bench as he sought to give one of the referees, Rodney Mott, an unsolicited opinion.
When Ed O'Bannon hit a jump shot off the 19-year-old Timberwolves rookie Kevin Garnett, with barely a minute remaining in the first period, Bradley, sitting just a few feet from the play, jumped up and hollered: "He had two hands on him! What are you looking at?!"


Pension Shortages Reduced At 50 Big Companies in '94
The gap between promised retirement benefits and the money to pay for them narrowed by two-thirds last year at the 50 largest pension plans with shortages, the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, a Federal agency, said yesterday.
Combined shortages at the 50 largest underfinanced plans fell to $13.5 billion at the end of last year, from $39.7 billion a year earlier.


SHONEY'S RAISES OFFER FOR TPI, ITS LARGEST FRANCHISEE
Shoney's Inc. of Nashville said yesterday that its acquisition of TPI Enterprises Inc., its largest franchisee, was back on track and that it had raised the value of the offer.
Under the new agreement, TPI shareholders will get 0.315 of a newly issued Shoney share for each of their TPI shares.
Based on  yesterday's closing price for Shoney's, the acquisition is worth $71 million.
Under a previous merger agreement, TPI shareholders were to get 0.28 of a Shoney share for each TPI share.
Under the deal, Shoney's is to receive TPI's 188 Shoney's stores and 70 Captain D's restaurants.
The company will also assume an undisclosed amount of TPI's debt.
Shoney's shares fell 37.5 cents yesterday,  to $11, on the New York Stock Exchange.


When Hairy Paws Meet Pedigrees
FOR AFICIONADOS OF hairypaw Chippendale-style furniture, there is a mystery surrounding a newly discovered tea table.
Is it the same one that General John Cadwalader, a Revolutionary War hero, ordered in 1770 for his Philadelphia mansion?
No one knows for sure.
But John Hays, who heads the American furniture department at Christie's in New York, where the table will be auctioned on Jan.  27, hopes that it is.
There had been such a table at Cadwalader's sumptuously furnished house -- the closest thing to a palace in the Colonies at the time --  at which George Washington and other patriots often dined.
And since 1974, 10 pieces of hairy-paw furniture made for that house by the master cabinetmaker Thomas Affleck have been auctioned, with one commanding a record price of $2.7 million.


New House Ethics Inquiry
The House ethics committee will open a preliminary inquiry into accusations that Representative Barbara-Rose Collins, Democrat of Michigan, misused "official, campaign and scholarship fund resources."
The inquiry, announced by the ethics panel on Tuesday, will focus on whether  Ms.
Collins used campaign money and her Capitol Hill staff for personal purposes.


Found in Queens: The Royal Diamonds


Options Exercised By AT&amp;T Officials
Seven executives of the AT&amp;T Corporation, including its chairman, Robert E. Allen, exercised options for shares worth about $17.6 million in October and November, as they cashed in on investor optimism about the company's planned three-way split.
Mr.
Allen made about $600,000 when he exercised 16,539 shares on Oct. 30, taking cash instead of shares, said Dick Gray, an AT&amp;T spokesman.
Mr.
Allen's options were due to expire in January.


HOLLYWOOD ENTERTAINMENT'S SHARES DROP NEARLY 53%
Shares of the Hollywood Entertainment Corporation lost more than half their value yesterday after two analysts downgraded the stock and a Forbes magazine article questioned the company's accounting practices.
Shares of Hollywood, based in Beaverton, Ore., tumbled $8.625, to $7.75, or nearly 53 percent, in Nasdaq trading of almost 15.3 million shares.
Montgomery Securities is said to have cut Hollywood to a hold from a buy, while Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons cut the stock to neutral from a strong buy.
The Forbes article questioned whether the video store chain depreciated its tapes fast enough.


French Fried


Uniting to Seek a Death Penalty;Killer Works With Prosecutor on a New Sentence
In 1987, Michael Ross and C. Robert Satti Sr. were fierce adversaries, as Mr.
Ross was tried for the murders of four young women.
Mr.
Satti, the prosecutor, sought the death penalty.
Mr.
Ross, who had begun a series of rapes and murders  soon after graduating from Cornell University, said he was mentally ill, powerless to stop his own crimes.
Mr.
Satti convinced a jury that Mr.
Ross should die.
In 1994, the Connecticut Supreme Court voided the sentence, ruling that jurors had been wrongly prevented from seeing psychiatric evidence in Mr.
Ross's favor.


No Headline
We had a group of challengers in for a seminar and I told them I have one piece of advice: Their opponents' middle name is 'Gingrich.' I think it's good advice."
MARTIN FROST, chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. [A20:1.]


Israel Strives for Peace Because It Must;Realizing the Link
To the Editor:
"In Calamity, Common Ground" (Week in Review, Dec. 3) perceptively identifies the new link created when Arabs discover that Israelis too have their criminal nationalistic fanatics.


Court Expands Its Monitoring Of the Trash-Hauling Industry
In the latest move to rid Long Island's garbage-hauling business of Mafia control, Federal prosecutors said yesterday that six companies with a "healthy share of the market" will come under Federal Court oversight, joining eight companies already under such supervision.
The prosecutors and a court-appointed monitor said the growing court supervision of the business on Long Island had resulted in increased competition among hauling companies in Nassau and Suffolk counties and sharp drops in the cost of commercial-trash collection.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
TOM PETTY AND THE HEARTBREAKERS: 'PLAYBACK' MCA; six CD's ($80)


Robinson a Spur for Life
The All-Star center DAVID ROBINSON has signed a new multiyear contract that will keep him with the San Antonio Spurs for the rest of his National Basketball Association career.
Robinson, 30, had two years remaining on a 10-year deal that would have reportedly paid him at least $7.3 million this season.


Economic Scene;Justifying Government rules and dumping the dumb ones.
EASING Washington's regulatory burden is high on the agenda of the Republicans who control Congress.
While big changes are not likely to occur until after the 1996 elections, once-settled issues ranging from the preservation of endangered species to tough inspection standards for cars are bound to receive a serious second look.
And when they do, those who dare to complicate the debate with facts will have some sobering research by Robert Hahn to draw on.
In an analysis to be published next year by Oxford University Press, Mr.
Hahn, an economist at the American Enterprise Institute, looks closely at 92 health, safety and environmental rules issued by five Federal agencies since 1990.
Only 17 of them, he finds, can be justified in the sense that the measurable benefits exceed the costs.


Metro Digest Inside
Beginning this week, the Metro Digest appears inside this section, no longer  on page B1.
Today, the digest is on page B3.


Rutgers Tight End Honored
Tight end MARCO BATTAGLIA of Rutgers led everyone at his position in receptions (69), receiving yards (894) and touchdowns (10), and yesterday he was named to the Associated Press all-America first team, joining Nebraska quarterback TOMMIE FRAZIER; the nation's rushing champion TROY DAVIS of Iowa State; the nation's scoring leader EDDIE GEORGE and wide receiver TERRY GLENN, both of Ohio State, and wide receiver KEYSHAWN JOHNSON of Southern Cal.
(AP)


Bill Bradley's Mother Dies
Susie C. Bradley, the mother of Senator Bill Bradley, Democrat of New Jersey, died last Thursday in Palm Beach, Fla., where she had made her home since the early 1970's.
Mrs.
Bradley was 86.
Her funeral was held yesterday at Grace Presbyterian Church in Crystal City,  Mo., where the senator grew up.
Mrs.
Bradley was active in the church, in Crystal City and in Palm Beach.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
'I GOT RHYTHM: THE MUSIC OF GEORGE GERSHWIN' The Smithsonian Collection; four CD's ($60)


Bridge
A student may read a book or take lessons from an expert.
A compromise is to  study an expert's lesson notes for his students, and one famous teacher, Eddie Kantar, publishes his.
His third series, on 13 areas, is available from him for  $25 (Box 427, Venice, Calif. 90294).
The diagramed deal, from a section on first-trick play, shows the importance  of thinking as soon as the dummy appears.
South reaches three no-trump by an old-fashioned route.
A modern player might reach the same contract after opening two clubs.


Liberties;Ireland's Soul
There was a touch of the supernatural about Michael Collins.
When the man who made Ireland was shot at 31, The Washington Herald ran an editorial on Aug. 24, 1922: "Wails of banshees sound today over green mountain and blue lake, through thatched villages and castled market towns. Ireland's Galahad has gone from the land."


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Widening Plant Horizons


Primal Riffs for Tormented Teen-Agers
The great adolescent identity crisis is a bonanza for songwriters.
It unleashes intense, contradictory emotions that beg to be shouted or moaned, and  every teen-ager discovers them anew, before they seem like cliches.
Candlebox, a band from Seattle that opened a two-night stand at Roseland on Monday, understands adolescent turbulence, and plays to it with shifting degrees of aggression, self-pity and reassurance.
The band's souvenir T-shirts read, "Just Like You," and one of the band's singles, "You," declares, "As I cry for you, yes I'll die for you/ Pain in my heart it is real."


Omega Wins Gilbarco Suit
Omega Environmental Inc. said this week that it had been awarded $27 million  in damages after winning an antitrust and unfair competition suit against Gilbarco Inc. of Greensboro, N.C.
Omega, based in Bothell, provides products and services for environmentally safe tank storage of liquids and cleanup of contaminated soils.
Gilbarco supplies fuel dispensers and related components used in service stations.


Currents;From the Sublime to the Sumptuous
THE William Doyle Galleries, at 175 East 87th Street, is the only major auction house in New York City that sells vintage and antique textiles, which make unique gifts.
The house is having a sale today at 3 P.M., including the simple and the sumptuous: 200 sets of hand-woven tablecloths, napkins and place mats made of silk, lace, linen and damask and dating from the turn of the century.
Among them are kitchen tablecloths from the 1930's to 50's, estimated at $100 to $150 for a set of seven.


Insider Trading Case Is Related To Bid for Tele-Communications
The Securities and Exchange Commission filed charges of illegal insider trading today against a former board member of the Liberty Media Corporation and his wife.
The insider trading preceded Bell Atlantic's unsuccessful 1993 bid for Tele-Communications Inc. and its subsidiary Liberty Media.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
'THE MUSIC OF VIETNAM' Celestial Harmonies, Box 30122, Tucson, Ariz. 85751; three CD's ($48)


Martinez, With Cone, On Yanks' Wish List
The clock is ticking on the Yankees and their persistent pursuit of Tino Martinez.
The Seattle Mariners gave the Yankees 48 hours to talk to Martinez's agent about trying to sign the first baseman to a multiyear contract, and the deadline for reaching an agreement is today.
Despite the continued uncertainty, the Yankees were so confident they would sign Martinez that General Manager Bob Watson and Manager Joe Torre, in conversations yesterday with David Cone, told the free-agent pitcher to consider the Seattle slugger to be Don Mattingly's replacement for 1996.
Cone and his agent met with Watson and Torre to discuss which players could comprise the Yankees, a picture Cone wants more cleared before considering a return to the Bronx.


Jordan Takes the Wind Out of the Knicks' Sails
For the good part of three quarters tonight, the bones creaked and the shots  did not fall.
And Michael Jordan was of this universe.
Nothing more.
And so, the Chicago Bulls needed someone else, out there, beyond the periphery of space, time and normality.
With the Knicks applying pressure and elbows, the Bulls needed the man with Crayola green hair.


Built-In Obstructed Views
To the Editor:
In his essay "Going for the Gold on Columbus Circle" [Nov. 19], Herbert Muschamp hit the nail on the head when he called Donald Trump's International Hotel and Tower on Central Park West "a display of kitsch." And it's going to be far worse than anyone could have imagined.


Senate Panel Will Subpoena Notes of Whitewater Meeting
Paving the way for a significant constitutional and political clash, the chairman of the Senate Whitewater committee announced today that the committee would issue a subpoena for the notes of a 1993 meeting where President Clinton's top lawyers and other officials discussed Whitewater.
The chairman, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican of New York, said the subpoena would be formally voted on Thursday, a result of the recent refusal by  two of Mr.
Clinton's closest advisers to answer questions about the meeting or provide notes of what occurred there.


Misguided Perception
To the Editor:
Mr.
Patton's article describes the ownership of the artistic work of the blues musician Robert Johnson and the painter Bill Traylor as "subjects of tortuous litigation" and then states that Traylor's heirs "had little use for him before his death in 1947."


Irish Leader's Wife Stirs Furor
The women's movement in Ireland is suffering an angry split as an unexpected  and unintended result of the largely triumphal visit here last week by President Clinton and his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton.
Encouraged by Mary Robinson's election in 1990 as the nation's first woman to become President, the women's movement has begun to change a society that has been male-dominated for centuries.


Bankers Trust Legal Stalemate
PT Dharmala Sakti Sejahtera of Indonesia does not recognize the authority of  a British court that ruled last week that the company owes the Bankers Trust New York Corporation $69 million to cover derivatives losses, the company said this  week.
The company will appeal the British High Court's decision, "but I don't want  that to give the sense that we recognize the English decision as valid in any way," said Robert Ti, deputy managing director of Dharmala Sakti's international division.


No Testing on Needle
The needle that a homeless man plunged into a child's leg on a subway train last weekend cannot be tested to determine if the child might have been infected with a disease because no blood or other fluid was found in the syringe, law enforcement officials said yesterday.
The check of the needle, conducted yesterday by the Police Department's crime lab technicians, included a microscopic examination of the needle, the officials said.
The needle was sent out yesterday to be tested further for the presence of drugs.


Some G.O.P. Senators Refusing To Back Dole on Bosnia Mission
Support in Congress for the deployment of 20,000 American troops to Bosnia, never strong, seemed to erode further today when a group of Republican senators  broke with the leadership and announced they would vote to disapprove the mission.
Senators of both parties also sharply questioned Administration officials this morning.
Even Senator John S. McCain, the Arizona Republican who has been working with Senator Bob Dole on a resolution to support the operation, said the Administration would not get support as long as it lacked a withdrawal strategy.


Anderson Is Close To Picking Agent
Kenny Anderson, who is looking for a new agent, is interested in having David Falk represent him.
Falk, who represents the newly acquired Shawn Bradley of the Nets, told New Jersey General Manager Willis Reed last week that he would be speaking to Anderson soon.
"I can say that I have heard David's name mentioned," Reed said last night.
Because Anderson is in the final year of his contract, his choice of agent could be significant.
It was Falk, after all, who helped negotiate Alonzo Mourning's trade to Miami when Mourning got into a contract dispute with Charlotte.
Mourning had said he wanted to play either in New York or Miami.


On-Line Joint Venture Draws European Inquiry
The European Commission opened an inquiry yesterday into whether the plans of a joint venture by America Online Inc., the German media company Bertelsmann A.G. and Deutsche Telekom to create an on-line service would be anti-competitive.
In a statement, the commission said it was concerned about possible anti-competitive situations that could slow the development of other on-line services.
(AP)


Rallies in U.S. Stocks and Bonds Help to Fuel Gains by the Dollar
The dollar rose yesterday as Wall Street stocks and bonds pushed to fresh highs and the European currencies regained strength against the German mark.
"The mark gave back a lot of ground against the lira, franc and yen," said Steven Jury, chief dealer at Union Bank of Switzerland.
"The result was that the dollar was able to pop up."


Rangers and Blackhawks: Nobody Wins
They played an energetic and entertaining mess of a hockey game last night at Madison Square Garden, these Rangers and those Blackhawks, two rivals from over  the decades.
It was a rambunctious engagement, with lots of goals and moments of spite.
Both sides showed plenty of effort, if not always grace and beauty.


Slain Mexican Candidate's Father Demands Justice
It is a scene that transfixes: the old pistol held coolly to the candidate's  head, the terrible instant of hesitation, the deadly flash.
Then the videotape blurs, obscuring who really killed Luis Donaldo Colosio just as night fell in Tijuana nearly two years ago.
By now Luis Colosio Fernandez, the father of the slain candidate, has seen those videotaped images hundreds of times, but they still have the power to wound -- especially the unresolved end.


Facing His Biggest Risk Of All, Romantic Comedy
HOLLYWOOD'S MOST FAMOUS FORMER carpenter would rather be spending the winter  on his 800 Wyoming acres, but instead he is homesteading on Central Park West in Manhattan.
His latest movie, "Sabrina," was made in New York, and his next one will be, too, so it seemed logical to Harrison Ford to relocate for a year to an apartment with a view of the tops of Macy's Thanksgiving Day parade balloons.
Still, there are plenty of days with no filming, and he finds himself at loose ends, without purpose.
He does not do New York City lunches, premieres or  fashion shows.
Out West, he could walk his land or putter in an elaborate woodworking shop he created.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Police Kill Carjacking Suspect
State police officers shot two carjacking suspects, one fatally, after a high-speed chase yesterday afternoon on the New Jersey Turnpike, The Associated  Press reported.
Troopers Brian Largey and Joseph Caliguari shot and killed the suspects, who were wanted in a Nov. 27 carjacking in West Virginia.
The troopers were traveling south on the turnpike when they noticed the car, a Porsche, speed up as they approached.
After a brief chase, the car hit a guardrail at the Thomas Edison Rest Area, the police said.
The troopers fired 12 shots at the suspects when one, stuck in the mud of Woodbridge Creek, reached for a gun, investigators said.


Christopher Suggests 'Sensitivity' to Needs of the Bosnian Serbs
Directly addressing the concerns of Bosnian Serbs for the first time, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said today that the Bosnian peace agreement concluded last month should be carried out "with sensitivity," but he  ruled out any change or addition to the accord.
The roughly 80,000 Serbs living in Serbian-held districts of Sarajevo have objected vehemently to the agreement's stipulation that all of the city be handed over to the Muslim-led Government, and have demanded that the treaty be changed.
They have received outspoken support from one French general serving with United Nations forces in Bosnia, who was promptly relieved of his post, and more guarded expressions of sympathy from France.


Correction
Because of an editing error, an article on Nov. 26 about the movie "Reckless" misidentified the designer of the sets for the Off Broadway play on which the film was based.
He is Loy Arcenas; Andrew Jackness was the film's production designer.


A Plea to Clinton to Lead U.S. Efforts Against AIDS
For two hours today, President Clinton had his ear bent and, once or twice, his arm twisted -- by advocates for people with AIDS who pleaded with him to protect Medicaid, to support needle-exchange programs and to exert greater leadership in the fight against the AIDS epidemic.
Mr.
Clinton declared that a reduction in the Medicaid budget would be "a stake in the heart of our effort to guarantee dignity to the people with AIDS in this country," and promised to protect research efforts.


Corrections
A report in the Daily Briefing column in New Jersey copies on Nov. 23 about a discrimination lawsuit involving Trenton State College faculty members misstated the complaint against Eugenia Shanklin, an anthropology professor.
She was not accused of having called a colleague racist names and posted offensive cartoons.
Those accusations referred to another defendant, Howard Robboy; he and Dr.
Shanklin had also been accused by Mohamoud M. Ismail of blocking Mr.
Ismail's efforts to be promoted.
On Tuesday, as the column noted yesterday, a Federal jury dismissed complaints against both defendants.


Waiting Game for Controllers of Jupiter Mission
On the eve of their spacecraft's arrival at Jupiter, officials and flight controllers of the $1.3 billion Galileo mission had little to do here today but  wait and worry.
Galileo is less than a million miles from its destination, scheduled to rocket into orbit of the giant planet on Thursday shortly after 9 P.M.
Eastern time.
About three hours earlier, an instrument-laden capsule already detached from Galileo should enter Jupiter's atmosphere, radioing data on temperatures, pressures and chemistry as it plunges deeper into the dense clouds.


World News Briefs;Papandreou Worsens And Has Tracheotomy
Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou's health worsened today and doctors performed a tracheotomy after efforts to remove him from life support machinery  were unsuccessful.


High Court Narrows Definition of What 'Using' a Gun Means
The Supreme Court ruled today that a person cannot be convicted of using a gun in connection with a drug offense unless the Government proves that he fired, brandished, threatened someone with, or in some other way actively deployed the weapon to commit the crime.
The Court's unanimous conclusion, in an opinion by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, might appear linguistically and logically obvious, but it resolved a troublesome issue of statutory interpretation that had split the lower Federal courts.
The question for the Court was the meaning of the word "use" in a Federal law, known as Section 924(c)(1), that imposes a mandatory five-year minimum sentence on anyone who "uses or carries a firearm" while committing a drug offense.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
ELVIS PRESLEY: 'WALK A MILE IN MY SHOES: THE ESSENTIAL 70'S MASTERS' RCA; five CD's ($80)


Report Faults School Board On $12 Million Bronx Lease
An internal report by the inspector general of the School Construction Authority concludes that the New York City Board of Education may have paid millions of dollars too much to lease a South Bronx building last year for a new alternative high school.


World News Briefs;Palestinians Now Able To Use Own Passports
Palestinians living in the West Bank and Gaza Strip were able to travel on their own passports for the first time today.
"It means that any Palestinian can go out through the airport or across the borders using a Palestinian passport," said Jamil Tarifi, the Palestinian minister of transport who made the announcement.


Chronicle
Shana Alexander won't play favorites: today she'll talk about her famous father, tomorrow about her famous mother A tribute to the Bushmen.
SHANA ALEXANDER is giving equal time to each of her parents this week.
The writer, whose "Happy Days: My Mother, My Father, My Sister &amp; Me" was published last month by Doubleday, will be speaking about her parents at separate events.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;Late-night channel surfers have made the Psychic Friends Network an infomercial  success story.
TUNE in to late-night television and it is sure to be there, drawing you in as if by magic.
It is called the Psychic Friends Network, and for the last few years this odd infomercial has been reaping millions of dollars by enticing viewers to call a "900" number and have their fortunes read for $3.99 a minute.


Stocks Surge in Japan
Stocks traded sharply higher here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 344.46 points, or 1.81 percent, at 19,412.32.
On Wednesday, the Nikkei gained 188.33 points.


Merged Utility Is Named
The Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and the Potomac Electric Power Company said today that they would name their merged company the Constellation Energy Corporation.
The two companies announced their merger in October, but the deal must still be approved by shareholders of both companies, state and local regulators and Federal agencies.
Constellation Energy, which will be based in Annapolis, Md., will be the ninth-largest utility in the nation, with 2.3 million electric and gas customers and annual revenue of about $5 billion.


Saddam Hussein's Crime
To the Editor:
The headline "Iraq Sanctions Kill Children, U.N. Reports" (news article, Dec. 1) is wrong.


A Hundred Salutes to the Library
Clearly, it was not just another night in the most literary of cities.
Best-selling authors juggled pots and pans in the kitchen.
Bleary-eyed manuscript readers mingled with tycoons whose main daily reading matter is stock tables.
And from private midtown clubs to minimalist SoHo lofts to Upper East Side town houses, they all toasted a singularly New York institution, the New York Public Library.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
VARIOUS ARTISTS: 'PLANET SQUEEZEBOX' Ellipsis Arts, 20 Lumber Road, Roslyn, N.Y. 11576; three CD's ($50)


William S. Kroger, 89, Pioneer In Use of Hypnosis as Treatment
Dr.
William S. Kroger, a pioneer and longtime champion of the medical uses of hypnosis, died on Monday at Cedars Sinai Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 89 and  lived in Los Angeles.
A native of Chicago who obtained his medical training at Northwestern University, Dr.
Kroger specialized in obstetrics, gynecology and endocrinology until he became intrigued by the psychosomatic causes of many illnesses he encountered.


Night of Saxophone as Muse
A recital of music recently composed for the saxophone might be expected to have a certain grab-bag, ad-hoc quality.
It certainly is not an instrument with  unlimited repertory to its name.
But Taimur Sullivan's recital on Sunday night at Merkin Hall lacked neither substance nor variety: a world premiere of a John  Harbison work, the ninth of Luciano Berio's Sequenzas, an imposing recent piece  by Milton Babbitt and respectable second-tier works by John Anthony Lennon and Edison Denisov.
Mr.
Harbison's "San Antonio" is essentially a sequence of Spanish dances, sometimes upbeat, sometimes languid.
This is perhaps not one of the composer's major utterances, but it has much colorful movement and, at the end, a surprising tone of melancholy regret. (Mr. Harbison explains in a program note that the work was inspired by an encounter with dancers in the streets of San Antonio; a young woman eventually asked the composer to dance, but he declined.)


Essay;Farewell, Red Ink
Paris is paralyzed by a strike of workers determined to keep the lavish benefits of France's anachronistic welfare state.
We cannot mock; Washington D.C. commuters were blocked on their way to work this week by "Sweeney's garbagemen," militant A.F.L.-C.I.O. unionists resisting  overdue cuts of waste in waste management.


Currents;Stylish Guardian Angles
ON the coldest day or the warmest, guarding Harperly Hall, an Arts and Crafts-style cooperative building at 1 West 64th Street, is a comfortable and stylish job.
The new guardhouse, designed by Laura Schwartz to replace and to resemble the original one built in 1911, is a charming urban architectural folly.
It is a tiny copper house like the first one, but embellished with burnished mahogany walls and new amenities: central heating, air-conditioning and windows that can open.
"We wanted to upgrade it but make it look as though time had not changed," said Ms.
Schwartz, a resident of the building and a longtime friend and former student of Frank Gehry.
"We wanted it to have the same handcrafted details as Harperly Hall."


Maker of Design Software Accuses Rival of Theft
Cadence Design Systems Inc. said today that it had sued the Avanti Corporation, accusing it of the theft of software code, copyright infringement and conspiracy.
The companies compete in the market for the computer-aided-design software used to develop computer chips.
Shares in Avanti dropped by $5.75, to $35.25, in Nasdaq trading after the company said that it had been served with a search warrant on Tuesday by the District Attorney's office in Santa Clara, Calif.
Avanti, which is based in Sunnyvale, Calif., said that it had cooperated with the authorities, and that no criminal charges had been filed.
The stock of Cadence, which is based in San Jose, Calif., fell 62.5 cents, to $35.25, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
BUTCH MORRIS: 'TESTAMENT: A CONDUCTION COLLECTION' New World Records; 10 CD's ($160)


E. D. Sullivan, 82, A Princeton Scholar Of French Literature
Dr.
Edward Daniel Sullivan, a scholar on 19th-century French and comparative  literature who was dean of the college at Princeton University, died on Nov. 21  in the Medical Center at Princeton.
He was 82 and lived in Jamesburg, N.J.


New Pact for Army's Sutton
Fresh off his fourth straight victory over Navy, Army Coach BOB SUTTON was rewarded yesterday with a two-year contract.
Sutton's current five-year contract was to expire at the end of June 1996.
Sutton's five-year record at West Point is 24-30-1.


James Reston of The Times
James B. Reston, a son of Clydebank whose friends knew him as Scotty, was fond of describing himself as an "unreconstructed Scotch Calvinist" and reminding people that "nothing makes Scotch Calvinists happier than misery." That may have been one of the few disingenuous remarks this extraordinary journalist ever made.
In 50 years as a reporter, columnist and editor for The New York Times, Scotty Reston saw enough pestilence and knavery to satisfy anyone's appetite for misery.
But he never much liked it, and he never succumbed to it.
There was another aspect to his faith, and that was his belief in the possibility of redemption.
What suffused his life and his writing were love and  hope -- love for his chosen profession, hope for his adopted country.
"On the whole," he said in the autobiography he finally got around to writing a few years ago, "I believe in happy endings."


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
'THE COMPLETE BLUE NOTE ANDREW HILL SESSIONS (1963-66)' Mosaic; seven CD's ($112)


The Self in Cyberspace, Decentered and Opaque
LIFE ON THE SCREEN Identity in the Age of the Internet By Sherry Turkle 347 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.


Casinos Are No Solution
New York's mayors seem unable to resist casinos.
In the 1860's, Fernando Wood consorted with John Morrissey, the city's premier gambler, at Morrissey's posh illegal gambling hall on West 24th Street.
Jimmy Walker liked to conduct city business from the elegant Central Park Casino in the 1920's.
In the glory days of the early 20th century, "entrepreneurs" like Richard Canfield and Arnold Rothstein made the city a mecca for high rollers without worrying about whether gambling was a public good.
Now, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani is weighing whether gambling, in the form of a proposal for floating casinos that sail out of Staten Island to international waters, can be a civic virtue, the fertilizer for economic development.
But if there are any lessons from the colorful characters of the past, it is to keep an eye on the bottom line.


A Gardener on Your List? Think Basics
NO, thank you, I really don't want a pair of cherry red Wellington boots.
I'd be embarrassed to be seen in such cutesy-pie little numbers.
There is a reverse  snobbism among real gardeners, who get their army-green rubber boots at farm supply stores.
They are quiet snobs though, about good tools, because the cheap  stuff wears out.
Like the Scott pruning shears I bought at Wal-Mart one summer because I didn't want to drive a few more miles for a pair of Felco's.
The Scott shears fell apart halfway through the mock-oranges.
So give me a pair of Felco's, No. 7, any day, with the rotating handle.
And one of those holsters that fit onto your belt, so you don't keep losing your shears in the rose bushes.
Besides, it's like the farmer boots.
The holster gives the gardener a certain serious but sexy dash, especially if you have a waist.


Seles Joins Investors in Cafe
MONICA SELES has joined other sports celebrity partners who have invested in  the Official All-Star Cafe, the soon-to-open, $15 million sports restaurant in Times Square.
Seles is the chain's first female investor, joining SHAQUILLE O'NEAL, JOE MONTANA, ANDRE AGASSI, WAYNE GRETZKY and KEN GRIFFEY JR.
Seles, sidelined by tendinitis in her left knee but expecting to return to tennis at the Australian Open, was asked to invest several weeks ago.
"It was the easiest yes I've ever said," she said.


Stirrings of a New NATO
As NATO gathers a force of 60,000 troops to help secure the peace in Bosnia,  the Atlantic Alliance is shaking off some cobwebs from the cold war.
The Bosnia  peacekeeping mission, the largest military operation in NATO's history, is turning into the catalyst for some welcome changes in an organization that was left without a clear purpose after the demise of the Soviet Union, but did not seem to realize it.
Anxious not to be left on the periphery of the NATO command as the Bosnia operation commences, France has decided to resume involvement in the alliance's military leadership, ending a haughty separation initiated nearly 30  years ago by Charles de Gaulle.
France had maintained political affiliation with NATO, but stayed aloof from alliance military planning.


Russian Generations Out of Tune: Listen In
In June 1992, Nina Zvereva was approached in a Moscow courtyard as she washed a battered brown Zhiguli, a Soviet-made Fiat.
Then 28, she was just learning to drive, and she and her younger sister, Natasha, their husbands and their parents were struggling to find a niche in the new economy six months after the Soviet Union collapsed, prices were freed from Government controls and inflation gathered a frightening momentum.


Israel Strives for Peace Because It Must;Millenarian It Isn't
To the Editor:
How perverse!
Cynthia Ozick, in "The Consensus That Plagues Israel" (Op-Ed, Dec. 2), equates the efforts by Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel to bring  peace with the Palestinians with his assassin's dastardly deed.


High School Test Scores Show Slight Dip Over Previous Results
The latest test results released by New Jersey's Department of Education show a slight drop in the number of high school students passing the exams needed to  graduate.
Education officials said today that the low scores were particularly troubling in the state's 30 poorest districts, which lag significantly when compared with more wealthy, suburban districts.
Two districts under state control when the tests were administered, Jersey City and Paterson, mirrored the overall mediocre results from poor areas.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
WILLIE NELSON: 'REVOLUTIONS OF TIME . . .
THE JOURNEY, 1975-1993' Legacy/Columbia; three CD's ($50) 'A CLASSIC AND UNRELEASED COLLECTION' Rhino; three CD's ($50)


COMPANY NEWS
MICRODYNE CORP., Alexandria, Va., which makes data communications and network connection products, canceled plans to sell 3.5 million common shares because it believed the stock was undervalued.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


SHARES FALL AFTER SERVICO AFFIRMS ITS INDEPENDENCE
Shares of Servico Inc. fell 17 percent yesterday after the company said it would try to expand as an independent company.
Servico, which is based in West Palm Beach, Fla., had hired Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette in July to assist it in evaluating strategic alternatives, including a possible sale or merger.
The lodging company said it had received acquisition proposals valued at a "meaningful premium" above the trading price of its shares.
The company said, however, that the proposals did not reflect the value that could be achieved by  going forward independently.
The company owns or manages 55 hotels.
Its shares fell $2.25, to $11, on the American Stock Exchange.


Correction
An article on Nov. 26 about a new revival of the blues misspelled the surname and misstated the sex of one author of a biography of the singer Charley Patton.
The author is a man, Gayle Dean Wardlow, not Wardlaw.


Tomatoes Found to Cut Risk of Prostate Cancer
Men who eat at least 10 servings a week of tomato-based foods sharply reduce  their risk of developing prostate cancer, Harvard University researchers reported today.
The findings, based on a nine-year study of the eating habits of 47,000 men,  were published in The Journal of the National Cancer Institute.


HONDA CONSIDERS A MINI-VAN PLANT IN THE U.S.
The Honda Motor Company is considering whether to build an assembly plant in  the United States to produce mini-vans and will make a decision in the next six  months, a company spokesman said yesterday.
The plant, which would be Honda's fourth in North America, would be aimed at making the company a larger player in the lucrative United States mini-van market, the spokesman, Andrew Boyd, said.
Honda also said that it planned to invest $100 million in its first car assembly plant in Brazil.
The plant will begin producing Civics in August 1997.
It will build about 15,000 cars in its first year, but its annual production capacity will be expanded to 30,000 by 1999.
A number of auto makers have announced plans to build plants in Brazil this year, including Renault of France, Mercedes-Benz of Germany and Asia Motor Company of South Korea.


Kate Winslet: No 'Period Babe'
WITH HER SLEEK hair, tailored leather jacket and a prepossessing mixture of candor and cool, Kate Winslet is, in the words of her director, a very sparkling, very modern, very attractive person.
On the job, however, she is typically swathed in silk, linen and lace, playing a series of self-destructive romantic heroines in period films.
Her interpretations of Sue Bridehead, a Thomas Hardy heroine, and Shakespeare's Ophelia will arrive on screen sometime next year.
And in "Sense and Sensibility," opening on Wednesday, film audiences will see her play Marianne Dashwood, perhaps the most reckless young woman Jane Austen ever created.
"But I'm not that period babe, not at all," said Ms.
Winslet, who is 20 and looks like Julie Christie circa "Darling." "I haven't really sat back and addressed the fact I have done all these period films. Some people say, 'Don't you want to do something modern?' I suppose I do. But I don't think it's necessarily a bad thing at all. I do feel very comfortable in the clothing." The role was not, at first, a perfect fit.
Ang Lee, the director, says he initially saw Ms.
Winslet as a "raw talent and an uplifting spirit" in need of guidance and some restraint.


Approval by Council Panel Foreshadows Pay Increases
A City Council committee approved pay raises of up to 28 percent for Council  members and some other elected officials yesterday, and final approval of the increases seemed all but certain when the full Council votes on the proposal today.
Committee members endorsed Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's recent arguments that  the city's elected officials, commissioners and managers had gone too long without salary increases, making it increasingly difficult to recruit and retain talented top-level city employees.
The Mayor has said he would propose a broad package of raises for the commissioners and managers after the raises for the elected officials are approved.


Metro Digest
NEW YORK CITY


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
JOHN COLTRANE: 'THE HEAVYWEIGHT CHAMPION' Atlantic; seven CD's ($180)


Seton Hall Keeps Providence at Bay
Two sophomores, Levell Sanders and Jacky Kaba, had breakthrough games, and the steady play of Danny Hurley down the stretch helped Seton Hall hold off a strong second-half charge by Providence to win its Big East home opener by 79-72.
Sanders, a Brooklyn native, had a career-high 26 points including 3 for 3 from 3-point range and 9 of 12 over all.
Kaba, a 6-foot-9-inch forward, used strong moves to the basket in recording a career-best 21 points.
He also made two crucial free throws with 1 minute 9 seconds left to halt a 9-2 Providence charge and give the Pirates a 75-69 cushion.


A Team With a 4-9 Record Is Not Expecting Accolades
Center Brian Williams laughs when asked if he thinks there were any Pro Bowl  players on the Giants' 4-9 team.
"When it comes to voting for the Pro Bowl," he said, "it's all based on names and teams that win."


Arnold Finnegan Picks New President
Arnold Finnegan Martin in Richmond, a division of Arnold Fortuna Lawner &amp; Cabot, said yesterday that it had named Robert L. Barocci, 53, as president and  chief operating officer.
He succeeded Tom Robinson, 45, who will continue as the new business director.
Mr.
Barocci joined Arnold Finnegan from Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. in London, where he was the area director for Central and Eastern Europe for the last two years; before that he worked at agencies including the Leo Burnett Company.


Delta and Pilots in Accord To Provide Low-Cost Flights
Delta Air Lines reached a tentative agreement with its pilots' union yesterday to provide lower-cost service to smaller markets.
Delta said the agreement would enable the airline to expand in smaller markets from which it has been retreating because it could not serve them profitably.


Child Welfare Agency Offers Plan to Cut Its Budget
The Child Welfare Administration, already facing criticism for its handling of child abuse allegations, is proposing a new $18 million budget cut that would fall in part on the field investigations staff that acts as the city's front line in child abuse cases, according to an internal city budget memo.
The proposed reduction is part of a $52 million cut -- or 7.5 percent in city funds -- that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has ordered in the city's Human Resources Administration.
That, in turn, is part of the Mayor's overall effort to close a yawning budget gap for the next fiscal year.
He has ordered each city agency to propose cuts of 7.5 percent -- or more than $500 million in all.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
CLIFFORD BROWN: 'THE COMPLETE BLUE NOTE AND PACIFIC JAZZ RECORDINGS' Blue Note; four CD's ($64)


NEWS SUMMARY
International
A3-19


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
'HI TIMES: THE HI RECORDS RHYTHM-AND-BLUES YEARS' The Right Stuff; three CD's ($25)


'Black Ink': 3 Comedies And Death
Questions of identity give shape to the plots of all four new one-act plays in "Black Ink" at Playwrights Horizons on Theater Row.
Performances of these works by members of the theater's African-American Playwrights Unit continue through Sunday.
In Beverly Smith-Dawson's "Cover," we find that the Federal witness-protection program can not only disguise people but also change their race and sex: an apparently black man takes home an apparently white woman from  a bar, only to find out she is a protection program officer who is chopping her  agency's budget by lethal means.
The dialogue is so sharp and the changes in perception of who these people are are so fast that only in retrospect does one  realize that Ms.
Smith-Dawson has been cutting deftly to the heart of racial and sexual issues that could have given real offense in less skilled hands.


Neutrality' Won't Protect Our Troops
The Bosnian Government signed away half its country last month -- but only after receiving oral assurances that the United States would provide it with the military equipment and training it desperately needs to provide for its own defense.
Now it is becoming clear why the Clinton Administration was reluctant to give its assurances in writing: It has no intention of arming the Bosnians.
Instead of immediately beginning to arm and train the Bosnians so that American forces can be honorably withdrawn in a year, the Administration is blundering toward an ill-defined, unworkable scheme to subcontract this job to other countries.


The Pop Life
Music Sale


Museums Share More Art to Save Money
Distinguished youngish medium-size museum in the hinterlands with lots of wall space and ambition to match seeks like-minded partner(s) for art-to-art sharing relationship.
Photo a must. (Of the art.)
If it hasn't quite come to this in the once-starchy precincts of American museums, such appeals may not be all that farfetched, not when tough economic times in the arts are making for interesting new institutional bedfellows.
With government contributions down and private and foundation giving stretched increasingly thin, museums around the country are seeking ways to cut costs and  maximize resources.


Plain Speaking Underground
New York City, which is supposed to be the media capital of the world, has long inflicted upon its subway riders what might well be the world's most unintelligible and annoying public address system.
Whether the problem is an injured passenger ahead or a stalled train behind, anxious passengers seeking enlightenment on the platform sometimes hear only one sound: "Squawk!"
Straphangers can thus take heart from the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's plan to replace 30 year-old wiring with a fiber-optic system.
But there is much that can and must be done to make life easier for today's riding public.


Currents;Message in a Bottle (On It, Too)
WHEN fashion designers market perfumes, they design the package first, encapsulating their vision in the bottle.
Last month, Rifat Ozbek and the studio of the late Franco Moschino did just that.
Mr.
Moschino's clothing is printed with images like pizzas and peace signs.
So, it is no surprise that his perfume, Cheap and Chic by Moschino, is in a bottle shaped like Olive Oyl (below).
"She made him laugh" as a child, said Rossella Jardini, the design director for Studio Moschino.
The tall bottle of cologne ($45) and the plump bottle of perfume ($120) are at Neiman Marcus.


The Gingrich Factor
In a California Congressional race, the Republican is no Newt Gingrich clone, but his Democratic opponent is not letting that deflect his attacks.
Page A20.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
'THE 1940'S MERCURY SESSIONS' Verve; seven CD's ($98)


Theater in Review
From Sholom Aleichem, a Tale Of Love, Two Men and a Woman 'Double Identity' Folksbiene Playhouse


New York Offers Bluebird Car Plates
New York State today unveiled a new license plate featuring a bluebird that will be offered to people who want to donate $25 toward preserving the state's open spaces.
Initially, the new plate, designed by the wildlife artist Roger Tory Peterson, will cost New Yorkers $39.50.
That includes the annual $25 fee for a custom license plate and a $14.50 processing fee.


Hydraulic Arm From Garbage Truck Kills 2 on Passing School Bus


House Joins Senate in Voting Limits on Suits By Stockholders
The House approved a bill today that would make it far more difficult for stockholders who believe that they were defrauded to bring lawsuits against corporate officials, accountants and stockbrokers.
By a vote of 320 to 102, it sent to President Clinton a House-Senate compromise measure that would drastically alter a system of regulating the securities industry that for 60 years has sought to discourage fraud by a combination of private and Government actions.


Theater in Review
Reworking Reworked Moliere: O Youth!
O Enthusiasm!
Oh-Oh! 'The Misanthrope' Classic Stage Company


Assign Docudramas Ratings for Accuracy
To the Editor:
William Safire's Nov. 27 column, which assails docudramas, illustrates that as increasing numbers of directors feel entitled to use cheap tricks and devices to spike their dramas, the news media must challenge not only a quirky celluloid establishment but also a passive viewing audience.


Hvorostovsky Sings of Russia
The charismatic Russian baritone Dmitri Hvorostovsky does not have a conventionally beautiful voice.
His sound has a slightly grainy texture; even at full volume, the tone is somewhat covered.
And vibrato richness is not a natural quality of his singing.
Yet his burnished, plaintive voice is utterly distinctive, and his artistry affecting.


South Africa Reducing Emphasis On Its Synthetic-Fuel Producers
Undoing two major synthetic-fuel enterprises started as self-protection by the white former Government, South Africa announced today that it would sell a gasoline-from-natural-gas project and phase out subsidies to a gasoline-from-coal company.
Mossgas, a Government-owned offshore rig and refinery that converts natural gas into gasoline and diesel fuel, is considered a boondoggle.
At $3.3 billion,  it cost far more to build than expected and never produced fuel profitably in an era of crude oil prices below $20 a barrel.


BAUSCH &amp; LOMB TO OFFER NEW PRODUCTS TO LIFT EARNINGS
Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc. said yesterday that it would market several new products as part of a cost-reduction strategy intended to raise lagging earnings.
As part of the plan, the maker of contact lens products and Ray-Ban sunglasses will continue its shift from traditional contact lenses to low-priced, high-volume disposable lenses.
The company, which is based in Rochester, also said it wanted to do a better job of selling sunglasses to young, affluent consumers.
Bausch &amp; Lomb described the three-year plan to institutional investors and analysts after reporting that its fourth-quarter earnings would fall far below Wall Street expectations.
Bausch &amp; Lomb shares were down $1 yesterday, to $34.375, on the New York Stock Exchange.


The Outer Limits Of Cable Create A Comfort Zone
AT FIRST, IT LOOKS AS IF A tiny flying saucer has appeared in the lower right corner of the screen.
At second glance, the object turns out to be something almost as odd: a ringed planet, the logo of the Sci-Fi Channel, where endless reruns of "The Twilight Zone," "She-Wolf of London" and "Tales From the Darkside" make it possible to watch television all day and most of the night without encountering one normal human being.
For some of us, of course, cooking is a kind of science fiction, so those identifying logos really help while flipping channels.
When the words TV Food Network appear beneath a miniature serving cover, you have landed in the home of shows like "Chef du Jour" (it's not about cannibalism but has a different guest  chef each day) and "How to Boil Water" (which recently advanced to cooking with  tofu).
For relief from all that instruction, look for the block letters that spell out Cartoon Network, a fantasy land of wall-to-wall cartoons, most of them much older than their viewers.


S.&amp; L. Profits Rise 17%
Savings and loan association profits rose 17 percent in the third quarter this year, extending their four-year recovery of financial strength.
The Office  of Thrift Supervision said today that the industry earned $1.6 billion in the quarter ended Sept. 30, compared with $1.4 billion in the previous three months.
"The industry clearly has put the thrift crisis behind it," said Jonathan Fiechter, acting director of O.T.S.
The industry's return on average assets, a key measure of economic health, hit a record high in the quarter, and the number of troubled S.&amp; L.'s dwindled.


Panel Urges Shift of Focus For School Science Courses
Rather than memorizing the nomenclature of plant families, the anatomy of a frog or the periodic table, long staples of school science courses, students should learn to investigate and question the workings of the natural world, a national panel of teachers and scientists recommends.
Their report, a set of guidelines known as the National Science Standards, is the latest in a series of recommendations for 11 disciplines, including history, mathematics and social studies.
Most have been announced; two others, English and economics are still being written.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
'GLOBAL DIVAS' Rounder; three CD's ($30)


CHEVRON TO REVAMP GAS MARKETING AND CUT 130 JOBS
The Chevron Corporation said yesterday that it would revamp its United States gasoline marketing business, cutting 130 jobs from its non-service station work  force.
The move will combine regional offices and consolidate support staff in an effort to focus on sales growth, the company said.
About 1,900 employees will remain in the non-service station work force.
Some 4,200 employees work in company-operated service stations.
Chevron, based in San Francisco, said it has 8,000 branded service stations in 25 states.


The Moor's Pavane


Labor Chief Asks Business For a New 'Social Compact'
John J. Sweeney, the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s new president, called yesterday for a new "social compact" between America's corporations and workers, saying he and the labor movement might forgo their rhetoric of confrontation if business adopted what he called a less greedy, more respectful attitude toward the people it employs.
In what was billed as a major speech, Mr.
Sweeney told 400 New York business  executives and civic leaders that companies were undermining the nation's prosperity by holding down wages and slashing their work forces at a time of record profits.


Tyson Pulls No Punches in Training
He's back, as quick and fast and powerful as he was before he hurt his right  thumb six weeks ago.
Now the question is whether he can regain the skills that made him the best and most feared heavyweight fighter of his time.
In a half-hour of ferocious hitting today in his first workout open to the news media since then, Mike Tyson battered two sparring partners for four and a  fraction rounds and then battered a speed bag.
At the end, he was hardly sweating.


Sports of The Times;Hockey's Hypnotist, Is Back
MARIO LEMIEUX had the puck on his stick, but he wasn't skating with it.
As still as a statue, he was holding it along the boards outside the red face-off circle to the right of Islander goaltender Tommy Soderstrom, and all around him  the game seemed to stop for a split second.
"When he has the puck," Al Arbour, who coached the Islanders to four Stanley  Cup championships and is now their director of hockey operations, would say later, "he just hypnotizes everybody."


BOSTON CHICKEN MAKES $298 MILLION IN PUBLIC OFFERING
Boston Chicken Inc. sold nine million shares yesterday for $34.50 each, making what it said was a profit of $298 million.
The company announced the sale on Nov. 3 after registering to sell seven million shares, and said it increased  the number of shares because of demand in the investment community.
The shares were priced at $34.50 by an underwriting group led by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
Boston Chicken shares were up 25 cents yesterday, to $34.875, in Nasdaq trading of almost 5.1 million shares.
Boston Chicken, based in Golden, Colo., operates and franchises Boston Market restaurants.


At the Corcoran, A Renaissance After a Dark Age
WHEN DAVID C. LEVY, A native New Yorker with a reputation as a bit of an institution fixer, arrived here five years ago as the new director of the Corcoran Gallery of Art, he discovered that even he was unprepared for the mess  that awaited him.
"I was stunned," Mr.
Levy recalled as he reminisced the other day in his oak-paneled office.
"Problems were coming out of the woodwork like cockroaches,  and some were so fundamental you couldn't anticipate them."


A Bosnian City Remembers Its Dead


Metro Matters;Investigating Child Welfare: What's New?
THE Governor has become interested, Time magazine has weighed in, two governmental task forces are investigating, politicians are leaking memos and, wait and see, Ted Koppel may soon take note.
A tragedy like the violent death of Elisa Izquierdo gets attention.
That's how it is, and maybe some good will yet come of it.
But before another notable anoints another commission, some perspective, please: people who know something about child welfare have long known what's wrong with the system.
They know what kind of adult is likely to abuse children.
They know, too, where the city's child welfare agency falls short.


The Bride Isn't the Only One He Has Fathered
Money Train Wesley Snipes, Woody Harrelson Directed by Joseph Ruben R 103 minutes


Dmitri Volkogonov, 67, Historian Who Debunked Heroes, Dies
Col.
Gen.
Dmitri A. Volkogonov, a Soviet Army historian who lost his illusions about Communism and helped strip his countrymen of theirs, died today  in Moscow of stomach cancer.
He was 67.
General Volkogonov's biographies of Stalin, Trotsky and Lenin, based on secret documents that he had unique access to in the 1970's and 1980's as chief  of the military's psychological warfare department, forced Russians to face the  harsh truth about their leaders.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
ERIC DOLPHY: 'THE COMPLETE PRESTIGE RECORDINGS' Milestone; nine CD's ($140)


Devils Decline to .500 As Canadiens Rebound
Inconsistency continues to plague the Devils.
The Stanley Cup champions played with intensity and emotion only in spurts again tonight and lost by 4-2 to the Canadiens in their last visit to the historic Forum.
Defenseman Oleg Petrov scored the game-winner for the Canadiens early in the  last period after Vincent Damphousse and Pierre Turgeon scored in the opening period.
Damphousse iced the victory with an empty-net goal with 31.9 seconds left.


Season Fails to Fulfill Expectations for Parcells
Even Giants followers who try not to think about Bill Parcells wearing another team's warm-up jacket -- thought the Patriots were ready to move to the  elite level of the National Football League this season.
But Parcells conceded today that the season has been lost, with little hope of sneaking into the playoffs with, at most, an 8-8 record.
And the reason, he said, has to do with the fact that his team could not handle the increased respect their opponents brought to bear.


Japan's Leaders Were Also Tried
To the Editor:
In his essay on the Nuremberg war-crimes trial that followed World War II ["Watching for a Judgment of Real Evil," Nov. 12], Alex Ross states that "no subsequent international tribunal addressed the further atrocities that accumulated in the 20th century."


Jordan Offers To Organize Opponents Of Iraq Leader
King Hussein of Jordan has offered to be host to what would be an extraordinary gathering of Iraqi opposition leaders to discuss arrangements for  governing Iraq after President Saddam Hussein.
With Amman already playing host to prominent Iraqi defectors, the step would  mark an important new break with Baghdad by the King, who sided with the Iraqi leader during the Persian Gulf war.


Amerada Hess Announces Earnings Charge
The Amerada Hess Corporation said yesterday that it would take a fourth-quarter after-tax charge of $420 million, or about $4.50 a share, to write down the value of some of its assets under new accounting rules.
The oil company, based in New York, said that the noncash charge of $580 million before taxes primarily reflected a reduction in the book value of its Port Reading refinery and United States Flag Jones Act ships.


AS LONG PROMISED, PRESIDENT VETOES THE G.O.P. BUDGET
President Clinton today vetoed the Republicans' sweeping plan to balance the  Federal budget in seven years, denouncing it as extreme and wrongheaded.
At the  same time he promised to present a counterproposal on Thursday for eliminating the deficit by 2002, with less severe spending reductions and smaller tax cuts.
"We must balance the budget, but we must do it in a way that honors the commitments that we all have and that keep our people together," Mr.
Clinton said in a brief Oval Office ceremony.
"With this veto, the extreme Republican effort to balance the budget through wrongheaded cuts and misplaced priorities is over. Now it's up to all of us to go back to work together to show we can balance the budget and be true to our values and our economic interests."


Accounts
Karsten Manufacturing Corp., Phoenix, to the Martin Agency, Richmond, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Cos., to handle advertising for the manufacturer of Ping golf equipment, previously handled in-house.
Though the billings were not disclosed, Advertising Age estimated them at $6 million.
*
Amre Inc., Dallas, to Elkman Advertising and Public Relations, Bala- Cynwyd, Pa., to handle print advertising and mall marketing for Amre, a remodeling company, which on Jan. 1 plans to begin offering its services under the name Century 21 Home Improvements.
Those duties were previously handled in-house.
The billings were estimated at more than $4 million.


Roy Traded to Colorado
The turmoil-ravaged Montreal Canadiens sent another tremor through the hockey world today when they traded goaltender Patrick Roy, the pillar of the once-proud franchise, to the Colorado Avalanche in a five-player blockbuster deal.
Roy, a three-time Vezina Trophy winner who led the Canadiens to Stanley Cup titles as a rookie in 1986 and again in 1993, was sent to Colorado with right wing Mike Keane, the captain, for goalie Jocelyn Thibault, left wing Martin Rucinsky and right wing Andrei Kovalenko.


Lord Matthews, 76: Delivery Boy to Press Baron
Lord Matthews of Southgate, a British newspaper baron better known as Victor  Collin Matthews, the rags-to-riches former proprietor of the Express Newspapers  in London, died on his 76th birthday on Tuesday.
News reports, quoting family and friends, said he died of cancer at his farm near Saint Brelade on the Channel Island of Jersey.
As Mr.
Matthews, and starting as a newspaper delivery boy, he made himself into a press baron and the man at the helm of Trafalgar House.
He helped build it into an immense conglomerate that owned the Cunard Line and the Ritz Hotel in London, among other holdings.
But it took former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher to make him a real baron 15 years ago.


Radiant Wonders of the Mid-Century World
NOTHING COULD BE FURTHER FROM the hard-sell strategies of the Christmas season than the triple bill of photographs by Hiroshi Sugimoto now at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The show has a timeless, seasonless quality.
The elements in Mr.
Sugimoto's troika have, at first sight, nothing in common except the will to push a specific and sharply defined experience to its farthest limit.
One section in this show of 80 black-and-white photographs, which runs through Jan. 14, deals with 10 of the fantasticated movie houses that date from the time when going to the movies was the archetypal American leisure  activity.
Mr.
Sugimoto, who was born in Tokyo in 1948 and has lived in New York  for 21 years, started the "Motion Pictures" series in 1978.


On South Africa and Hope: A Dialogue
THE PLAYWRIGHTS ATHOL FUGARD AND Jon Robin Baitz know South Africa in different ways.
Mr.
Fugard, 63, has traced his country's agonies over apartheid  in such dramas as " 'Master Harold' . . . and the Boys" and "My Children! My Africa!" His newest work, "Valley Song," is set in the post-apartheid present.
It opens on Tuesday at the Manhattan Theater Club, with Mr.
Fugard directing and playing two roles: the autobiographical Author, who is white, and Abraam Yonkers, who is black and the grandfather of Veronica, played by Lisa Gay Hamilton.
Mr.
Baitz, 34, an American who lived in South Africa and went to school there in the 1970's, has written about apartheid in his 1988 play "The Film Society" and, most recently, in "A Fair Country," which opens in February at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater at Lincoln Center.


Gore Finds Rainbow at End of African Trip
Vice President Al Gore got a blast of the Rainbow Nation today, finding himself surrounded by dancing bricklayers, electricians and carpenters in orange, blue, green, yellow and red overalls.
His visit to an American-sponsored trade school in this black and Indian suburb of Johannesburg had slipped from sober testimonials about the school into a hearty chorus of "Nkosi Sikelel' iAfrika" ("God Bless Africa') the national anthem, and then into a singing, chanting African hoedown with the Vice President in the middle playing maypole with a big grin on his face.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Overturning of Law Urged
The lawyer for a Camden County man committed to a state mental hospital after being found not guilty of a sex offense by reason of insanity urged an appeals court yesterday to overturn a law that forbids such people from living in supervised community group homes.
James Katz, a volunteer lawyer for the American Civil Liberties Union, said  that his client, described only as "J.W.," was no longer under court supervision for the 1981 case and that his doctor had said he belonged in a group home.
But  State Superior Court Judge E. Stevenson Fluharty ruled that state law prevented  the man from ever being assigned to a group home.
J.W. has been living in Ancora Psychiatric Hospital in Winslow Township, the A.P. reported.


Post-Election Fights in Cairo Leave 15 Dead
Rival gangs fought with guns, knives and sticks today in a bloody conclusion  to parliamentary elections that were boycotted by leading Islamic candidates to  protest what they called an attempt to bar them from politics.
At least 15 people were killed and dozens wounded during runoff elections today for 306 seats in parliament.
The voting followed last week's election, in  which Government-backed candidates won 90 percent of the decided seats.


Works Apart These May Be, but They're Not Atypical
AT THIS TIME OF YEAR, IT IS NO surprise to encounter "L'Enfance du Christ," Hector Berlioz's "sacred trilogy," and Sir Charles Mackerras and the Orchestra of St.
Luke's will oblige on Saturday evening at Carnegie Hall.
But it is a surprise at any time to encounter the composer's lone comic opera, "Beatrice et  Benedict," which Yale Opera, of the Yale University School of Music, will present at Alice Tully Hall in semistaged form on Wednesday evening.
In different ways, these relatively late works, both with texts by the composer, have always been considered somehow apart from the rest of Berlioz's output.
"L'Enfance du Christ" (1854), which tells of the holy family's flight to Egypt to avoid Herod's slaughter of infants, was one of the rare works of Berlioz to be received with considerable enthusiasm in his native France during  his lifetime, and it has never lost its popularity.
It is generally regarded as  a product of a kinder and gentler Berlioz.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;2 Men Sentenced in Sex Case
Two men who were convicted of luring six boys to perform sex acts at their Bayonne home were sentenced yesterday in Federal District Court.
Richard Bagarozy, 47, received 10 years -- the maximum sentence under Federal sentencing guidelines -- and Edward Federowicz was sentenced to six years.
The men were put under surveillance in June 1993 after they placed newspaper ads seeking boys 15 1/2 to 17 1/2 to paint and clean their house, said Laura J.  Kaplan, an assistant United States attorney.


Nigerian Group Defends the Executions of 9 Nigerian Activists
Nearly a month after Ken Saro-Wiwa and eight other human rights activists were hanged in Nigeria for the murders of four pro-Government chiefs in the Ogoni region, the families and supporters of the slain chiefs have begun an international campaign that seeks to justify the executions and portray Mr.
Saro-Wiwa as a man of violence.
"Over time, we've been looking for an opportunity to get the facts out," Desmond L. Orage, son of Chief Samuel N. Orage, one of the four chiefs who were  killed in May 1994, said in a telephone interview from Washington.
"We are trying to put down the correct version of what happened."


The Bride Isn't the Only One He Has Fathered
The American President Michael Douglas, Annette Bening, Martin Sheen, Michael J. Fox Directed by Rob Reiner PG-13 115 minutes


Coleman Comes to Play And 76ers Snap Slide


Pataki Offers Details on Lilco Breakup
Gov.
George E. Pataki and a small army of state officials and investment advisers delivered more details of a plan to break up the Long Island Lighting Company today, but they remained vague about financial relief for Suffolk County.
The plan, drafted by the Long Island Power Authority at Mr.
Pataki's request, promises to cut electricity rates on Long Island by 12 percent through a partial state takeover of Lilco and the sale of the utility's gas operations and power plants to private companies.


Japan Account Surplus Fell Sharply in October
Japan registered a much smaller surplus in its broadest measure of trade in October, the Finance Ministry said today.
The surplus in the current account, measuring trade in goods and services, plunged to $4.31 billion.
That was less than half of the October 1994 surplus of $8.95 billion and of the $10.6 billion  surplus of September.
Economists had expected a drop, because of Japan's rapidly rising imports from Asia and the slowing pace of exports to the United States.
Though imports in the past were mostly high-priced European luxury goods, the trend now is for more imports of low-cost utility items, they said.
(Reuters)


Student Printer Is Arrested
A college student has been arrested on charges that he used a school printing press to produce $82,000 in counterfeit bills, the United States Secret Service  said.
Agents said the student, Kenneth Dent, 24, of Hueytown, had used an offset press at Bessemer State Technical College, where he took a printing class.
He was arrested on Nov. 21 when he tried to pass a fake bill, they said.
Mr.
Dent could face up to 30 years in prison if convicted on Federal counterfeiting charges.


Corrections
A listing in the City section on Sunday about a Hanukkah arts festival and crafts fair at Congregation Ansche Chesed, on the Upper West Side, misstated the opening date and the information number.
The fair begins this Saturday, not Dec. 10, running from 8 P.M. to 11; it will continue on Sunday, from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
The number is (212) 865-0600.


RETURNING HOME WITH: Ruth Brown;She's Still Making The Liver Quiver
RUTH BROWN has presence.
She has it when she performs at Rainbow and Stars, wearing a gown that glitters so much it rivals the view of the city skyline.
She fixes the audience with a gaze of regal imperiousness, then dismisses any airs with a slyly lifted eyebrow and sings, "If I Can't Sell It, I'm Gonna Keep Sittin' on It," which is not necessarily about secondhand furniture.
Miss Brown  is winding up her four-week engagement at the club, two shows a night through Saturday.
She brought different regalia for each one: 40 dresses.
Her presence also showed on a recent afternoon as she stood outside the Apollo Theater in a more casual outfit while a photographer prepared to take her picture.
A teen-ager did a double take and asked, "Are you a movie star?," while gray-haired passers-by called out her name and stopped to shake her hand.


Airgas Plans Expansion
Airgas Inc. said this week that it would buy the Acetylene Gas Company, a distributor of industrial, medical and specialty gases and related equipment.
Terms were not disclosed.
Airgas, based in Radnor, Pa., said Acetylene Gas, based in St.
Louis, has annual sales of about $21 million and operates 12 sites  in Missouri, Illinois, Kentucky and Indiana.


Parents Poll Shows Higher Incidence of Child Abuse
Two studies released yesterday paint a bleak picture of American childhood: One estimated, based on parents' own reports, that more than three million children are punched, kicked or struck with a hard object each year in the name  of discipline, and the other, a poll of young people, found that 40 percent of girls ages 14 to 17 said they had a friend their own age who had been hit or beaten by a boyfriend.


Clash in Burundi Capital
The Burundi Army and Hutu rebels clashed today in the capital, but the army reportedly drove the rebels out.
Aid workers in the capital, Bujumbura, said it was the fiercest fighting in months.
The Burundi radio said at least three people were killed.


Corrections
An article on Monday about the decline of the insurance industry in Hartford  referred incorrectly to the abandonment of buildings.
Hartford officials say 1 building out of 30 has been abandoned -- not 1 in 10, a figure supplied by Nick  Carbone, president of the Connecticut Institute of Municipal Studies.


Judge Finds Eagle-Picher Liable for $2.5 Billion in Claims
Eagle-Picher Industries said yesterday that a bankruptcy judge had found the  company liable for $2.5 billion in claims arising from its sale of products containing asbestos.
Although the determination by Judge Burton Perlman was higher than the $1.65  billion proposed by the company and some of its creditors in February, the company will apparently acept the figure and proceed with plans to emerge from Chapter 11 of bankruptcy law.


The Bride Isn't the Only One He Has Fathered


In Sarajevo, Plowshares Can't Do It All


Of Mondrian, Street Grids And Cities Transcendent
UPTOWN, DOWNTOWN, crosstown, our town: long before reaching the painting "Broadway Boogie Woogie," visitors to the Museum of Modern Art's magnificent Mondrian show may find themselves drawn into a New York state of mind.
Mondrian's painted grids, of course, fit almost too neatly into the city with the 90-degree soul.
And for an architecture critic, the show casts a revealing light on the city itself.
It may be entirely coincidental that Mondrian's grids recall the street plan of Manhattan.
Even so, the paintings and the city both stand at the intersection of material reality and metaphysical thought.
At the Modern, wall plaques help viewers grasp the idea that Mondrian's abstract forms are not simply a matter of composition or design.
For Mondrian, and for those susceptible to the creative process he pursued with such passion,  the departure from representation holds a spiritual dimension.
Perhaps the show  itself can help us perceive the transcendent city outside from a similar point of view.
The engineers who designed New York's grid did more than carve out identical plots of land from a bumpy little island.
They also defined a metaphysical space, a test ground for the aspirations that the skyline came to symbolize.


A Natural Defense To H.I.V. Is Reported
Two groups of scientists report that they have identified long-sought chemicals produced by the immune system that in laboratory experiments have stopped the AIDS virus in its tracks.
But they say that the research done so far is basic and that any application to treating people with AIDS is far down the road.
Article, page B17.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
HENRY MANCINI: 'THE DAYS OF WINE AND ROSES' RCA; three CD's ($40)


With Unions Adding Drama, the Season Is On at La Scala
When La Scala, the grande dame of Italian opera houses, opens its season on Thursday with a gala performance of "The Magic Flute," the sigh of relief from both audience and cast will be almost as loud as the first notes of Mozart's overture.
Until a few days ago, there was a risk that La Scala's traditional St.
Ambrose Day opening -- the crowning event of Italy's cultural calendar -- would  fall victim to a strike, a tradition that in recent months has become part of the opera's repertory.


J.F.K. Worker Is Arrested In Royal Theft
On Sunday evening, a dazzling diamond necklace draped the neck of Sarah, the  Duchess of York, as she mingled with President Clinton and the First Lady at a White House reception.
On Tuesday morning, the authorities say, it lay in a toolshed behind a modest row house in South Ozone Park, crammed into an empty video-game cartridge.
The tale of how the necklace and a matching bracelet, valued at half a million dollars, found their way from the Duchess's luggage to a backyard in Queens reverberated across the Atlantic yesterday -- providing yet another embarrassment for the scandal-plagued royal family and leading some United States law enforcement officials to question the royal common sense.


The Personality Lingers On
IN ONE OF HER MORDANT autopsies of the 1960's, Joan Didion wrote this cruelly elegant sentence: "Joan Baez was a personality before she was entirely a person." The imputation of personality has become an intellectual insult.
In matters of culture, it suggests the fast-fading aura of show-business fame.
"Personality" evokes the paper-thinness of people on a television screen.
Nevertheless, the word has residual strength.
Despite long overuse, dating back at least to the Romantic period, it points to something essential.
When we  meet someone who makes a vivid impression, we still say, "What an interesting personality," or, on occasion, "What an extraordinary personality." When Thomas  Mann met Gustav Mahler, he said, "For the first time in my life I had the impression of encountering a truly great man."


The Bride Isn't the Only One He Has Fathered
Father of the Bride Part II Steve Martin, Diane Keaton, Martin Short Directed by Charles Shyer PG 106 minutes


I.C.H. Sells Most Assets
The I.C.H.
Corporation said this week that a United States bankruptcy court had approved the sale of the company's principal insurance units and most of the assets of its facilities management unit to the Southwestern Financial Corporation for $260 million.
Southwestern Financial, based in Dallas, was the successful bidder in a court-supervised auction of the Southwestern Life Insurance Company, the Union Bankers Insurance Company, the Constitution Life Insurance Company and Facilities Management Installation Inc.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
'SOUL TRAIN: 25th ANNIVERSARY HALL OF FAME' MCA; three CD's ($50)


Missouri Inmate Executed
A reputed white supremacist who stabbed a black inmate to death in a Missouri prison with a homemade ice pick was executed by injection early this morning as  he clutched a Bible to his chest.
The man, Robert Earl O'Neal Jr., 34, was put to death after a last-ditch appeal had been rejected by the United States Supreme Court.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
MILES DAVIS: 'THE COMPLETE LIVE AT THE PLUGGED NICKEL 1965' Columbia; five CD's ($130)


MICROCHIP TECHNOLOGY PLANS 2 NEW PLANTS IN ARIZONA
Microchip Technology Inc. announced plans yesterday to build two wafer manufacturing plants and an office building in Chandler, Ariz., in what was expected to be a $1 billion expansion.
The construction will begin in June.
The  Intel Corporation is also building a $1 billion semiconductor plant in Chandler, which is 17 miles southeast of Phoenix.
Microchip Technology makes microcontrollers for automobiles, office equipment, and consumer and communications products.


Alfred I. Schlossberg Textile Manufacturer, 87
Alfred I. Schlossberg, a longtime New York textile manufacturer who was Caroline Kennedy Schlossberg's father-in-law, died on Monday at a hospital in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 87 and had lived in Palm Beach since his retirement.
Mr.
Schlossberg, whose son, Edwin, married Miss Kennedy, the daughter of the  late President John F. Kennedy and Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, in 1986, was born in Lynchburg, Va.


The Flag-Wavers Return
The Senate's professional patriots are at it again, pressing for a constitutional amendment to "protect" the American flag from the virtually nonexistent danger of physical desecration.
The majority leader, Bob Dole, said  yesterday he would seek a floor vote on an amendment empowering Congress and the states "to prohibit the physical desecration of the flag." The House has already approved the measure.
A two-thirds Senate vote would send it to the states for ratification.
The First Amendment to the Constitution, as twice declared by the Supreme Court in the past half-dozen years, already protects the rights of Americans to  express freely their feeling about the flag.
That honors the right of the vast majority who revere the Stars and Stripes to salute and glorify it.
But it also  tolerates those who would abuse the flag, an act rarely performed.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Agreed to terms with Dick Schofield, shortstop, on a one-year minor-league contract.


The Lights of Peace


Many Farm Animal Breeds Risk Extinction, U.N. Experts Say
From curly haired pigs in Croatia to cold-resistant cattle in Siberia, hundreds of farm animal breeds risk extinction, according to United Nations experts who are encouraging creation of animal semen and embryo banks.
The Rome-based United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization reported Tuesday on the status of 3,882 breeds of 28 species around the world, and classified 873 of those breeds as "at risk" -- meaning fewer than 1,000 females  or 20 breeding males exist.


Report by Fed Helps Derail Bond Rally
A Federal Reserve report showing wage pressures helped derail a strong bond rally yesterday, erasing much of the day's price gains.
Earlier, the price of the 30-year Treasury bond rose as much as 11/32 , pushing the yield below the psychologically important level of 6 percent, to 5.97 percent.
Prices and yields move in opposite directions.


Paris Slows To a Crawl, But Still Has Baguettes
What amazes me is how so many Parisians seem to think this is all just a lark," said Karoline Knoth, a German museum director who came to Paris to find the museums and nearly everything else crippled by a transport strike that is now in its second week.
There was still no end in sight today, so Miss Knoth, who is staying with French friends in the suburb of St.-Cloud, hitchhiked into the city.


James Reston, a Giant of Journalism, Dies at 86
James Reston, former columnist, Washington correspondent and executive editor of The New York Times, died tonight at his home here.
He was 86.
The cause was cancer, said his son Thomas.


To Confront the Call-In Critics, U.S. Aides Take to the Airwaves
In the free-flowing realm of talk radio, it is perfectly natural for Jim from Washington State and Jay from his car on a Los Angeles freeway to sound off against the President for sending soldiers to Bosnia.
But it is downright peculiar when people like Jim and Jay get to sound off directly to President Clinton's top policy makers: people like Madeleine K. Albright, the chief representative to the United Nations, and Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott.


A Pen for the Ages Inopportunely Runs Dry
It seemed like an inspired bit of political staging: President Clinton would  veto the Republican budget bill with the same pen Lyndon B. Johnson used 30 years ago to sign the Medicare and Medicaid programs into law.


N.B.A. Bans Tarpley Again, This Time for Using Alcohol
Dallas Mavericks center ROY TARPLEY, already banned once by the National Basketball Association for cocaine use, was thrown out of the league again yesterday for using alcohol.
By violating the terms of his aftercare agreement, the contract that was to pay him $23 million over the next five seasons was nullified.


Officer Pleads Guilty to Selling Cocaine He Took From Dealers
A New York police officer linked to the 30th Precinct corruption scandal pleaded guilty yesterday to selling more than a kilogram of cocaine that he took from Harlem drug dealers while in uniform.
The officer, Christopher DiLorenzo, 31, signed a plea agreement admitting to a single count of conspiracy to distribute narcotics in return for the promise of a reduced prison sentence.
With his head bowed and his hands clasped behind his back during the hearing  in Federal District Court in Manhattan, Mr.
DiLorenzo explained how drug dealers paid him thousands of dollars in exchange for "protection" from other police officers from the 30th Precinct in northwest Harlem.
The drug dealers were not so worried about the prospect of being arrested, Mr.
DiLorenzo told Judge Allen  G. Schwartz, adding, "Their main concern was the other officers would rip them off."


Mets Reward Vizcaino With New Deal
Jeff Kent does not have the luxury.
Nor do Carl Everett, Butch Huskey, Ryan Thompson or Edgardo Alfonzo.
Those incumbent Mets have yet to learn that their 1995 jobs are theirs to lose in 1996.
But Jose Vizcaino now knows that the position of shortstop is his  unless someone, namely the highly touted Rey Ordonez, has the wherewithal to take the job away.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Nov. 30, with an article about the sale of some Aetna Life and Casualty Company operations to the Travelers Group Inc., misstated some rankings of the largest property and liability insurers.
The CNA  Financial Corporation, which acquired the Continental Corporation in May, now ranks third in the industry; that makes the Travelers-Aetna combination fourth.


Courville Is the Met's Best
JERRY COURVILLE JR. of Shorehaven Golf Club in Norwalk, Conn., winner of the  Met Amateur and United States Mid-Amateur tournaments, was honored last night as the player of the year by the Metropolitan Golf Association.


European Union Review Of VW's Sales in Italy
The European Union is investigating whether Volkswagen A.G. of Germany told its dealers in Italy not to sell cars to foreigners trying to take advantage of  the weak lira, the European Union's competition commissioner said yesterday.
Such a practice would violate rules that allow car makers to run exclusive national distribution networks.
Italian and European officials raided several companies in Italy at the beginning of November to gather evidence in the case, according to the competition commissioner, Karel Van Miert.
Mr.
Van Miert said the commission had received complaints from individuals who tried to buy VW cars in Italy to take advantage of the devaluation of the Italian lira, which gave other currencies more spending power in Italy.
(AP)


Balancing Profits And Principles In South Africa
IT'S HARD TO pigeonhole Anant Singh, the producer of "Cry the Beloved Country," in the terms one uses to discuss his counterparts in America and Europe.
Major film maker?
Not yet, although Miramax, his American distributor, has high hopes for "Cry, the Beloved Country," which opens in New York and Los Angeles on Friday.
Here in South Africa, the hope is that it will be the country's break-out film, the one that does for the local movie industry what "Breaker Morant" did for Australia's in 1980.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Democrats to Pick Chairman
The Democratic State Committee selects its chairman tonight, and the incumbent, B. Thomas Byrne Jr., has no challengers.
Mr.
Byrne angered some Democrats in Hudson County last month when he came out against the re-election of Assemblyman Joseph V. Doria Jr. of Bayonne as minority leader without consulting other party leaders.
Mr.
Doria got the post anyway.
Mr.
Byrne, the son of former Gov.
Brendan T. Byrne, is seeking his second term as head of the party.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
GEORGE STRAIT: 'STRAIT OUT OF THE BOX' MCA; four CD's ($50)


INSIDE
New Signs of a Slowdown


Incendiary Doings


Bad Times for Education Company Force a Shift in Vision
At last year's stockholder meeting, executives of Education Alternatives Inc. celebrated their efforts at bringing private management to troubled big city school systems, pointing out proudly that recent contracts in Hartford and Baltimore meant that they were overseeing more public schools than any other company in their fledgling industry.
Yesterday the company's chairman, John T. Golle, was on the defensive, defiantly telling shareholders that the bruising experience of the last year, including Baltimore's cancellation of its contract and Hartford's refusal to pay for millions of dollars in expenses, meant that Education Alternatives' future was no longer primarily in urban education, but in a "less political and less volatile" place.
"Unfortunately," Mr.
Golle said, "the people who we view as our best users now are suburban."


A Health Care Merger Teeters;Egos Clash in California, in Pursuit of Blue Cross Plans
The meeting three weeks ago at the Woodland Hills Marriott in Los Angeles was called to iron out the differences between Leonard D. Schaeffer and Malik M. Hasan, two of the most ambitious and self-confident executives in the health care business.
The men had announced in March that they would be merging their managed health care companies into an industry powerhouse, but they were increasingly at odds over key provisions as the Dec. 31 merger deadline neared.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Prohibitions Planned Against Filth in Cyberspace Prohibitions against transmitting obscenity and indecent material over computer  networks were agreed to by a House-Senate conference, which rejected a compromise offered by moderate Republicans and on-line services.


Theater in Review
Forget About Rudolph; Vixen Is Making Headlines 'The Eight: Reindeer Monologues' Adobe Theater Company


Simpson will grant Interview, CNN says
Cable News Network announced yesterday that O. J. Simpson had agreed to grant an interview to one of the network's legal analysts for his trial, Greta Van Susteren.
But no details, including a date, have been worked out, Ms.
Van Susteren said in a report carried by CNN.
She would not comment further.
CNN executives referred all questions to a transcript of Ms.
Van Susteren's televised remarks.


Calendar: Exhibitions, Fairs and a Boutique
On Design Herb Lubalin Study Center of Design and Typography at Cooper Union, 41 Cooper Square (Astor Place); (212) 353-4214.


Growth Predictions Cut for Big Industrial Nations
These are nail-biting times for the Group of Seven major industrial powers as they watch their economies weaken under the double impact of faltering consumer  confidence and self-imposed campaigns to curb their budget deficits.
When they last met in early October, Group of Seven finance ministers publicly congratulated themselves on the "improved outlook" for the world economy.


2 Parties Back House Bill to Keep the District Operating in aGovernment Shutdown
In a rare display of agreement, House Republicans and Democrats said today that they supported a bill that would keep the District of Columbia government operating anytime a budget impasse shut down the Federal Government.
"This city simply cannot afford to shut down, and this Congress has a responsibility to see that it does not shut down again," said Representative Thomas M. Davis 3d, the Virginia Republican who heads a House subcommittee for the District.
Mr.
Davis spoke at a hearing in support of a measure offered by Eleanor Holmes Norton, a Democrat who is the District's nonvoting delegate in the House.


Blessed Peacemakers
To the Editor:
Re "For Buoyed Clinton, Down to Business" (news article, Dec. 4):


An Iced-Tea Spoon for Two, Please
AS my family snoozed peacefully last Sunday morning, I bolted out of bed.
Forget about how many days were left to holiday shop.
Only five were left till The Wedding.
And it wasn't even mine.


Placing Blame When Children Are Abused
To the Editor:
Re your Dec. 5 news article on the Elisa Izquierdo child abuse case:


Interpublic Acquires Addison Whitney
The Interpublic Group of Companies in New York, which owns agencies like Lintas Worldwide, the Lowe Group and McCann-Erickson Worldwide, said yesterday that it had acquired Addison Whitney in Charlotte, N.C., an international brand  consulting company.
The terms were not disclosed.
Addison Whitney has 19 employees and billings estimated at $6 million.
Many  Addison Whitney clients, like the Coca-Cola Company, the General Motors Corporation and Johnson &amp; Johnson, are also clients of Interpublic agencies.
Bill Smith, 37, president of Addison Whitney, will continue to head the company  in that position.


BIC IS ABSORBED BY ITS PARENT AND ENDS U.S. TRADING
The Bic Corporation said yesterday that its shareholders had approved the deal for Societe Bic S.A. of France to spend $40.50 a share, or $219 million, to buy the 22 percent of the Bic Corporation's common shares not owned by Societe Bic and the Bich family.
A Bic Corporation spokeswoman said in May that its closely held French parent company was making the offer in part because the French franc was much stronger than the dollar.
Bic, of Milford, Conn., expects to continue its United States operations as before.
The company, which traded on the New York Stock Exchange, said that it had ceased being a public company at the close of business yesterday.


PUBLIC SERVICE ENTERPRISE TO SELL A UNIT
Public Service Enterprise Group Inc. said yesterday that it would sell its Energy Development Corporation, one of the largest independent oil and gas exploration and production companies in the United States.
The Newark-based electric and gas utility said it expected to sell the unit, which is unregulated, in 1996.
The company has hired Morgan Stanley &amp; Company to study alternatives.
Energy Development, based in Houston, has 230 employees in 13 states, offshore in the Gulf of Mexico, and onshore and offshore in Britain, Argentina, Senegal, Tunisia and China.
About 67 percent of its proven reserves are natural gas.
Shares of Public Service Enterprise rose 75 cents yesterday, to $30, on the New York Stock Exchange.


William Roerick, Stage Actor, 82
William Roerick, an actor in theater, film and television, died last Thursday in a car accident in Monterey, Mass.
He was 82.
Mr.
Roerick's theatrical career began in the 1930's.
He acted in a 1936 production of "Hamlet" starring Sir John Gielgud, Lillian Gish and Dame Judith Anderson, appeared with Katharine Cornell in "Romeo and Juliet" and toured in a  production of "Dear Charles" with Tallulah Bankhead.
He was also in the original company of "Our Town" (1938).


Currents;A World of Machines and Crafts
FOR 10 years, Troy Halterman was a hairdresser.
But last year, at 31, he decided there was more to design than that.
There were chairs.
Compasses.
Christmas ornaments.
He went around the world to find objects for the home.
"I brought back things old and new, things machined and things that are crafted," he said.


Man Charged With 4 Rapes Was on Parole
A 45-year-old Brooklyn man was arrested yesterday for raping four women in the Fort Greene section, the first of whom he raped a day after his release from prison last summer, the police said.
The man, James Webb, was sentenced to 20 to 25 years in prison in 1973 with a long criminal record that included rape, sodomy and arson, the police said.
He was freed in 1990 but was quickly reincarcerated for violating parole.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column yesterday about Leon Fleisher, the pianist who lost the use of his right hand 32 years ago and has performed compositions for the left hand over the years, misstated the date of his first recital in New York.
It was last night at Carnegie Hall; it is not tonight.
Mr.
Fleisher is to  mark another milestone on Jan. 13 at Carnegie Hall by playing Mozart's Piano Concerto No. 12, using both hands, with Andre Previn and the Orchestra of St.
Luke's.


Stress Control in Bosnia
While the 20,000 G.I.'s in Bosnia are not expected to see heavy combat, the Army is ready to deal with "peacekeeping stress." Page A6.


The Bride Isn't the Only One He Has Fathered
The Baby Sitter Alicia Silverstone, J. T. Walsh, Lee Garlington, Nicky Katt, Jeremy London, George Segal Directed by Guy Ferland R 90 minutes (Playing exclusively at Film Forum in Manhattan; also available on videotape)


Bagir Journal;In the Land of Arranged Wedlock, Love Steals In
More than a thousand guests crammed into the backyard of Akmurat Akhmedov to  witness the wedding of the season: a double ceremony for his twin 20-year-old sons, Shokhrat and Azat.
If the brides were nervous, it was hard to tell underneath their identical glittery red shawls, silver headdresses and heavy veiling.


Michael Jackson Collapses At Rehearsal
Michael Jackson collapsed while rehearsing on a Manhattan theater stage yesterday, casting uncertainty over plans for a highly publicized national cable television special to be telecast on Sunday.
Tests showed that the entertainer was suffering from low blood pressure.
Mr.
Jackson, 37, was admitted overnight to Beth Israel Medical Center North at 170 East End Avenue on the Upper East Side, where he was taken after being stricken at the Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway at 74th Street, just before 5 P.M.
He had been rehearsing for the Home Box Office special, which HBO officials say  they hope will be watched by 250 million people worldwide.


Such a Doable Deal
In private, when they are not wailing about Republican cheeseparing or molar-gnashing about Democratic profligacy, some of the parties to the balanced-budget talks on Capitol Hill will concede a secret: If they really tried, they might quickly cut a deal on Federal spending.
So far, they have not really tried.
A lot of evidence now suggests that this  may be the week in which they finally start.


Islanders Make a Strong Case for Change
The future was only an hour away.
That's where the 20-year-old goaltending prospect Eric Fichaud was tending to his nets in Worcester, Mass., this evening for his minor league team.
And after one period here tonight, the hope was that Coach Mike Milbury of the Islanders would desperately try to summon him to the Hartford Civic Center.


Leader of Treasury's Law-Enforcement Agencies Will Step Down
The Treasury Department's top law-enforcement official is stepping down, and  the agency is considering several high-profile candidates to succeed him, including a former New York City Police Commissioner and a former Senator from Arizona, Government officials said today.
As Under Secretary for Enforcement, the Treasury official, Ronald K. Noble, has supervised several law-enforcement agencies, including the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, the Customs Service, the Secret Service and the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network.
He has long expected to return to teaching and will rejoin the faculty at New York University Law School.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
VELVET UNDERGROUND: 'PEEL SLOWLY AND SEE' Polydor; five CD's ($55)


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
'THE COMPLETE CAPITOL RECORDINGS OF DUKE ELLINGTON' Mosaic Records, 35 Melrose Place, Stamford, Conn. 06902; five CD's ($80)


Market Place;The Nasdaq, which is battling criticism, names a top regulator.
Mary L. Schapiro was named president yesterday of N.A.S.D.
Regulation Inc., a new operating subsidiary of the National Association of Securities Dealers that  will regulate broker/dealers.
Colleagues say she is an experienced and efficient administrator who is likely to be a strong enforcer and regulator for the Nasdaq stock market.
That fast-growing market is currently regulated by the National Association of Securities Dealers.
With this and other changes, the N.A.S.D. is seeking to counter longstanding  criticisms of its self-regulation, which critics charge has favored member firms and their executives over customers.
In addition, the N.A.S.D. and its stewardship of the Nasdaq market are the subject of investigation by the Justice Department and the Securities and Exchange Commission.


PATAKI PLANNING A GRADUAL REPEAL OF A UTILITY TAX
The Pataki administration and the Republican leader of the State Senate say they intend to push for the gradual repeal of a utility tax that brings the state almost $1 billion a year and adds several dollars a month to the average New Yorker's gas and electric bills, state officials said today.
The gross receipts tax, as it is called, has few if any supporters in the state.
A 4.25 percent tax on utility companies' gross sales of power, which is passed along to customers, it is a regressive tax that hits poor New Yorkers especially hard, and large manufacturers say it adds tens of thousands of dollars to the cost of doing business in New York.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
THE JACKSON FIVE: 'SOULSATION!' Motown; four CD's ($60)


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
'THAT'S ENTERTAINMENT: THE ULTIMATE ANTHOLOGY OF MGM MUSICALS' Rhino; six CD's ($90)


Leading Expert in Geophysics Is Found Slain in Hotel Room
Dr.
S.
Keith Runcorn, a geophysicist who was one of the earliest champions of the theory that the continents move relative to one another, was killed in his San Diego hotel room on Tuesday, the police said yesterday.
Dr.
Runcorn, 73, had been strangled and had suffered injuries to the head caused by a blunt force, said Lieut.
Glenn Breitenstein, who supervises homicide investigations for the San Diego Police Department.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Faculty Union Assails Rutgers
Accusing the administration of Rutgers University of stalling in contract negotiations, the union that represents the faculty is asking its members to authorize a strike.
The American Association of University Professors hopes to put pressure on the administration to resolve the long-standing dispute, Mary Gibson, president of the union, said yesterday.
The university's 2,300 professors and 1,600 graduate and teaching assistants have been working without  a contract since June 30.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt


Real-Life AIDS Lessons For Two Playing a Part
Pity the do-good project that winds up more irritating than illuminating.
Pity indeed "Positive: A Journey Into AIDS," an "Afterschool Special" on ABC at  4 P.M. today.
The primary players here are two actors who figured in a recent AIDS story line on ABC's "General Hospital." Robin Scorpio (Kimberly McCullough), hard-working A student, fell in love with Michael (Stone) Cates (Michael Sutton), runaway drifter, only to discover that Stone had AIDS.
As Robin prepared to deal with Stone's death, she discovered that she was H.I.V.-positive.


Drug Law Helps the Police Help Themselves
Investigative Reports" draws attention tomorrow night to a recent embellishment of the criminal law that permits Federal agents and the state and  local police to confiscate cash and property on the suspicion that their owners  are involved in drug trafficking. Just suspicion. No arrest or indictment, much  less conviction, is required. And the fact that most of the proceeds stay with the police may be a temptation to confiscation.
Particular attention is directed at two towns on drug routes, one in Louisiana, the other in Florida, where police departments have been notably enterprising.
The officers stop cars, usually those with black or Hispanic drivers, for trivial reasons, like changing lanes without signaling; chat the drivers into permitting a search, and then, if a significant amount of cash turns up, simply take it and send the drivers on their way.
The alleged suspects can get their money back by going to court, but the cost of a lawyer is so high  that few bother, leaving the police with considerable sums with which to expand  their efforts.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
CARLY SIMON: 'CLOUDS IN MY COFFEE 1965-1995' Arista; three CD's ($50)


Nippon Oil to Buy Caltex Stake in Refinery for $2 Billion
The Nippon Oil Company said today that it had agreed to buy the 50 percent stake in a jointly held Japanese refining venture from the Caltex Petroleum Corporation for 200 billion yen, or about $2 billion.
Industry executives and analysts said the agreement would benefit both companies.
By gaining full control of the refining venture, Nippon Oil can better prepare for the increased competition that the coming deregulation of the oil industry in Japan will bring, they said.
And Caltex, a joint venture of two  American oil companies, the Chevron Corporation and Texaco Inc., can use the sale proceeds elsewhere in Asia.


Antidote to Fruitcakes: A Dose of Design Books
CONCRETE fruitcakes, Muzak carols, gift books opened once and perhaps never again: ah, the joys of the holiday season.
According to a recent Gallup poll conducted for the American Booksellers Association, 54 percent of Americans want a book for Christmas.
And given this season's thick publishers' catalogues, it looks as if they could each receive one, with enough left over to satisfy the remaining 46 percent.


Mini-Mill Pioneer Steps Down at Nucor
The Nucor Corporation, the fourth-largest United States steelmaker, said today that its longtime chief executive, F. Kenneth Iverson, would step down on  Jan. 1 and be succeeded by its president, John D. Correnti.
Mr.
Iverson, 70, the principal architect of Nucor's rise to prominence as a pioneer of steel mini-mill technology, has been chief executive of the company since 1967.
Mr.
Iverson will remain chairman, a position he has held since 1984.


Bilingual Education Should Be Goal for All
To the Editor:
Representative Peter T. King's Dec. 5 letter rests on a flawed premise.
He implies that mastery of a second language is comparable to an unearned handout,  to laziness and sloth.


Jackson Sees Nelson's Imprint
It did not take Phil Jackson long to notice the difference in the Knicks under Coach Don Nelson.
Yes, they posted up more than one person and isolated many players.
And, of course, Anthony Mason's dual role of playmaking forward stood out on the game films.
But there were other differences, too.
No one looked back to the sideline for approval every trip downcourt.
Players were not always in the right place on the court, but it often did not matter.
A broken play was not necessarily viewed as  a bad one.


BILL WOULD CURB ON-LINE OBSCENITY
A House-Senate conference committee agreed in principle today on tough new prohibitions against transmitting obscenity and "indecent" material over computer networks, rejecting a compromise offered by moderate Republicans and the on-line computer industry.
Members stopped short of voting on the exact language of the bill.
But in a key development, House members of the conference committee voted 17-to-16 for a  measure that would impose fines of up to $100,000 and prison terms of up to five years for people who make "indecent" material available to minors.


A Chronicler Of Time's Slow March
HOW COULD SUCH A SMALL TREE BEAR SO much fruit, someone asks in "The Quince Tree Sun," a film by the Spanish director Victor Erice about an artist painting  the quince tree in his backyard in Madrid.
The question might be asked about all of Mr.
Erice's films, for they create large landscapes out of the smallest worlds.
Mr.
Erice (pronounced a-REE-thay), who, at 55, is considered by many to be Spain's foremost auteur, is surprisingly little known in the United States.
But  "Spain on Film: Spanish Cinema Now IV," a two-week festival that opened on Friday at the Walter Reade Theater, may help remedy the situation.
It includes a retrospective of Mr.
Erice's three movies, starting Wednesday, which the director is expected to attend.


Gingrich Made an Issue in a California Race
Speaker Newt Gingrich is not running for Congress from a district here in the high-tech Silicon Valley.
It just looks that way.
Democrats are so determined to make the Speaker an issue in the special election here on Tuesday that they feature him far more prominently in a torrent of campaign commercials than even their own candidate. (His name, for the record, is Jerry Estruth).


40 Wall Street Is Sold to Trump
The real estate developer Donald J. Trump completed his purchase of 40 Wall Street yesterday, buying the distinguished 70-story office building, across the  street from the New York Stock Exchange, for a price estimated at less than $8 million.
Mr.
Trump in July had disclosed an agreement to buy the building, which contains 1.1 million square feet of space, from Kinson Properties of Hong Kong.
Kinson paid $8 million for it in 1993.


CHRONICLE
COLETTE AVITAL, the Israeli Consul General in New York, telephoned MARVIN HAMLISCH a few days ago to ask him to perform in a public memorial tribute to Yitzhak Rabin on Sunday at 10 A.M. in Madison Square Garden.
"She wanted me to play a song I wrote with Marilyn and Alan Bergman called 'One Song,' and I said, 'Not only will I do that, but I have written another song that would be great for this occasion," Mr.
Hamlisch said yesterday.


Saboteurs Send Signal To President Of Honduras
The first time President Carlos Roberto Reina found the telephone lines to his office at the National Palace had been cut, it was easy to dismiss the break in service as nothing unusual.
After all, the state-owned telephone company, Hondutel, has never been regarded as a model of efficiency.
But the phone cables have been cut or stolen seven times since the summer, leaving him without communications for up to 14 hours at a time, so there seems  little doubt that someone has a grudge against him.


Senators Pass Ban on Form Of Abortion
Following a path that the House laid down a month ago, the Senate voted tonight to approve a bill outlawing a form of late-term abortion and making it a felony for doctors to use the procedure.
It is the first time since the Supreme Court's landmark Roe v.
Wade ruling in 1973 upholding a woman's right to abortion that Congress has voted to ban a particular method of abortion.


Troubled Americans In Rome: A Comedy
Sitting through Ron Nyswaner's "Oblivion Postponed," which opened last night  at the Second Stage Theater, is like being trapped on a tour bus with people who are too busy talking about the relative merits of their guidebooks to look out the windows.
It's a comedy about despair, but it's so inadequately written that  nothing seems to have been observed firsthand.
The situation is this: two seemingly disparate American couples meet by chance while sightseeing in Rome.
In the course of an impromptu dinner, they are forced to acknowledge the ugly cracks in their relationships, which, as the playwright would have it, are not unalike.


Three Jets Are Paying a High Cost for Hits
Three starting defenders for the Jets were assessed a total of $31,500 in fines today for what the National Football League described as illegal hits on three different quarterbacks.
Defensive linemen Marvin Washington and Erik Howard each were hit with $12,000 fines for their actions last Sunday against the Rams.
Washington sent quarterback Chris Miller to the locker room with a concussion following their helmet-to-helmet collision and Howard leveled Miller's replacement, Mark Rypien, with what the league described as "improper tackling techniques."


G.M. Venture to Make Vehicles in Russia
The General Motors Corporation said today that it had signed a $250 million joint-venture agreement with a Russian auto maker, Elabuga Automotive Works, to  build Chevrolet Blazer sport utility vehicles.
The agreement will give G.M. its first assembly plant in the former Soviet Union.
It will also be the first joint auto-making venture there for an American company, G.M. said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Clinton Offers New Plan To Balance the Budget President Clinton offered a new plan that he said would balance the budget in seven years.
The plan, which would make cuts averaging 5 percent in domestic programs, was immediately assailed by Republican leaders.


For Children
Storytelling One Dream Theater for Kids 232 West Broadway, at North Moore Street TriBeCa (212) 274-1450 Recommended ages: 3 to 7 Saturdays


Aid or Handout: A Useful Distinction
To the Editor:
Jay Marvin (letter, Dec. 5) cannot understand why American financial assistance to Russia is called "aid," while foreign assistance sought by the Cuban leader Fidel Castro would be a "handout." The distinction is actually a useful one.


Italian Prosecutors Seek Fraud Trial of No. 2 Fiat Executive
Italian prosecutors formally requested today that the No. 2 executive at the  Fiat group, Cesare Romiti, stand trial in connection with accusations that the company maintained slush funds from which it made illegal payments to politicians in exchange for public contracts.
A final decision whether Mr.
Romiti, Fiat's managing director, should stand trial has yet to be made by a court that functions much the way a grand jury does in the United States.
But the request was nonetheless a major setback to the campaign by Fiat to stave off a trial and clear its name.


Helmet Law Repeal Advances
Motorcycle riders over the age of 21 who have completed a motorcycle safety course would no longer have to wear a helmet under a bill that passed the Senate yesterday by a vote of 27 to 9.


Rowan Is a Big Name in Small-College Game
A football team from New Jersey will play in a bowl game tomorrow for a national championship.
No, it is not Rutgers, certainly not the Giants.
This team is 10-2-1 and will meet Wisconsin-LaCrosse (13-0) in the Amos Alonzo Stagg Bowl in Salem, Va., outside Roanoke, for the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division III title.


Retirees Help In Roundup Of Fraud Ring
F.B.I. agents began rounding up 422 people in 15 states today on fraud charges arising from an undercover investigation in which volunteer retirees tape recorded dishonest telemarketers who victimize the elderly.
Earlier in this two-year operation, 114 people were arrested and 112 locations were searched under warrants.


Japanese Stocks Lower
Stock prices were lower here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 125.35 points, or 0.65 percent, at 19,286.97.
On Thursday, the Nikkei rose 344.46 points.


After 28 Years, Referee Retires
On the day the National Basketball Association officially ended its two-month lockout of referees, one of the league's most respected ones, Jake O'Donnell, announced his retirement yesterday after 28 seasons and more than 2,100 games, including 279 playoff games.
"It has been a great run for me, but it felt like the time had come to spend  more time with my family," said O'Donnell.


Trash Trucks Idled After Deaths of Boys
Mayor Richard J. Riordan ordered hundreds of city trash trucks off the streets today, the day after a freak collision between a malfunctioning sanitation vehicle and a school bus killed two boys.
City officials focused on 390 trucks -- about half the fleet -- that are similar to the one involved in the crash on Wednesday, said Gyl Elliott, a spokeswoman for the Bureau of Sanitation.
About 100 trucks were inspected and put back in service this morning.
More than 720,000 residents could have trash-collection delays while the inspections are completed, Ms.
Elliott said.


Officer's Murderer Executed in Texas
A man who was on parole for the fourth time when he murdered a Dallas police  officer seven years ago was executed by injection at the state prison here on Wednesday night.
In a final statement, the 33-year-old prisoner, Bernard Amos, said his life was being taken in error and accused the courts of racism.


Plan Offered To Speed Poor Into Shelters
New York City would end its practice of keeping homeless women and children overnight in a shelter-placement office in the Bronx by doubling up families in  shelters and expanding the use of hotel rooms for emergency shelter, according to a plan submitted to a State Supreme Court justice.
The plan was offered in response to an October order from Justice Helen E. Freedman of State Supreme Court in Manhattan calling for the city to find a way to take eligible homeless families into the shelter system without forcing them to spend days in the Bronx office.


Abdul-Rauf Scores 51 Points As Nuggets Hold On at Utah
Nuggets 124, Jazz 119


Arthur F. Kip, 85; Physics Expert Led A Berkeley Group
Arthur Frederic Kip, an expert in solid-state physics and a professor emeritus at the University of California at Berkeley, died on Saturday at Alta Bates Hospital in Berkeley.
He was 85 and lived in Berkeley.
The cause was a heart attack, the university said.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)


Sports of The Times;Yanks Seek Continuity In Martinez
MY man, the Yankee fan, has this new nightmare.
He recently forked over many, many resemblances of Benjamin Franklin for the dubious privilege of watching the Yankees next summer.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)


Dow Down 39.74 as Rates Worries Reappear
After three consecutive record sessions, the stock market took its sharpest fall in six weeks yesterday.
Stocks were dragged down by profit taking and by concerns that the Federal Reserve might not lower short-term interest rates later this month.


Clair C. Patterson, Who Established Earth's Age, Is Dead at 73
Clair C. Patterson, a geochemist who made the first accurate measurement of Earth's age and raised the alarm about dangerous levels of lead in the environment, died on Tuesday at his home in Sea Ranch, Calif.
He was 73.
The cause was an asthma attack, said a spokesman for the California Institute of Technology, where Dr.
Patterson had been on the faculty for 40 years.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)


Politics Drives the Gopac Investigation
To the Editor:
Re "The Speaker's New Problem" (editorial, Dec. 1):


Rebels Plan New Attacks In Sri Lanka
Separatist Tamil Tiger rebels in Sri Lanka, defeated in their northern Jaffna stronghold, said today that they plan to attack areas in the north and east but  would not say if the capital Colombo might be hit.
"Our concentration is on the occupation of the army" in the north and east, said Lawrence Thilakar, the Paris-based spokesman for the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam.
"I don't like to comment on Colombo."


Korean Tycoons Dodge A Bullet
With South Korea caught in the grip of a monumental corruption scandal, knuckles are white in boardrooms across the country.
Seven captains of Korean business were indicted this week for giving bribes,  and many more are under scrutiny.
But executives are breathing a bit easier now because the Government has allowed the indicted tycoons to remain at liberty while awaiting trial.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)


2 Diplomats Rescue 185 Imprisoned By Sahara
It was a desert adventure worthy of the 19th century, but with a few twists.
Last month, moved by the tragic stories of 185 abandoned elderly Moroccan prisoners of a forgotten war over Western Sahara, two swashbuckling ambassadors  in coats and ties, commanding two military transport planes, swooped down on an airstrip just over the border in Algeria, cut through some red tape and took  the old soldiers home.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)


Heisman: So Close, It's Hard to Call
They became finalists for the Heisman Award by showing an ability to move over, around and through a season's worth of obstacles, an experience that may or may not prepare them for Manhattan in December.
When five finalists gather at the Downtown Athletic Club for the announcement tomorrow evening, they will redefine, perhaps by the narrowest margin ever, the concept of a gridlock alert  day.
Darnell Autry of Northwestern, Troy Davis of Iowa State, Tommie Frazier of Nebraska, Eddie George of Ohio State and Danny Wuerffel of Florida have produced individual efforts that have transformed this year's Heisman decision from the usual coronation into a rare coin flip.


Contract Vote Puts Mayor on Defense
With his hopes for labor peace in sudden disarray, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani  vowed last night that the city would not return to the bargaining table with teachers who rejected a tentative contract settlement, and he warned they would  suffer as a consequence.
Although the union's president, Sandra Feldman, called for new talks and "more flexibility" on the city's part, Mr.
Giuliani said the city would seek nonbinding arbitration before the state's Public Employment Relations Board, a process that could drag on for months.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
"HOLIDAY HEROES" (Soul Purpose Records, 440 S. LaSalle Suite 2320, Chicago, Ill. 60605).
Singers from the heyday of 1960's and 70's soul -- Mavis Staples, Bobby  Womack, Jerry Butler, the Chi-Lites, Dennis Edwards of the Temptations, Felix Cavaliere of the Rascals -- return with soul-style Christmas songs, many of them by the album's producer, Jon Tiven.
Some are about loneliness; others are dedicated to the purpose of the album, which raises money for the anti-hunger charity Feed the Children.
The production is lean and the voices are strong, testifying for compassion.
JON PARELES


Notre Dame's Kinder Explains His Actions
RANDY KINDER said yesterday that an "overindulgence of alcohol" and "immature behavior" led to his suspension from the Notre Dame football team.
Notre Dame announced on Tuesday that Kinder, the Irish's leading rusher this  season, had been suspended from the Orange Bowl against Florida State and from spring practice but would not say why he was being punished.


NEWS SUMMARY


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan gallery shows:
PETER HUTCHINSON, Holly Solomon Gallery, 172 Mercer Street, at Houston Street, SoHo (through tomorrow).
A retrospective of Conceptual photo works from 1962 to  the present, along with large color collages in which mushrooms, mountains, cactuses and flowers are blended into impossible landscapes (Charles Hagen).


Ex-New York Policeman Guilty in Drug Case
How could a retired New York City police officer and his wife afford a sprawling house with a swimming pool and two expensive sports cars, Federal prosecutors rhetorically asked a jury in St.
Louis.
Easy, the prosecutors said:  The couple were cocaine and heroin traffickers.
The jury agreed, and yesterday convicted George and Elisa DeLuca of conspiring to distribute cocaine and heroin, and of money laundering.
They face life in prison when they are sentenced next March.


Changes Could Affect Giants' Coaches, Too
The Giants are 4-9.
It is not the record they had hoped for.
And when teams lose, heads usually roll.
Because of that Giants players aren't the only ones who are wondering what the future will bring.
Coaches are as well.
With the future of Giants Coach Dan Reeves still somewhat in doubt -- although it seems as each day goes by his future is more secure and he will probably end up staying -- some members of the staff are naturally wondering what will happen to them.
Even if Reeves does stay, there could be changes on the staff.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the pen used by President Clinton to veto the Republican budget bill misspelled the surname of a White House staff member in some editions.
The aide, who provided an inkwell, is Todd Stern, not Stearn.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
"JAZZ TO THE WORLD" (Blue Note).
Pretty much anything fits on this album, from a remake of the Betty Carter and Ray Charles's masterpiece "Baby, It's Cold Outside," sung here by Dianne Reeves and Lou Rawls, through Herb Alpert and Jeff Lorber's funky "Winter Wonderland," to Cassandra Wilson's "Little Drummer Boy," featuring her voice and drums, only.
Diana Krall sings "Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas," Anita Baker sings "The Christmas Song," with an orchestra, and Chick Corea performs a solo version of "What Child Is This?"
PETER WATROUS


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS


More Muslims Evicted From Homes Despite Pact
About 60 more Muslim families have been evicted from their homes in the Banja Luka area, United Nations officials reported today, and Serbian flags are flying over the houses seized, they said.
The expulsion of Muslims, from the Serbian-held village of Dubrave, near the  Croatian border, comes just a few weeks after the Dayton, Ohio, peace accord in  which the warring factions agreed to let refugees reclaim their homes.


Corrections
A list of film credits in Weekend on Dec. 1 with a review of "The Dancer," part of the "Dance on Film" series at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center, omitted the name of the film's distributor.
It is First Run Features.


Council Votes Raises for Itself And Others
With a minimum of hand-wringing but a healthy dose of uncollegial rancor, the City Council approved hefty raises yesterday for its members and New York City's other elected officials by a vote of 38 to 10.
As they voted, Council members argued among themselves in tones that ranged from plaintive to emphatic about whether they deserved $15,500 raises.
But the assertions that got the most attention came from Council members who voted yes and lashed out at their dissenting colleagues, calling them hypocrites because they probably would quietly accept the raises despite their principled negative  votes.


Transit Fare Increase Survives a Court Test
In a ruling that means subway and bus fares will remain at $1.50 for now, a Federal appeals court said that a lower-court judge was wrong to block the 25-cent transit fare increase on civil rights grounds.
The ruling cast doubt on the logic opponents had planned to use to fight the increase: that it is discriminatory against the mainly black and Hispanic commuters who use the city system, an issue that still must be decided by the lower court.


Shoppers: East Village Beckons!
EACH year, the holiday feeling is the same, a claustrophobic, stultifying sensation of walking through a bright department store in a winter coat, not knowing where to look first, fighting through throngs of similarly desperate people as they wander from floor to floor, dodging models with atomizers filling the air with the latest cologne.
As far as I'm concerned, there are two kinds of people I shop for each holiday season: relatives for whom I don't know what to get, and friends for whom I don't know what to get.
And each year, I come up with the same solution:  procrastination.
So it is that for more Christmas Eves than I care to remember I'm on the telephone with large Manhattan department stores asking how late they are open.
And there I am, braving the thousands of other shoppers who curse themselves for waiting until the last minute, pawing through the remaining merchandise, searching for something, anything, that will fit into a box and look presentable the next morning.


Elektrowatt Agrees To Buy Landis &amp; Gyr
Elektrowatt A.G., a Swiss utilities company, agreed yesterday to buy the electrical company Landis &amp; Gyr A.G. for 1.8 billion Swiss francs ($1.54 billion) as it seeks to increase its building control business.
Landis &amp; Gyr's board recommended that shareholders accept the offer.
The combined sales of Elektrowatt's and Landis &amp; Gyr's building control units, which include heating and ventilation systems, are seen at 2.1 billion francs.
That would make Elektrowatt a challenger to be largest company in the industry, approximately equal with Honeywell Inc., said John Willis, an analyst  at Kleinwort Benson Securities.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Saboteurs Send Signal To President Of Honduras
The first time President Carlos Roberto Reina found the telephone lines to his office at the National Palace had been cut, it was easy to dismiss the break in service as nothing unusual.
After all, the state-owned telephone company, Hondutel, has never been regarded as a model of efficiency.
But the phone cables have been cut or stolen seven times since the summer, leaving him without communications for up to 14 hours at a time, so there seems  little doubt that someone has a grudge against him.


Senate Confirms Prosecutor
In a unanimous vote, the State Senate confirmed John B. Dangler yesterday as  Morris County's new Prosecutor.
Mr.
Dangler, 45, who will be sworn in today, was the municipal prosecutor for Mendham Borough and Mendham Township.


TELEBIT SAYS SALE IS POSSIBLE AS STOCK SOARS
The Telebit Corporation, whose stock has soared in the last week and a half,  said yesterday that it was in talks for the possible sale of the company.
The stock has risen from a close of $4 on Nov. 29 to $7.375 on Wednesday.
In response to questions, the company, based in Chelmsford, Mass., said no definitive agreement had been reached.
Telebit did not disclose with whom it was in talks.
The stock jumped briefly to $8.625 yesterday, before settling at $7.375, unchanged.
Almost 2.6 million Telebit shares changed hands yesterday, and 2.7 million shares were traded Wednesday.
Telebit makes data transmission products.


ECHLIN TO BUY AUTOMOTIVE UNIT FROM HANDY &amp; HARMAN
Echlin Inc. of Branford, Conn., agreed yesterday to acquire the assets of Handy &amp; Harman's automotive segment for $65 million in cash.
Handy &amp; Harman's automotive segment consists of four plants in Ohio and Indiana and a technical center at its headquarters in Auburn Hills, Mich.
The companies said the segment, which makes fuel-delivery system components for motor vehicles, had annual sales of about $130 million.
Handy &amp; Harman said the move was one more step in its strategy to concentrate on its surface finishing business and said the sale would provide the company with additional capital and debt capacity.


John Brennan, 41, A Leading Pollster
John Brennan, a nationally recognized expert on polling who for the last four years directed the Los Angeles Times Poll, died on Sunday at Midway Hospital in  Los Angeles.
He was 41 and lived in nearby Marina del Rey.
The cause of death was a stroke related to brain cancer, The Los Angeles Times reported.


Stage Is Set for a Renaissance Runner
Cross-country runners rarely find themselves in the spotlight, but there's a  song-and-dance man accustomed to standing ovations with a chance to win tomorrow's Foot Locker High School Championship in San Diego.
When Matt Lane, a senior at Yarmouth High outside Portland, Me., captured the Northeast Regional Nov. 25 at Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx, he became the event's first male winner from Maine.
He was also purportedly the first champion who would rather stand on the Broadway stage than an Olympic podium.


Aviation Meeting Analyzes Slow, Steady Progress on Safety
Eleven months after the Secretary of Transportation told 1,000 aviation industry executives that they should strive for zero accidents, 300 of those executives, meeting over two days, laid out a picture of painstaking progress, but few finished projects.
Two airlines, for example, have initiated better data collection and analysis systems in an effort to spot trends and anomalies that would alert them to a systemwide problem.
And the Federal Aviation Administration has proposed a rule  that would allow greater use of flight simulators, one of the more effective training tools for pilots.


For Some Bosnians, Return Is Just a Dream
War, never gentle, was hard enough on Hana Comic, making her a refugee before she was two years old.
But, three years later, the idea that peace might spirit  her home to Bosnia makes her weep.
Home has come to mean a place she has seen on television "where there are massacres, refugees, where the children have no food, no clothes, no shoes, where children are burned and crying," said her father, Ekrem Comic, 29.
Her mother, Hiba, 26, said that whenever Hana, now 5, hears adults talk of returning to Bosnia, she breaks down and cries.


Short on Family Values But Fairly Long on Heart
Adapted by Patricia MacLachlan (author of "Sarah, Plain and Tall") from one of her novels, "Journey" is a perfectly heartwarming family entertainment but is not likely to get much support from the Family Values professionals.
The Hallmark Hall of Fame presentation, on CBS on Sunday at 9 P.M., is about an 11-year-old boy mending a relationship with his grandfather.
That's heartwarming.
The problem is that the boy's mother has simply left him and his sister, deciding that she wasn't cut out for family life.
That spells anxiety for "I Remember Mama" enthusiasts.
But there can be no faulting this cast.
Grandpa Marcus is played by Jason Robards; his wife, Lottie, by Brenda Fricker (Oscar winner for "My Left Foot"),  and their wandering daughter Min by Meg Tilly (Oscar nomination for "Agnes of God").
Young Journey is portrayed by Max Pomeranc (the chess prodigy in "Searching for Bobby Fischer"), his 14-year-old sister, Cat, by Eliza Dushku ("True Lies").


Our Towns;Uneasy Rests the Village That Wears the Crown
THE last bad news in town was pretty much of a shock: some of the oldest, most treasured buildings on the oldest, most treasured streets were lying about  their age!
Residents said it just couldn't be that so many houses were younger than everyone had thought.
Not here, where the first warship in the Continental Navy  was built in 1775.
But research proved it.
A Federal-style house on Middlesex Turnpike was built not in 1764, but 1801.
The Henry Champlin House on Champlin Square, one of the most admired homes in the community, was built not in 1765, but 1818.
And so on.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
"YOU SLEIGH ME!" (Atlantic).
NEIL STRAUSS


Bulls' Defense Dominates Knicks
Derek Harper's defense helped cut off the Air supply early, enough so that the Knicks appeared headed toward their most satisfying victory of the season.
But as the game wore on, you-know-who got hot, 6-foot-7-inch Scottie Pippen was  posting up 6-3 Gary Grant with ease and the Knicks were on their way to losing yet another regular-season encounter to the Bulls.
It is an old story, this inability to put Chicago away, but it is worth repeating after Wednesday night's game, a playoff-type affair won, 101-94, by the Bulls at the United Center.
Because if it meant anything, the Bulls' victory meant that the matchup problems plaguing the Knicks for so long against Michael  Jordan and his teammates have somehow returned.


Budget Critics Detail Losses
Nearly 68,000 elderly New Jerseyans would be denied access to long-term health care over the next seven years under the Republican budget plan, a coalition of advocacy groups for families and the elderly said yesterday.
A study released by the coalition, led by the American Association for Retired Persons, found that New Jersey would lose $3.6 billion by 2002 for long-term care, which includes nursing home care and care for the elderly at home.
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman and other Republican governors officially endorsed the plan, which would provide Medicaid financing directly to the states, with no Federally imposed restrictions.


The C.I.A. and Haiti
The performance of the Central Intelligence Agency in Haiti is a cautionary tale about what can happen when a spy organization loses sight of the clear line between providing neutral intelligence estimates and interfering with the execution of American foreign policy.
In an interview with "60 Minutes" last Sunday, Emmanuel Constant, the former  leader of Fraph, the paramilitary organization that terrorized Haitians in the years of the illegal junta, described his work as a paid informer for the C.I.A.
Mr.
Constant is now in a Maryland jail, awaiting deportation hearings, and he has a clear self-interest in invoking the agency.
But whatever embellishments he may have added about his association, Government officials confirm he was paid by the agency and kept in close touch with it at a time when he was doing his best to prevent the return to Haiti of its ousted President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


AT&amp;T's Plan Gets Approval
The AT&amp;T Corporation today said that Illinois regulators had approved its plan to provide local phone service in the Chicago area, marking the first time  AT&amp;T would compete directly with a Baby Bell in a local market.
AT&amp;T plans to offer the service by purchasing time on the Ameritech Corporation's network and reselling it to customers under the AT&amp;T name.
The move is AT&amp;T's latest step toward gaining a share of the $100 billion local phone market.
So far, AT&amp;T only offers local service in Rochester.


Probe Pierces Jupiter's Clouds In First Interior Look at Planet
In the first literally penetrating exploration ever of Jupiter, an instrument-laden capsule from the Galileo spacecraft plunged today into the roiling atmosphere of the largest planet in the solar system and took the measure of its temperatures, density and other-worldly chemistry.
The Galileo craft fired its rocket for 49 minutes to slow down and enter a wide-ranging orbit of Jupiter.
It becomes the first spacecraft to orbit one of the giant outer planets for a long-term campaign of photography and detailed observations.
First reports indicated that the maneuver had been successful and  that the spacecraft was operating normally.


Will Satan Please Stand Up?
The Convent," which was shown as part of this year's New York Film Festival, opens today at the Quad Cinema, on 13th Street west of Fifth Avenue in Greenwich Village. Following are excerpts from Stephen Holden's review, which appeared in  The New York Times on Oct. 7.
Which of the intriguing characters in Manoel de Oliveira's metaphysical mystery film "The Convent" is the Devil?
The newest work by the noted 86-year-old Portuguese film maker is an exceedingly odd morality play, a whimsical blend of theological chess and erotic cat-and-mouse larded with readings from Goethe's "Faust." Set in an ancient Spanish convent, the film is an X-ray into the morality of a bourgeois married couple who find themselves on  territory designated "sacred space."


Jordan's King Fights Powerful Foes of Peace Effort
When Ahmed al-Zoubi, a Jordanian lawyer, met with Israeli leaders in Jerusalem in June, he thought he was celebrating the peace between Israel and Jordan.
But Mr.
Zoubi, 53, came home to find himself disbarred, the victim of a strict ban by Jordan's bar association on any contact with Israel despite the peace treaty signed by King Hussein in October 1994.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)


Mortgage Rates Fall
Thirty-year fixed-rate mortgages averaged 7.18 percent this week, down from 7.33 percent last week, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
The latest reading was the lowest since  Feb. 17, 1994, when rates averaged 7.11 percent.
On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 5.53 percent, down from 5.60 percent last week.


Time Is Short for Big Telecommunications Bill
House and Senate conferees canceled a meeting today intended to work out agreements on a sweeping telecommunications bill, a delay that reduced but did not eliminate the chance of passing a final measure before Christmas.
Senior staff members from both parties said tonight that they had moved closer to a compromise on the single biggest sticking point: the terms on which  the seven regional Bell telephone companies would be permitted to compete in the $70 billion long-distance market against companies like AT&amp;T, MCI Communications and Sprint.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)


After 28 Years, Referee Retires
On the day the National Basketball Association officially ended its two-month lockout of referees, one of the league's most respected ones, Jake O'Donnell, announced his retirement yesterday after 28 seasons and more than 2,100 games, including 279 playoff games.
"It has been a great run for me, but it felt like the time had come to spend  more time with my family," said O'Donnell.


INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: The U.N.'s Master Juggler;An Accountant Copes With Deadbeats and Bad Debt
It sounds like a chief financial officer's nightmare: a multinational corporation with no cash reserves, with no authority to raise capital or write off bad debts and with its most influential customer a chronic deadbeat who cheerfully admits that the billion or more dollars he owes will not be in the mail soon.
Joseph E. Connor doesn't need to imagine such a nightmare.
For the last year  and a half, he has lived it as the United Nations Under Secretary General for Administration and Management, trying to impose financial sanity on an organization tottering on the brink of insolvency, thanks to the refusal of member countries -- most notably the United States -- to pay their dues.


Italian War-Crimes Trial Opens
At the opening hearing of what could be the last Nazi war crimes trial in Europe, families of the victims of a 1944 massacre in a cave outside Rome asked  today to be allowed to interrogate a former SS officer who took part in the executions.
The trial of Erich Priebke, a former SS captain extradited to Italy from Argentina last month, is expected to get under way early next year, after Italy's constitutional court rules on the request.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)


In Primary Season, Big Question Is, Who's On First?
It is not as threatening as plummeting hog prices or widespread corn blight.
But a move in Louisiana to hold Presidential caucuses ahead of those in Iowa has infuriated top Republican officials in Iowa who feel proprietary about their first-in-the-nation standing.
This week, Iowa's Governor and House Speaker held news conferences to denounce the idea, which has been proposed by Louisiana Republicans.
One of Iowa's United States Senators has asked the Justice Department to investigate whether Louisiana's plan violates Federal civil rights laws.
And the state's Republican Party has asked all Presidential contenders not to campaign in Louisiana.


Justice Dept. to Call for Veto of Affirmative-Action Ban
Declaring that a measure ending Federal affirmative-action programs would threaten integration, a top Justice Department official said today that Attorney General Janet Reno would recommend that President Clinton veto the measure.
"For about 30 years now, we have had a national commitment to addressing historic segregation in American society," Deval L. Patrick, Assistant Attorney  General for Civil Rights, told reporters after testifying before a House subcommittee.
"And we have one tool -- one -- used mainly in the private sphere  to help businesses and schools bring some manner of integration to the work force or the college campus. And that is affirmative action."


Billy Bruton, 69, Braves Star in 50's
Billy Bruton, the leadoff batter, chief base stealer and rangy center fielder for the powerful Milwaukee Braves teams of the 1950's, died on Wednesday after suffering a heart attack while driving near his home in Wilmington.
He was 69.
The Delaware State Police said Bruton's car drifted off the highway and struck a pole.
He was pronounced dead a short time later at Christiana Hospital.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)


Bradshaw and Johnson: Fox's Analysts Du Jour
How does a publicity-shy network draw attention to a nationally televised football game at 4 P.M.
Saturday that does not feature the Cowboys, 49ers, Chiefs or Raiders?
If you are Fox Sports and the game is Arizona-San Diego you reticently fling open the doors of your smokefree Hollywood studio, unlock the manacles that bind the analysts Terry Bradshaw and Jimmy Johnson to the pre-game studio desk and unleash them to call a game.
A stunt?
No.
A bold experiment. (Remember NBC's announcer-free game? That wasn't a stunt; that was progress!) But here, two loquacious guys -- Bradshaw, who hasn't called a game in six years, and Johnson, who never has -- will analyze without a play-by-play man between them to act as a traffic cop to give  the yards, downs, tackler, upcoming Fox programming and to tell his analysts to  hush.
Hardly anyone has told Bradshaw to hush up since he went to Fox.


CHRONICLE
Somewhere in England, there's a 28-pound turkey in hiding that owes its life  to LINDA McCARTNEY, the wife of Paul McCartney and a passionate vegetarian.
She paid more than $4,500 for the bird at an annual turkey and goose auction  held Wednesday for children's and cancer charities at Henley-in-Arden, northwest of London, The Times of London reported yesterday.


Lois Moss Rothenberg, Benefactor, 60
Lois Moss Rothenberg, a benefactor of Jewish and other causes, died on Friday at New York University Hospital.
She was 60 and had homes in Manhattan, Ventnor, N.J., and Boca Raton, Fla.
The cause was a stroke, her family said.


Soldiers Accused of Racially Motivated Killings
Two Fort Bragg soldiers described as skinheads by Army acquaintances were arrested today and charged with murdering two people in what police called a racially motivated attack.
The suspects, Malcolm Wright Jr., 20, and James N. Burmeister, 21, both with  the 82d Airborne Division, were each charged with two counts of first-degree murder, said Lieut.
Tom Bergamine of the Fayetteville police.
Both suspects are  white; the victims, a man and a woman, were black.


Remembering Six Who Died in the L.I.R.R. Shootings


Rhode Island Stands Pat
Rhode Island, which last month finished its first winning football season since 1985, will remain in the Yankee Conference and continue to offer athletic  scholarships.


Ruling Party In Egypt Wins Big Majority
The Egyptian ruling party won an overwhelming parliamentary majority in a violent election during which at least 28 people were killed as rival parties' gangs roamed constituencies armed with sticks, clubs and guns.
Interior Minister Hassan el-Alfi said today that the ruling National Democratic Party of President Hosni Mubarak won 317 of the 444 seats at stake in the two rounds of voting.


Home Video
Let it be said that it took home video to tone down "Showgirls," Paul Verhoeven's film about a Las Vegas lap dancer.
When it opened to disastrous reviews and small crowds in September, the movie, which includes explicit if glaringly faked sex and an extremely violent rape scene, carried a seemingly indelible NC-17 rating.
But when MGM/UA releases the film on tape on Jan. 2, a slightly revised version will have an R rating.


The Spoken Word
CITY LIFE LECTURE, Villard Houses, 457 Madison Avenue, at 51st Street.
A lecture by Witold Rybczynski, author of "City Life: Urban Expectations in a New World."  Tonight at 6:30 P.M.
Part of an Antiquarian Book and Paper Fair sponsored by the Municipal Art Society and Urban Center Books.
Hours: Today, 10 A.M. to 9 P.M.; tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: $3 per day; $5 for a three-day pass.
Information: (212) 935-3592.


N.C.A.A. Soccer Lists Semifinals
Virginia (21-0-2) and Duke (15-6-1) will play in the second semifinal on Friday of the National Collegiate Athletic Association soccer tournament.
Portland will meet Wisconsin (18-4-1), which is in the semifinals for the first time, in the first game.
The title game is Sunday.


Jordan's King Fights Powerful Foes of Peace Effort
When Ahmed al-Zoubi, a Jordanian lawyer, met with Israeli leaders in Jerusalem in June, he thought he was celebrating the peace between Israel and Jordan.
But Mr.
Zoubi, 53, came home to find himself disbarred, the victim of a strict ban by Jordan's bar association on any contact with Israel despite the peace treaty signed by King Hussein in October 1994.


Man Arrested in Slaying Plot
A man who was accused earlier this year of hiring someone to kill his girlfriend was arrested in Florida yesterday while trying to obtain a driver's license with a fake birth certificate, the authorities said.
The man, James Minett, fled his home in Union, N.J., on May 25, the day the police charged Charles Ward of Newark in the shooting death of Holly Jo Desch, said Edward M. Neafsey, Acting Prosecutor for Union County.


Sophomore Wins Lombardi Award
Orlando Pace, Ohio State's left offensive tackle, tonight became the first sophomore to win the Vince Lombardi Award honoring college football's lineman of the year.
Pace outpolled the seniors Jonathan Ogden of U.C.L.A., Simeon Rice of Illinois and the two-time finalist Tedy Bruschi of Arizona for the 26th annual prize.


Burundi Fighting Reported
Sporadic shooting sounded through Burundi's capital today, one day after ethnic fighting between Hutu and Tutsi reportedly killed 26 people.
One aid worker said he saw army troops in the national university courtyard firing mortars into the hills around the capital, where Hutu extremists took refuge.


Art in Review
Frank Stella 'Free Standing Murals' Leo Castelli 420 West Broadway, near Spring Street SoHo Through Dec. 16 Frank Stella 'Imaginary Places' Knoedler &amp; Company 19 East 70th Street Manhattan Through Jan. 6


Burundi Fighting Reported
Sporadic shooting sounded through Burundi's capital today, one day after ethnic fighting between Hutu and Tutsi reportedly killed 26 people.
One aid worker said he saw army troops in the national university courtyard firing mortars into the hills around the capital, where Hutu extremists took refuge.


James Reston, for Many Years a Nonpareil Among American Journalists,Dies at 86
James Reston, former columnist, Washington correspondent and executive editor of The New York Times, died on Wednesday night at his home here.
He was 86.
The cause was cancer, said his son Thomas.


On Stage, and Off
Director Dismissed


Richard Haydock, 82, Legal Service Chief
Richard Haydock, who organized the legal referral service of the New York City bar association in 1947 and headed it until his retirement in 1984, died on Nov. 23 at Tally-Ho Manor in Boonton Township, N.J.
A 43-year resident of Mountain Lakes, N.J., he was 82.
Mr.
Haydock, a native of New York City, was an economics graduate of Harvard  University and received his law degree from Columbia University Law School in 1937.
He worked for the Legal Aid Society before forming the Legal Referral Service of the Association of the Bar of the City of New York, taking the position of executive director.
It was one of the first such services in the country for people unacquainted with the law or with lawyers, and provided legal help for a modest fee.


2 Diplomats Rescue 185 Imprisoned By Sahara
It was a desert adventure worthy of the 19th century, but with a few twists.
Last month, moved by the tragic stories of 185 abandoned elderly Moroccan prisoners of a forgotten war over Western Sahara, two swashbuckling ambassadors  in coats and ties, commanding two military transport planes, swooped down on an airstrip just over the border in Algeria, cut through some red tape and took  the old soldiers home.


Abdul-Rauf Scores 51 Points As Nuggets Hold On at Utah
Nuggets 124, Jazz 119


State to Buy Pine Barrens Lots
The Pinelands Commission was set up in 1979 to protect southern New Jersey's  1.1 million-acre Pine Barrens, but many property owners have complained over the years that environmental restrictions have made it impossible for them to develop or sell their lots.
As a result of a new $2 million program financed by the State Department of  Environmental Protection, the state will be able to buy parcels of up to 50 acres from property owners, the A.P. reported.


Parking Rules
Because of the celebration of the Feast of the Immaculate Conception, alternate-side street-cleaning regulations are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Strikes Spread Across France With Protests
The French Government named a mediator today and offered discussions with labor unions representing public employees on its plans to overhaul the social security system and the railroads.
But hundreds of thousands of people demonstrated in scores of cities, and the state-run rail network, as well as mass transit in Paris, remained shut down.
More than a third of all French public employees were on strike today, the Government said, as the walkout widened to include grammar and high school teachers in the capital.


TEACHERS REJECT 5-YEAR CONTRACT IN NEW YORK CITY
New York City's public school teachers voted down a proposed five-year contract last night, dealing a staggering and surprising setback to the union leadership and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, whose labor strategy was plunged into  uncertainty.
It was the first time in the 35-year history of the United Federation of Teachers that the rank and file membership rejected a tentative contract agreement negotiated for them.
With all 55,059 teachers' ballots counted, the vote was 56 percent against to 44 percent in favor, according to figures from the American Arbitration Association, the nonprofit group that tallied the results.


Both the Musical And the Physical In Joint Service
Playing the left-hand piano repertory is not a career of choice.
Paul Wittgenstein, the instigator of Ravel's D-major Piano Concerto, lost his right arm in World War I. Leon Fleisher, who gave a recital at Carnegie Hall on Wednesday night, suffered a less drastic but equally restrictive fate some 30 years ago and has struggled with repetitive stress injury ever since.
Mr.
Fleisher is making progress toward restoring his right hand and will play an early Mozart concerto in New York next month.
The instrument offers such broad possibilities to two hands that confining it to one adds the element of physical feat to musical performance.
This is literally the prizefighter who can master an opponent with one arm tied behind him, though presumably he would fight more artfully with two.
The situation poses teasing questions.
Should normally endowed performers playing this literature "cheat" if better music is the result?
Given the partial functioning  of Mr.
Fleisher's other hand, should he do the same?


Jets Knew Haselrig's History
Although Carlton Haselrig had fought with the police as recently as last February and his wife had requested an order of protection, the Jets still signed the troubled guard last summer.
Indeed, it was the second time that Haselrig, who has been out of touch with  his family and the team for more than a week after being suspended for violating the league's substance abuse policy, had been signed to a big-league contract despite a history of violence and substance abuse.


Assistant Principal Admits School Theft
A former assistant principal of the High School for Leadership and Public Service faces up to a year in Federal prison after pleading guilty to defrauding the New York City Board of Education.
United States Attorney Zachary Carter said yesterday that the administrator,  Robert Mazza, resigned as part of his guilty plea to misuse of public money.


Softkey Reaches Agreement to Buy Learning Company
Five weeks after initiating a hostile bid, Softkey International Inc. said today that it had reached an agreement to acquire the Learning Company for a combination of cash and stock valued at about $606 million.
Learning Company said it had terminated its previous merger agreement with Broderbund Software Inc., its preferred suitor.
Coupled with Softkey's Oct. 30 agreement to acquire the Minnesota Educational Computing Corporation, known as M.E.C.C., and its agreement this month to acquire Compton's New Media from the Tribune Company, this deal would make Softkey the dominant player in educational software.
Softkey's combined market share would be more than twice that of its closest competitor.


Inside Art
On Maneuvers at the London Sales


Father to Pay $600,000 in Support
A prominent investment adviser who has become the nation's most notorious deadbeat dad ended four months in jail yesterday after promising to pay his former wife more than $600,000 in child support and other obligations he had evaded for five years.
The man, Jeffrey A. Nichols, went free after he and his former wife, Marilyn  Nichols Kane, reached a court-approved agreement behind closed doors and then, appearing separately before a battery of television cameras, described their hopes for a future more amicable than the poisoned relations of the recent past.


Corrections
A chart in Science Times on Tuesday, with an article about culture-bound mental problems, misattibuted the data.
The chart was adapted from "The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual," Fourth Edition, published by the American Psychiatric Association, not the American Psychological Association.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
"SWING INTO CHRISTMAS" (Columbia).
Recorded before a live audience, this album brings together the trumpeters Terence Blanchard and Wynton Marsalis, the pianist Marcus Roberts, the saxophonists David Sanchez and Grover Washington Jr. and the singer Tramaine Hawkins.
The songs are standard-issue Christmas fare: "The First Noel," "Winter Wonderland," "Let It Snow! Let It Snow! Let It Snow!" and more, and the performances are at times sublime.
Mr.
Blanchard's "Christmas Time Is Here" captures him at his best, playing a ballad.
Mr.
Marsalis's versions of "Carol of the Bells" and "Let It Snow!" find him in the company of a swinging nonet.
PETER WATROUS


MERGER OF CALIFORNIA H.M.O.'S APPEARS DOOMED
Wellpoint Health Networks Inc. yesterday sent Health Systems International Inc. a 15-page letter asserting the deadline for a planned $1.9 billion merger of the two California health-maintenance organizations can not be met.
The letter escalated the war of words between the two, once friendly merger partners.
The letter asserted that it was Health Systems that breached parts of  the merger pact, not Wellpoint or Blue Cross of California, as Health Systems has contended.
WellPoint also said that while it would continue to proceed in good faith under the deal's original terms, it reserved the right to end the talks and collect a $50 million termination fee from Health Systems.
A Health Systems spokesman called the letter a maneuver to skirt the issues at hand, saying that the main issue was who has final responsibility for completing the merger.


David R. Inglis, 90; Worked on A-Bomb
David Rittenhouse Inglis, emeritus professor of physics at the University of  Massachusetts, who campaigned to dismantle the nuclear arms he helped to build in World War II, died on Sunday at his home in Amherst, Mass.
He was 90.
A native of Detroit and a 1928 graduate of Amherst College, Dr.
Inglis received a doctorate in physics from the University of Michigan in 1931.
He was  an associate professor at Johns Hopkins University when he was recruited for the Ballistics Research Laboratory at Aberdeen Proving Ground in Maryland and, later, for the Manhattan Project to build an atomic bomb at Los Alamos, N.M.


Saluting the Sun


Returning Home a Millionaire
A sheet-metal worker from Springfield, N.J., won a slot-machine jackpot of more than $6.3 million at the Showboat Casino last night.
The winner, Tom Severini, 50, traveling on business, won the prize on a Megabucks progressive slot machine, which is linked with machines in other Atlantic City casinos to produce multimillion-dollar jackpots.


JAPAN SUFFERS EIGHTH BANK FAILURE OF YEAR
Tokai Bank Ltd., Japan's seventh-largest commercial bank, will take over an indebted Osaka-based savings institution in the eighth Japanese banking failure  in a year.
Tokai will absorb the more than 300 billion yen worth of deposits from the Osaka Credit Cooperative as well as recoverable loans, according to officials of Osaka Prefecture and the Ministry of Finance.
Since last December,  eight Japanese financial institutions have failed under the weight of bad loans left from speculative real estate lending in the 1980's.


Emena Journal;To Keep Dream Alive, Doctor Starts a Revolution
On a continent littered with grand projects that inevitably seem to give way  to shoulder-high grass and dust, when Emmanuel Tuffour set out on a crusade to bring decent health care to this region, he meant to create something lasting.
Benefiting from generous scholarships, he left Ghana for the United States at the age of 20 and went on to become a medical doctor with a lucrative practice in Cleveland.


Art in Review
Sean Scully Mary Boone Gallery 417 West Broadway, near Spring Street SoHo Through Dec. 16


COMPANY BRIEFS
EMC CORP., Hopkinton, Mass., which makes storage systems for large computers, completed the acquisition of closely held MC Data Corp., Broomfield, Colo., a network switching company, for about $234 million.


Corruption-Fighting Agency Stripped in Pataki Dismissals
Gov.
George E. Pataki, who as a candidate vowed to attack fraud and waste in  state government, has stripped nearly all of the staff from the office responsible for investigating those abuses.
Of the 25 employees in the Office of the State Inspector General when Mr.
Pataki became Governor, 22 have been let go.
Only five replacements have been hired, most with ties to the Republican Party.


Corrections
An obituary of James Reston in late editions yesterday listed survivors incompletely in some copies.
In addition to his wife and sons, he leaves a sister, Joanna Richey of Santa Cruz, Calif., and five grandchildren, not four. (The obituary is reprinted on page B17 today for those who did not receive it.)


Hotel Slaying Of Scientist Baffles Police
The death of Stanley Keith Runcorn, the renowned geophysicist from the University of Alaska in Fairbanks who was found slain on Tuesday in a hotel room here, is still mired in mystery.
The police said today that Mr.
Runcorn, 73, was beaten and strangled, perhaps by a robber, but they were still uncertain about the motive for the killing.


Donor Turns Fast Food Into Big Bucks For Hospital
Tammie Murphy, 32, often finds checks, coupons and a fair amount of junk mail in the more than 700 envelopes she opens each day as a donations clerk at St.
Jude Children's Research Hospital here.
But last Thursday, toward the end of her work day, Ms.
Murphy found something she had never seen in her nine years on the job: a winning card from a McDonald's lottery-type game worth $1 million.
The colorful 12-inch-square card arrived in a plain white envelope, addressed to the hospital in blue ink.
There was no indication of who sent it: no return address, no accompanying note.
But it was postmarked from Dallas on Nov. 24, the day after Thanksgiving.
That was the day after the McDonald's game, Monopoly, began.


Rhode Island Stands Pat
Rhode Island, which last month finished its first winning football season since 1985, will remain in the Yankee Conference and continue to offer athletic  scholarships.


Corrections
A chart in Science Times on Tuesday, with an article about culture-bound mental problems, misattibuted the data.
The chart was adapted from "The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual," Fourth Edition, published by the American Psychiatric Association, not the American Psychological Association.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
"THE JOY OF CHRISTMAS, VOL. 1" AND "THE JOY OF CHRISTMAS, VOL. 2" (RCA).
A nicely put together collection of Christmas pop nuggets from the 1940's through  the 60's, "The Joy of Christmas" albums are among the year's best traditional packages, and the sound quality is excellent.
From Julie Andrews's old-fashioned "God Rest Ye, Merry Gentlemen" to Eartha Kitt's manipulative "Santa Baby," the albums offer both traditional carols and revisionist readings of Christmas.
The  focus is on tasteful arrangements, with lush strings, tinkling bells and celestial female choruses backing the crooning of Perry Como and Eddie Fisher.
NEIL STRAUSS


Ex-Wife Tells Court Bonds Abused Her
BARRY BONDS's former wife told a court in Redwood City, Calif., that the star beat and kicked her, describing him as an egotistical wife-beater who wanted to  control her life.
The witness, SUN BONDS, cried Wednesday when she said that the attacks by Bonds, a San Francisco Giants outfielder, included one when she was eight months pregnant.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
"EVEN SANTA GETS THE BLUES" (Point Blank).
Christmas albums are like Christmas presents: it's the thought that counts.
And very little thought seems to have been put into this compilation of blues and soul singers celebrating the holidays, from the inferior sound mixes to the printing mistakes in the CD booklet.
A potentially good idea is laid to waste as songs from B. B. King, Charles Brown, Lowell Fulson and Isaac Hayes mingle haphazardly, not quite spreading holiday cheer, not quite communicating how bad the blues can be in the season of red and green.
NEIL STRAUSS


Lakers Are Set to Retire Worthy's Jersey
JAMES WORTHY had an ability to raise the level of his game when the Los Angeles Lakers needed it most during their period of greatness in the 1980's.
Worthy will become the sixth former Laker whose jersey will be retired.
It will happen during a ceremony at halftime of the Detroit Pistons-Lakers game at  the Forum on Sunday.
He will be joining JERRY WEST, ELGIN BAYLOR, WILT CHAMBERLAIN, KAREEM ABDUL-JABBAR and MAGIC JOHNSON.


Leader Calls Cutbacks Vital For French Role in Europe
The French Prime Minister, Alain Juppe, made some remarkably candid comments  on Tuesday about why the French Government is determined to endure the worst unrest in a decade -- fear that France will permanently cede economic leadership in Europe to Germany.
"Either we will play in the first division or we will continue to be weighted down by deficits, and we slip back to the second division," Mr.
Juppe said in a  speech to Parliament.
"In short, we will have moved over to the path of decline, slowly but surely."


Couture's Greatest Hits
THERE have been dream teams of basketball players and lawyers, and all-star baseball teams.
This week, the Costume Institute at the Metropolitan Museum of Art opened a sort of dream couture show, with pieces for every significant change in fashion in the last 150 years.
The show, encased in glass and called "Haute Couture," is a virtual runway of couture's greatest hits, familiar to the eye from historic photos and from the cover versions of those hits that other designers have created in recent years.


Palestinians and Israeli Troops in West Bank Confrontations


Speed Skater Is Emerging From Blair's Shadow
With Bonnie Blair dominating women's speed skating, the sprints have been a race for second place in recent years.
Blair has retired, but the United States  has maintained its prominence this season with a pair of early World Cup victories at 1,000 meters by 20-year-old Christine Witty of West Allis, Wis.
"I get a lot of 'another American sprinter, here we go again,' " Witty said yesterday in a telephone conference call from Oslo, where she will compete this  weekend.


A Singer Who Can't Sing at Center Stage
Georgia," which was shown as part of this year's New York Film Festival, opens today in Manhattan. Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 30.
"Georgia," in which Jennifer Jason Leigh stunningly gives a piece of her heart to the main role of a ravaged, unsuccessful singer, isn't named for the character she plays.
Instead, Georgia (Mare Winningham) is the sister of Sadie Frost (Ms. Leigh), and Georgia is a country music star whose practiced nobility makes her well loved by her fans.
By contrast, Sadie is all jittery nerves and false optimism, pushy and needy and way too eager to please.
Whatever it is that makes Sadie so desperate, Georgia is at its core.


CLINTON OUTLINES ALTERNATE PLAN TO HALT DEFICIT
Hoping to get budget negotiations with Congress off the ground, President Clinton today offered a new plan that he said would balance the budget in seven  years, but it was immediately assailed by Republican leaders.
Following a 90-minute negotiating session in the Capitol this afternoon, Leon E. Panetta, the White House chief of staff, said of the President's new proposal: "We think it works. We think it's credible. We think it's defensible."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the pen used by President Clinton to veto the Republican budget bill misspelled the surname of a White House staff member in some editions.
The aide, who provided an inkwell, is Todd Stern, not Stearn.


Politics Drives the Gopac Investigation;Coalition Building
To the Editor:
Re "Files Show How Gingrich Laid a Grand G.O.P. Plan" (front page, Dec. 3): You do not succeed in portraying Gopac as an evil political action committee.
"They spoke to each other in conspiratorial language of revolutionaries." What conspiratorial language?
Discussions at Gopac meetings are always open and direct and with differences of opinion.


Corrections
An article in The Home Section on Nov. 16 about a residence in a renovated factory in New Jersey described the aluminum beam supports incorrectly.
They are welded, not cast.


Aid or Handout: A Useful Distinction;Guevara's Last Words
To the Editor:
In her Dec. 2 letter, Mary Alice Waters disputes Thomas H. Lipscomb's account (Week in Review, Nov. 26) of Che Guevara's statement to Capt.
Gary Prado Salmon, the Bolivian Army officer who captured Guevara.
Ms.
Waters is wrong.


As He Steps Down, G.M. Chairman Looks Ahead
On Monday, John G. Smale relinquished his post as chairman of the General Motors Corporation, and G.M.'s board gave the title to John F. (Jack) Smith Jr., the chief executive.
The move, reversing a decision made amid the company's 1992 board room coup to keep the jobs separate, disappointed many shareholders, who say that a separate chairman, drawn from outside a company's executive ranks, instills greater management accountability.
In an interview, Mr.
Smale, 68 -- a former chief executive of the Procter &amp; Gamble Company -- went on the record for the first time with his thoughts about  corporate goverance, about his new post as G.M.'s lead director and chairman of  the board's executive committee, and about the auto maker itself.


Abroad at Home;Is It A Zeal To Kill?
An Illinois man who had been on death row for 11 years, Orlando Cruz, had a new trial last month and was acquitted of murder.
The record, including police perjury, was so rank that the Justice Department has begun investigating possible civil rights violations.
In the last 20 years, 54 Americans under sentence of death have been released from prison because of evidence of their innocence.
In an important pending case, a U.S.
Court of Appeals has scheduled a hearing for Paris Carriger, an Arizona death row inmate who some usually skeptical criminologists believe is probably innocent.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in Manhattan that are to close soon:
Closing This Weekend


Slick Campaign Didn't Save Teachers' Pact
The major opposition group within the United Federation of Teachers spent the last few weeks sending out leaflets and organizing a telephone campaign against  the proposed five-year contract that went down to defeat last night.
The opposition's efforts initially seemed no match for the polished campaign, complete with slick videotapes and mass mailings, orchestrated by the union's leadership to try to convince teachers that the proposed contract was the best they could hope for, even though it included no raises for two years and asked new teachers to defer 5 percent of their earnings during their first four years.


ELECTRONIC ARTS WILL SELL ITS STAKE IN 3DO
3DO Company said its largest shareholder, Electronic Arts Inc., will gradually sell its 18 percent stake as 3DO evolves into a competitor in the market for computer games.
The decision by Electronic Arts comes a week after Time Warner Inc. sold its 12 percent stake in 3DO to institutional investors.
Trip Hawkins, who founded 3DO and serves as its chairman, also founded Electronic Arts and served as its chairman until June of 1994.


Court Panel Keeps $1.50 Fare Until Trial
A Federal appeals court ruled yesterday that a lower-court judge was wrong to block the 25-cent transit fare increase on civil rights grounds, and it cast serious doubt on the logic that opponents had planned to use to fight the fare increase at a full trial.
The ruling means that the subway and bus fare will remain at $1.50, at least  until the case goes to trial in Federal District Court in Manhattan, which is probably at least two months away, according to lawyers in the case.


RJR's Lagging Overseas Tobacco Unit Gets a New Chief
Two days after appointing a new chief executive, the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation named a new head of its international tobacco operations yesterday,  trying to buttress a lagging unit that analysts said was critical to the company's future growth.
Pierre de Labouchere, a 41-year-old cigarette marketer born in Paris who has  worked 15 years for the company, will become president and chief executive of R. J. Reynolds Tobacco International Inc., which is based in Geneva.
Mr.
Labouchere succeeds Anthony J. Butterworth, who is 58 and was the operation's interim president for two years.
He will retire.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Clinton Administration's campaign to increase  domestic support for the deployment of American troops to Bosnia referred incorrectly to the journal Foreign Affairs, with which talk radio was contrasted as an information source on current affairs.
The journal is published every other month, not quarterly.


LENNAR TO BUY EXXON'S REAL ESTATE UNIT
The Lennar Corporation, the nation's eighth-largest home builder, said yesterday that it would acquire the Houston-based residential business of the Friendswood Development Company, the real estate unit of the Exxon Company, U.S.A., for $110 million.
The deal is expected to close by the end of the year and includes Friendswood's residential development operations as well as Village Builders, its home building division, the company said.
Lennar builds moderately priced homes and condominiums in Florida, Arizona and Texas.


Eleanor Gambee, Horticulturist, 91
Eleanor Brown Gambee, a horticulturist, writer and civic worker, died on Saturday at her home in Englewood, N.J.
She was 91.
For five decades, Mrs.
Gambee devoted her time and active support to the New  York Botanical Garden.
As a lecturer and freelance writer, she discussed herbs and horticulture and contributed articles to horticultural journals and other publications.


Counterpoint of Artist and Short-Story Writer
AIR: 24 HOURS Jennifer Bartlett By Deborah Eisenberg 167 pages.
Illustrated.
Harry N. Abrams. $49.50.


GENCORP EXPECTS DROP IN SALES TO GENERAL MOTORS
Gencorp Inc. said yesterday that it expected to lose significant business from the General Motors Corporation and that it was in preliminary talks with Cambridge Industries for the sale of its reinforced plastics division.
The company, based in Fairlawn, Ohio, said that for the model years beginning in 1997, G.M. planned to convert its composite components in the mini-van line that includes the Lumina to steel from reinforced plastic.
Gencorp's reinforced plastics division produces lift gates, doors, passenger side panels and other components at its Shelbyville, Ind., plant.
Production of the components is scheduled to end in mid-1996.


Officials Warn of a Virus Deadly to Children
A winter respiratory virus that kills about 4,500 children a year in the United States has appeared once again, with cases already being reported across  the country, Federal health officials said today.
The officials, of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention here, said respiratory syncytial virus, or R.S.V., caused 90,000 infants and young children to be hospitalized each year with lower respiratory tract disease.


Brazil Plant for Honda
The Honda Motor Company announced yesterday that it planned to build a $100 million factory in Brazil to make Honda Civics starting in August 1997.
The Japanese auto maker said that the plant would be able to build 15,000 cars at first, rising to 30,000 by 1999 and capacity might eventually rise to 100,000 units.
(AP)


Wheat Soars to 15-Year High As Europe Puts Tax on Exports
Wheat prices jumped to a 15-year high on the Chicago Board of Trade yesterday after the European Union adopted a tax aimed at restricting wheat exports, forcing importing nations to pay higher prices or look elsewhere.
On other commodity markets, copper and heating oil prices rose.
The reformulated Commodity Research Bureau index of 17 commodities gained 0.61 point, to 244.2.


On the Couch, Culture Affects All
To the Editor:
"Making Room on the Couch for Culture" (Science Times, Dec. 5) states that Dr.
Juan Mezzich "is at the forefront of a new movement in psychiatry to recognize the cultural trappings that patients bring with them, and to shape diagnosis and treatment accordingly."


Rebels Plan New Attacks In Sri Lanka
Separatist Tamil Tiger rebels in Sri Lanka, defeated in their northern Jaffna stronghold, said today that they plan to attack areas in the north and east but  would not say if the capital Colombo might be hit.
"Our concentration is on the occupation of the army" in the north and east, said Lawrence Thilakar, the Paris-based spokesman for the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam.
"I don't like to comment on Colombo."


Mr. Clinton's Budget
President Clinton, as the price he paid to open shuttered Government offices, promised the Republicans that he would agree to their demand to balance the budget in seven years in accordance with estimates by the Congressional Budget Office.
The plan that Mr.
Clinton released yesterday to balance the budget does  not really meet that goal, since he used his own budget office's figures.
By Congressional Budget Office standards he is still perhaps $300 billion short of  the mark.
Even so, the new Clinton budget is becoming perilously like the G.O.P. version.
What the revised budget plan shouts out is that seven years of budget-cutting will be a very ugly process.
For example, the previous Clinton budget would cut welfare programs -- food stamps, cash assistance for the disabled and aid to legal immigrants -- by $38 billion.
His revised budget would subtract an extra $8 billion.
The previous White House plan would have taken $186 billion out of discretionary programs --  reducing these, as a percentage of total economic activity, to their lowest level since the early 1960's.
Now Mr.
Clinton could cut an additional $64 billion.
His plan includes steep reductions in Medicare payments to hospitals that treat the poor and train medical students.
If he closes the $300 billion shortfall, then he will be forced to make mammoth additional cuts in these and all other programs.


Economy in Germany Shows Signs of Distress
Germany's gross domestic product stagnated in the third quarter while unemployment surged in November.
German G.D.P. was unchanged in the third quarter of 1995 from the second and was 1.5 percent higher than the corresponding 1994 period, the Federal Statistics Office said yesterday.
The rise over the previous year was the weakest since the fourth quarter of 1993.
Unemployment leaped by 42,000 after seasonal adjustment in November to more  than 3.7 million, the fourth rise in a row, the Federal Labor Office said.
The rise was worse than economists had expected.
The jobless rate rose to 9.7 percent from 9.6 percent in October.
(Reuters)


Factory Orders Fall as Consumer Debt Surges
Factory orders declined in October, but consumer debt surged, according to Government reports issued today.
While the consumer spending gives the economy a temporary shot in the arm, economists fear that consumers will soon pull back under the weight of their heavy debts.
Thus the economists interpreted both reports as evidence that the economy was likely to start the new year on a sour note.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
"CHRISTMAS OF HOPE" (Columbia).
Pop superstars abound on this uneven anthology of previously released Christmas music.
High points include Bruce Springsteen's  rampagingly exuberant "Santa Claus Is Comin' to Town," Aretha Franklin's rousing "Joy to the World" and Aaron Neville's ethereal "Bells of St. Mary's." On the rest of the album, country music (Reba McEntire's "I'll Be Home for Christmas") rubs shoulders with austere rock (U2's out of place "New Year's Day"), jazz (Wynton Marsalis's "Let It Snow! Let It Snow! Let It Snow!") and soul (James Brown's "Merry Christmas, Baby").
The transitions are bumpy.
STEPHEN HOLDEN


U.S. Tests Border Plan In Event of Mexico Crisis
Sudden ly, a vast flood of illegal immigrants Mexicans driven to desperation  by some unspeakable and unspecified social catastrophe -- surges across the Southwest border, inundating entire communities as it washes north into the American heartland.
That was the scenario driving three days of field exercises here this week, in which the Clinton Administration's top immigration policy-makers tested new plans to control the border in case Mexico's financial and political problems worsen dramatically.
Their field radios crackling through a border canyon here,  scores of Border Control agents practiced erecting cyclone-fence corrals, herding immigrants through them for emergency processing, and loading them onto  bus convoys for travel to mass detention centers.


Bosnian Croat Sought by the Tribunal Is Freed Despite Pledge
Bosnian Croat authorities have released a jailed military commander under indictment by the international war crimes tribunal, violating one of the major  provisions of the Balkan peace agreement, American officials said today.
The officials said the Bosnian Croats had reneged on promises to extradite Ivica Rajic, a Croatian officer whose troops are accused of committing one of the more grisly massacres of the war.
Mr.
Rajic was allowed to leave prison this week after a Bosnian Croat judge acquitted him on unrelated murder charges.


Danny William Abreu, City Opera Marketing Director, 39
Danny William Abreu, director of marketing for the New York City Opera, died  on Tuesday at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 39.
The cause was AIDS, said his companion, Paul G. Wasmund.


Betsy McCaughey and Wilbur L. Ross Jr.
HER signature high heels glittering gold for the occasion, Lieut.
Gov.
Betsy  McCaughey wed a Wall Street multimillionaire, Wilbur L. Ross Jr., last night in  a candlelight ceremony that could be said to cap a storybook romance -- if the storybook were written by Sidney Sheldon.
A janitor's daughter born poor in Pittsburgh, Ms.
McCaughey rose through academia and recently rocketed into Republican Party power, a life already the stuff of paperback page turners.
Last night's convention-size wedding at St.
Bartholomew's Church on Park Avenue and the reception on the aircraft carrier-museum Intrepid -- a bash so big the couple said they did not have even  a ball-park number for the several hundred guests -- provided the requisite happy ending.


Bulls' Defense Dominates Knicks
Derek Harper's defense helped cut off the Air supply early, enough so that the Knicks appeared headed toward their most satisfying victory of the season.
But as the game wore on, you-know-who got hot, 6-foot-7-inch Scottie Pippen was  posting up 6-3 Gary Grant with ease and the Knicks were on their way to losing yet another regular-season encounter to the Bulls.
It is an old story, this inability to put Chicago away, but it is worth repeating after Wednesday night's game, a playoff-type affair won, 101-94, by the Bulls at the United Center.
Because if it meant anything, the Bulls' victory meant that the matchup problems plaguing the Knicks for so long against Michael  Jordan and his teammates have somehow returned.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
A MOTOWN CHRISTMAS CAROL (Motown).
Motown has boiled down six albums -- from the Jackson 5, Stevie Wonder, the Miracles, the Temptations and the Supremes -- that show the label's hit-factory system vigorously grinding away from 1963 to 1970.
The early Miracles sound barely rehearsed; Mr.
Wonder fights a scratchy throat, though he comes up with a fine harmonica solo on "Ave Maria." Motown's studio bands groove along, and Smokey Robinson, Diana Ross and Eddie Kendricks of the Temptations make the old songs sultry.
JON PARELES


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Clinton Administration's campaign to increase  domestic support for the deployment of American troops to Bosnia referred incorrectly to the journal Foreign Affairs, with which talk radio was contrasted as an information source on current affairs.
The journal is published every other month, not quarterly.


Profit Must Be 'Paper'
To the Editor:
Daniel B. Taylor (letter, Dec. 5) might be less upset about your characterization of Steven P. Jobs's profits from the public offering of Pixar Animation Studios as being "on paper" if he took into account securities laws applicable to such offerings.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY


Ex-East German Spymaster Finds Polishing His Image Is Hard
No eggs or rotten tomatoes were thrown at Markus Wolf when he delivered a lecture in Berlin recently, as some had feared, but many spectators were nonetheless unhappy with the former East German spymaster's efforts to rehabilitate himself.
Mr.
Wolf confessed to no crimes or sins or even misjudgments.
Serving for nearly four decades as deputy director of the hated secret police known as the Stasi, he asserted, was "a great honor, a duty, a chance to do something for our country."


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)


Strikes Spread Across France With Protests
The French Government named a mediator today and offered discussions with labor unions representing public employees on its plans to overhaul the social security system and the railroads.
But hundreds of thousands of people demonstrated in scores of cities, and the state-run rail network, as well as mass transit in Paris, remained shut down.
More than a third of all French public employees were on strike today, the Government said, as the walkout widened to include grammar and high school teachers in the capital.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)


Bozell Worldwide Gets Nynex Mobile
Bell Atlantic Nynex Mobile said yesterday that it had named Bozell Worldwide  in New York to handle its account, with billings estimated at $50 million.
The account was previously divided among four agencies: the Baltimore office of W. B. Doner &amp; Company; Erwin-Penland in Greenville, S.C.; Mason &amp; Madison in New Haven, and the New York office of the J. Walter Thompson Company, which is owned by the WPP Group.
Jim Gerace, a spokesman for Bell Atlantic Nynex Mobile in Bedminster, N.J.,  said that Bozell Worldwide, a unit of Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt, was awarded the account after a two-month review in which the other participants were not disclosed; Adweek reported that the review had been narrowed to two finalists, Bozell and Doner.
Bell Atlantic Nynex Mobile is a joint venture of the Bell Atlantic Corporation and the Nynex Corporation.


Transactions
Baseball


Budget-Busy Capital Now Fixes Gaze on Bull Market
Politicians in Washington are always wary of the financial markets, an unpredictable force playing by shifting rules that few in this city pretend to understand.
And the markets never quite know how to measure the odd political dynamics of budget battles.
Now, however, anxiety about a link in the fates of the budget talks and the nation's soaring stock and bond markets has begun to rise here among Democrats and Republicans alike.


Girl's World Is Expanded At a Center
The perimeters of Eileen Gonzalez's world used to stretch the distance of just four city blocks.
Shuttled between her cramped apartment, her junior high school and the homes of nearby relatives during vacations, she rarely ventured beyond her Manhattan Valley neighborhood.
Her summer days were spent watching television, an activity that her working mother preferred for her to the live drama of the streets.
Eileen described the routine of a typical summer day in her upper Manhattan neighborhood: "I go to my grandmother's house and I watch TV. Sometimes we get dressed and go to the supermarket, then we come back and watch TV, almost all day."


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)


Japan Sues on U.S. Bases
The Japanese Government filed a lawsuit today to force 35 Okinawan landowners who oppose the American troop presence to renew their leases with the United States military.
The suit was filed against Governor Masahide Ota of Okinawa, an opponent of the 40 American military sites.
Mr.
Ota had rejected a recommendation that he order landowners to renew their contracts.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
"BULLSEYE BLUES CHRISTMAS" (Rounder).
The album opens with two bars of horns playing a Christmas song; Little Jimmy King's electric guitar and the rhythm section trample it with deep Southern blues.
"We don't have much but we got us, and that's enough/With the love we got we don't need that other stuff," he sings on "Happy Christmas Tears," a Christmas song with a blues sensibility.
Charles Brown, playing organ, sings his "Merry Christmas, Baby," while Larry Davis sings "Poor Man's X-Mas" using a grinding slide figure to propel the piece.
PETER WATROUS


U.S. Cutbacks Paralyzing Mobile's Transit System
When Congress cut aid to transit systems by $310 million, the Mobile Transit  Authority cut 22 percent of its bus service.
And that is how Kenny Williams ended up waiting an hour and 45 minutes today for a bus to take him to a doctor's appointment.
The round trip is about six miles, but to make the journey, Mr.
Williams said, "you make a day of it, basically."


For a Joyous Season, Canines and Crooners
THE Christmas decorations go up before Thanksgiving, the big sales push kicks in before that and every year there are more Christmas albums, aiming for countless nooks of what is already a niche market.
While some Christmas music invokes the devout nature of the holiday, far more partakes of the season's consumer frenzy: it's another commodity promising to promote good will.
For some performers and listeners, Christmas music still does just that.
A basic repertory of a few dozen Christmas songs, from "Jingle Bells" to "O Come All Ye Faithful" to "Santa Claus Is Coming to Town," has been ingrained into nearly every American listener, Christian or not, and music marketers count on their association with warm, homey feelings.
Some performers strive to uphold those sentiments, invoking cozy memories and high-minded ideals; others can use  them as something to twist or defy.
Either way, musicians can bank on the songs' recognizable tunes, which open the way for flexible rearrangements.


Restaurants
Patrick Clark is a terrific chef.
Unfortunately, he is only human, and it would take a magician to make food good enough to overcome the service at Tavern on the Green.
Consider the meal I had in the spring, soon after Mr.
Clark took over the kitchen of America's largest-grossing restaurant.
We were seated at 7:30 P.M.
By 8:30 we had eaten our way through the entire bread basket, visited the gift shop twice, taken a stroll through the gardens, admired the lanterns and the topiary.
We begged for food.
When we could find someone to beg.
Once I looked across that vast windowed room, past the balloons, flowers and chandeliers, and  counted only four service people.
They were all studiously avoiding our waving hands.


Sophomore Wins Lombardi Award
Orlando Pace, Ohio State's left offensive tackle, tonight became the first sophomore to win the Vince Lombardi Award honoring college football's lineman of the year.
Pace outpolled the seniors Jonathan Ogden of U.C.L.A., Simeon Rice of Illinois and the two-time finalist Tedy Bruschi of Arizona for the 26th annual prize.


Talk-Show Critics Urge Boycott of Programs by Advertisers
Continuing a crusade they started six weeks ago to "take the trash out" of daytime television talk shows, William Bennett and Senators Joseph I. Lieberman  and Sam Nunn yesterday named names, unveiling a television commercial that urged three companies to stop advertising their products on the racier programs.
But almost immediately they had to retract their criticism of one company, Mars Inc., sending Mr.
Bennett back into a television studio yesterday afternoon to retape the commercial the three men had introduced at a Washington  news conference yesterday morning.


Japan Sues on U.S. Bases
The Japanese Government filed a lawsuit today to force 35 Okinawan landowners who oppose the American troop presence to renew their leases with the United States military.
The suit was filed against Governor Masahide Ota of Okinawa, an opponent of the 40 American military sites.
Mr.
Ota had rejected a recommendation that he order landowners to renew their contracts.


Litany of Woes Again Leaves The Devils At a Loss
The Devils, the defending Stanley Cup champions, now have a record below .500.
When they lost to the Toronto Maple Leafs by 2-1 tonight, it was their third consecutive defeat.
They have plenty of excuses and real reasons, too.
Key players are injured; others have the flu.
Their goalie, Martin Brodeur, projects a lack of confidence as long shots from the wings find their way between his legs.


Microsoft Seeks Internet Market; Netscape Slides
Seeking to convince Wall Street and millions of PC users that the world's largest software company can dominate the global computer Web just as it currently dominates desktop computing, the Microsoft Corporation's chairman, William H. Gates 3d, said today that every effort at the company would now be directed toward the Internet.
Mr.
Gates described a broad battle plan for integrating Internet components and communications links into every Microsoft product, including its popular Windows operating system, its suite of office productivity software and the more advanced tools used by businesses to link workers on public and private computer networks.


Remarks by German Bank Chief Are a Boon to the Dollar's Value
The dollar rose against the German mark yesterday after the president of the  Bundesbank said that a weak mark and a strong dollar would be good for his country's economy.
The official, Hans Tietmeyer, made his remarks as new economic figures showed a further slowdown in Germany.
His comments, combined with the economic data, further convinced analysts that lower German interest rates were imminent.


Art in Review
Al Hansen Gracie Mansion Gallery 54 St. Marks Place East Village Through tomorrow


Stage Is Set for a Renaissance Runner
Cross-country runners rarely find themselves in the spotlight, but there's a  song-and-dance man accustomed to standing ovations with a chance to win tomorrow's Foot Locker High School Championship in San Diego.
When Matt Lane, a senior at Yarmouth High outside Portland, Me., captured the Northeast Regional Nov. 25 at Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx, he became the event's first male winner from Maine.
He was also purportedly the first champion who would rather stand on the Broadway stage than an Olympic podium.


White House and Senate at Impasse on Whitewater Evidence
Lawyers for President Clinton and the Whitewater Special Committee failed today to resolve their differences about the evidence of a 1993 Whitewater meeting of Mr.
Clinton's senior advisers and lawyers.
Early in the day, the committee postponed its plan to issue a subpoena for the information about the meeting after an eleventh-hour plea by Mr.
Clinton's top personal lawyer, David E. Kendall.
The committee had scheduled a vote for this morning because, in recent days, the White House had blocked the testimony  of two of Mr.
Clinton's closest aides on the ground that the meeting was protected by the attorney-client privilege.


Men Replace Women In a Classic Ailey Work
The Alvin Ailey American Dance Company opened its three-week season at City Center on Wednesday with a program the company described as a preview. (Its opening gala was last night.) Given the circumstances, one might have expected Wednesday's program to be a dry run of sorts.
But not the Ailey troupe.
There were two Ailey classics, an interesting oddity choreographed by Brenda Way and a powerful reworking of Jawole Willa Jo Zollar's "Shelter," all performed by a company that looked stronger and more vibrant than ever.
Ms.
Zollar's "Shelter" is an unpreachy indictment of a world that allows homelessness, performed to music by Junior (Gabu) Wedderburn and texts based on  news reports and written by Hattie Gossett, Carl Hancock Rux and Laurie Carlos.
Created for a women's ensemble, the piece is being danced this season by six men.
The difference is both astounding and intriguing.


Clinton Asks Crackdown On Tax Deals
Challenging aggressive Wall Street deals that it contends have improperly stretched the tax law, the Clinton Administration proposed today to limit the deductibility of various innovative financial practices.
The limits would raise nearly $6.5 billion in the next seven years as part of a $28 billion list of initiatives included in President Clinton's budget plan that he sent to Congress today.
They are intended to curb corporate subsidies and to close loopholes involving activities ranging from the issuance of 100-year bonds, to farming, to manufacturing pharmaceuticals in Puerto Rico.


Korean Tycoons Dodge A Bullet
With South Korea caught in the grip of a monumental corruption scandal, knuckles are white in boardrooms across the country.
Seven captains of Korean business were indicted this week for giving bribes,  and many more are under scrutiny.
But executives are breathing a bit easier now because the Government has allowed the indicted tycoons to remain at liberty while awaiting trial.


Nets' Goal: Help Bradley on Offense
Jayson Williams is worried about his new teammate, the 7-foot-6-inch center Shawn Bradley, who makes his home debut as a Net against the Indiana Pacers Friday night at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
It has nothing to do with Bradley being nervous or how he will play or how he will be treated by the home fans.
It has to do with Bradley's fair complexion.
"I told him the first thing he has to do is get a tan," Williams said after today's practice at Fairleigh Dickinson University.
"The way he looks now, when  he puts that white jersey on, he's going to look like a ghost."


CHRONICLE
JEROME ROBBINS, a founding choreographer of the New York City Ballet with Peter Martins, had surgery on Wednesday to replace a heart valve, Christopher Ramsey, a company spokesman, said yesterday.
Mr.
Robbins, 77, was reported to be doing well after the operation at an unidentified hospital.


Sound of Foreign Policy
To the Editor: In "The Clinton Gamble" (column, Dec. 6), Thomas L. Friedman draws upon a quote  by Mark Twain regarding Wagner's music: "It's not as bad as it sounds."
The way I have always seen the quote is "Wagner's music is better than it sounds." Of course, a case can be made that President Clinton's foreign policy -- of using American military forces to save or rebuild shattered societies in nations like Somalia, Haiti and Bosnia -- sounds good until you see the results  on the ground.
RICHARD T. DOYLE Flanders, N.J., Dec. 6, 1995


Milton Lyon, 72, A Stage Director
Milton Lyon, a stage director long associated with Princeton University, died on Saturday at his home in Princeton, N.J.
He was 72.
The cause was cardiovascular disease, said Dan Bauer, a spokesman for the McCarter Theater Center for the Performing Arts, of which Mr.
Lyon was the founding executive director in the early 1960's.


Seattle Exercises Option to Retain Mirer
RICK MIRER can count on staying with the Seattle Seahawks through 1997 despite a rocky third season.
Mirer said he was told yesterday that the Seahawks had decided to pick up an  $8 million option to extend his contract for two years, including a no-trade clause that may be changed only with his agreement.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
"PUNK ROCK XMAS" (Rhino).
Most punk rockers take themselves too seriously to sing Christmas novelties, but not all of them.
Rhino's compilation mixes original punks -- the Ramones, Fear, the Dickies, Stiff Little Fingers, the Damned -- with latecomers and a few previously unreleased ringers.
Guitar-charged versions of "Silent Night" and "White Christmas" sit alongside nose-thumbing new songs like "Daddy Drank Our Xmas Money," but the momentum flags before the album ends.
JON PARELES


A Fuel Tanker Explodes in Iraq, Killing 10, With 2 From U.N.
At least 10 people, including two United Nations guards, were killed and 30 were injured today when a fuel tanker exploded in northern Iraq, a United Nations spokesman said.


No Headline
My constituents are saying: 'Israel, go get 'em.' They're saying: 'If you get $100,000 for the job, you deserve it.' -- COUNCILMAN ISRAEL RUIZ JR., of the Bronx. [B1:5.]


Ingenious Images of the Early Soviet Era
One of the most famous photographic works of the 1920's is "The Constructor," a photomontage in which the Soviet designer and photographer El Lissitzky depicted himself as a kind of visual engineer, with an image of his hand drawing a superimposed circle on his gleaming eye.
This 1924 work seems to sum up not only the fascination with engineering and industry among artists in that decade, but also their hopes of transforming the world through revolutionary art and design.
It is with a bit of a shiver that one notices a chipped glass-plate negative  in the marvelous show of Lissitzky's work now at the Howard Schickler Gallery, and realizes that it is the original for the artist's classic image.
This prime  artifact of modernist photography is only the most striking among many notable items in the show, which is taken from an archive discovered in Russia in 1989 by Lissitzky's son.


The Prurient Traveler: Sex and Drugs in Paris
Karim Dridi's film "Pigalle" is as bright and shiny and smudged as its recurrent image of reflected neon light sliding over the windshield of a car.
The film, which opens today at the Quad Cinema, purports to be an insider's picture of life in the red-light district of Paris, where it was filmed.
Despite its graphic depictions of the Parisian sex and drug industries, addiction and transvestism, the movie still has the prurient aura of a hip, sexy tourist exhibit.
The director has assembled an intriguing portrait gallery of stock characters plucked from Toulouse-Lautrec paintings and the novels of Jean Genet.
Leading the list are Vera (Vera Briole), a leggy, red-headed gamine who is a stripper in a peep show and is edging toward prostitution, and Fifi ( Francis Renaud), the handsome pickpocket with whom she has a rocky romance.


Corrections
An obituary of James Reston in late editions yesterday listed survivors incompletely in some copies.
In addition to his wife and sons, he leaves a sister, Joanna Richey of Santa Cruz, Calif., and five grandchildren, not four. (The obituary is reprinted on page B17 today for those who did not receive it.)
In some copies, a picture caption about Mr.
Reston's early days in London for The Times included one name erroneously and misspelled another.
The correspondents shown were Raymond Daniell (not F. Raymond Daniel), James MacDonald and Mr.
Reston.
Robert P. Post was not pictured.


From Sausage to Seeds, Organic Goods Get No Entry to Chile
Martha Santos sighed as she read the large signs in the arrival terminal at Santiago's airport: "Passengers are not allowed to bring fruits, vegetables, plants, or meats into Chile from abroad. They will be confiscated."
But the 33-year-old Brazilian schoolteacher thought that with a little luck she could sneak the fried chicken livers hidden in her carry-on bag past whatever checkpoint awaited her.
The Brazilian dish was a gift for her sister.


Yankees Take a Gamble By Yielding on McDowell
Without knowing if they will have David Cone in their pitching rotation next  season, the Yankees last night voluntarily relinquished negotiating rights to Jack McDowell, their other top-of-the-line free-agent pitcher.
Unless they have a contingency plan in the event Cone opts to sign elsewhere  -- in Baltimore, for example -- the Yankees took a major gamble by not offering McDowell salary arbitration and conceivably left themselves short of the commodity that their new general manager, Bob Watson, yesterday called "the  paramount thing."


Personal Religious Freedom Is No Inferior Right
To the Editor:
"Trifling With the Constitution," (editorial, Dec. 3) reaches a valid conclusion in stating that no constitutional amendment is necessary to replace the First Amendment's protection of religious liberty.


Children, Betrayed by Bureaucracy
It has long been known that New York City's Child Welfare Administration, the agency responsible for protecting abused and neglected children, is overburdened.
But the picture that has emerged since the tragic death of Elisa Izquierdo two weeks ago is of an agency in meltdown.
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has appointed a panel drawn from his own official family to look at what went wrong.
But the chronic deficiencies at the C.W.A. and the Giuliani administration's torpid response to them call for a more independent and thorough assessment.
A new and more varied commission appointed by Gov.
George Pataki to investigate the child welfare system needs to take a good look at how to fix this agency.


People
Andrea Hyde was named to the new post of chief operating officer at Badgerway Advertising, New York.
She was previously advertising director for the Gap and Gap Kids units of Gap Inc., San Francisco.


Art in Review
Chuck Close Pace Wildenstein Gallery 142 Greene Street, near Houston Street SoHo Through Jan. 13


Italian War-Crimes Trial Opens
At the opening hearing of what could be the last Nazi war crimes trial in Europe, families of the victims of a 1944 massacre in a cave outside Rome asked  today to be allowed to interrogate a former SS officer who took part in the executions.
The trial of Erich Priebke, a former SS captain extradited to Italy from Argentina last month, is expected to get under way early next year, after Italy's constitutional court rules on the request.


Palestinians and Israeli Troops in West Bank Confrontations


L.I. Abortion Clinic Staves Off Eviction
A Long Island abortion clinic won a victory yesterday in its battle to prevent eviction by a landlord who maintains that anti-abortion violence threatens the other tenants in his Garden City office building.
The Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court in Brooklyn barred the eviction of the clinic, Long Island Gynecological Services, until the full appeal of a lower court decision permitting the eviction can be ruled on.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Emena Journal;To Keep Dream Alive, Doctor Starts a Revolution
On a continent littered with grand projects that inevitably seem to give way  to shoulder-high grass and dust, when Emmanuel Tuffour set out on a crusade to bring decent health care to this region, he meant to create something lasting.
Benefiting from generous scholarships, he left Ghana for the United States at the age of 20 and went on to become a medical doctor with a lucrative practice in Cleveland.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
A WINTER'S SOLSTICE V (Windham Hill).
Windham Hill's roster shares an esthetic -- pristine and gentle, with a touch of enigmatic resonance -- that suits an album on which well-known and lesser-known holiday songs alternate.
It's probably the only Christmas collection to include "Poli'ahu: The Snow Goddess of Mauna Kea" played on Hawaiian guitar.
JON PARELES


From Sausage to Seeds, Organic Goods Get No Entry to Chile
Martha Santos sighed as she read the large signs in the arrival terminal at Santiago's airport: "Passengers are not allowed to bring fruits, vegetables, plants, or meats into Chile from abroad. They will be confiscated."
But the 33-year-old Brazilian schoolteacher thought that with a little luck she could sneak the fried chicken livers hidden in her carry-on bag past whatever checkpoint awaited her.
The Brazilian dish was a gift for her sister.


Welfare Limits Bill Dies
The sponsor of a bill that would have reduced welfare benefits for people suspected of moving to New Jersey to collect higher payments withdrew it yesterday because he did not have enough votes for passage.
The bill would have cut the benefits up to 25 percent for residents who could not prove they had lived in New Jersey for nine consecutive months.
Both the Legislature's legal adviser and the State Attorney General's office said the measure was unconstitutional.
But the bill's sponsor, Senator C. Louis Bassano,  Republican of Union, said he would try to revive it, The Associated Press reported.


WANG TO ACQUIRE AVAIL SYSTEMS FOR ABOUT $32 MILLION
Wang Laboratories said yesterday that it would acquire the closely held Avail Systems Corporation for about $32 million in stock.
Avail provides image-storage management systems.
Wang said it would expand its alliance with the Microsoft Corporation through the acquisition.
Wang, based in Lowell, Mass., is a provider of computer-based information processing solutions.
It will jointly develop with Microsoft storage management software for Microsoft platforms.
In February, Microsoft and Avail signed an agreement to include Avail storage management technology in the next generation of Microsoft's Windows NT operating system.
Wang's stock was up 87.5 cents yesterday, at $17.125, in Nasdaq trading.


Now, Mother-Daughter Pregnancies
Forgive yourself for noticing the kitchen cabinets while George and Nina Banks (Steve Martin and Diane Keaton) make love on the kitchen floor.
For one thing, you can't possibly be more middle-aged than they are.
For another, the sex looks perfunctory, but the decor is a labor of love.
The bourgeois splendor of the Banks house is a major feature of "Father of the Bride Part II," a cheerful, harmlessly ingratiating sequel on a par with its 1991 predecessor.
Having faltered with "I Love Trouble" in the interim, the film-making team of Charles Shyer (writer and director) and Nancy Meyers (writer and producer) retreat to safe ground with the adventures of a happy, fecund family in fiscal never-never land.
It's no less interesting to wonder how the house compares in size to a bowling alley than to hear these people talk.


Rowan Is a Big Name in Small-College Game
A football team from New Jersey will play in a bowl game tomorrow for a national championship.
No, it is not Rutgers, certainly not the Giants.
This team is 10-2-1 and will meet Wisconsin-LaCrosse (13-0) in the Amos Alonzo Stagg Bowl in Salem, Va., outside Roanoke, for the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division III title.


Cleveland Mayor Meets With Tagliabue
Cleveland's Mayor met yesterday with National Football League Commissioner Paul Tagliabue to pursue his case for preventing the Browns' move to Baltimore.
"I'm hopeful," Mayor Michael R. White said after the meeting at league headquarters in Manhattan.
"The commissioner kept his promise that we'd have a level playing field and that he'd be open-minded. We had the chance to make a substantive presentation based on the facts, which speak well for us."


In Rift Over Caucus, It's Gumbo Vs. Snow
Plans of Louisiana Republicans to hold Presidential caucuses ahead of those in Iowa has infuriated top Republican officials in Iowa.
Iowa's Governor and House Speaker have held news conferences to denounce the  Louisiana idea.
A Senator from Iowa has asked the Justice Department to investigate whether Louisiana's plan violates civil rights laws.
And Iowa's Republican Party has asked Presidential contenders to bypass Louisiana.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)


Education Dept. Rules Don't Target Speech
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis (column, Nov. 27) cites a university official who states that his university's speech code "was required by Federal Department of Education regulations" that prohibit racial harassment.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
"MUST BE SANTA! THE ROUNDER CHRISTMAS ALBUM" (Rounder).
The 19 songs on this anthology run the gamut of roots music styles from bluegrass (Tony Trischka's "Precious Child" and the Johnson Mountain Boys' "Friendly Beasts") to rhythm-and-blues (Irma Thomas's "O Holy Night" and Charles Brown's "Blue Holiday").
There is mandolin music by David Grisman ("What Child Is This?"), banjo music by Bill Keith ("Auld Lang Syne), Texan swing by Riders in the Sky ("Christmas at the Triple-X Ranch"), rockabilly by George Thorogood ("Rock-and-Roll Christmas"), polka music by Brave Combo ("Must Be Santa") and several folk songs. Although the material is not all top-drawer, it flows together seamlessly.
STEPHEN HOLDEN


Serbs in Sarajevo Suburbs Protest Dayton Accord


INSIDE
Abortion Bill Passes Senate


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
"A CHIAROSCURO CHRISTMAS" (Chiaroscuro).
The opening track, "White Christmas," performed by Earl Hines alone, sets the tone of the album, which is virtuosic, eccentric and brimming with thoughtful explorations of familiar tunes.
Dave McKenna does a solo version of "The Christmas Song," Milt Hinton's Survivors, including Doc Cheatham, Eddie Barefield and Buddy Tate, among others, do "Hark!  The Herald Angels Sing." The Summit Reunion, with Kenny Davern and Bob Wilber on clarinet and saxophone, play "It Came Upon a Midnight Clear," and Junior Mance finishes the 16 tracks with his version of "White Christmas."
PETER WATROUS


Feldman Vows to Renegotiate
Following are excerpts from last night's statement by Sandra Feldman, president of the United Federation of Teachers, after the defeat of the proposed teachers' contract.
Understandably angered at their terrible conditions, the two-year wait for salary increases to kick in and the general lack of regard for education and educators in this city, teachers are sending us back to the bargaining table.


Ex-East German Spymaster Finds Polishing His Image Is Hard
No eggs or rotten tomatoes were thrown at Markus Wolf when he delivered a lecture in Berlin recently, as some had feared, but many spectators were nonetheless unhappy with the former East German spymaster's efforts to rehabilitate himself.
Mr.
Wolf confessed to no crimes or sins or even misjudgments.
Serving for nearly four decades as deputy director of the hated secret police known as the Stasi, he asserted, was "a great honor, a duty, a chance to do something for our country."


Christians Against Welfare Cuts Are Arrested in Capitol
In a barely noticed counterpoint to the budget battle, 55 evangelical Christian preachers and their followers were arrested today in the Capitol Rotunda as they sought to speak up for the poor and to confront lawmakers with biblical verses against retreating from society's duty to help the needy.
"Woe to the legislators of infamous laws," the demonstrators recited in unison.
In paraphrase, the words of the prophet Isaiah boomed about the Capitol  dome as the police moved in and the demonstrators lambasted Republicans and Democrats alike for variously demonizing and bureaucratizing the poor.
"Woe to those who issue tyrannical decrees, who refuse justice to the unfortunate."


Real Estate;These days, it may be cheaper to buy a studio or small apartment in New York City than rent.
SALES of studios and one-bedroom apartments in Manhattan and Brooklyn, which  just a few years ago were sometimes as hard a sell as tickets to a Broadway flop, have revived -- partly a result of the high price of renting similar apartments.
"People just coming to New York are suddenly finding it's cheaper to buy than to rent -- sometimes without even figuring in the tax deductions," said Peter Marra, president of William B. May Real Estate.


Kmart Merchandising Executive Was Success at Sears, Roebuck
The struggling Kmart Corporation said today that it had hired one of the architects of the Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company's turnaround as its top merchandising executive.
Kmart named Warren Flick, chairman of Sears de Mexico, as the new president and general merchandise manager of Kmart stores in the United States.


Denver Denies Bond-Fraud Accusations
Denver officials denied yesterday that the city or the county had violated Federal securities laws in the financing of the new Denver International Airport and said that none of the information given to buyers of the airport's bonds had been false or incomplete.
In the continuing battle with Federal regulators, Denver officials released its "Wells" submission, a statement given to the Securities and Exchange Commission that gives those subject to enforcement action a last chance to change the agency's opinion.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
"YULES OF YORE" AND "CHRISTMAS IN TV LAND" (Nick at Nite/550 Music/ Epic).
Like  Christmas, these hastily compiled albums of kitsch tunes from television shows of decades past are both a blessing and a nightmare.
On "Yules of Yore," the better of the two albums, the unusual (Arthur Godfrey and friends going Hawaiian on "Mele Kalikimaka," the cast of Bonanza singing "Merry Christmas, Neighbor") mixes with the hackneyed (Engelbert Humperdinck's "Blue Christmas," Mike Douglas's "Silver Bells").
There are a few decent carols on "Christmas in TV Land" from Julie Andrews, Johnny Cash and Harry Belafonte.
But as for the songs  by Pat Boone and Perry Como, you can almost see the cobwebs hanging off each phrase of these lesser television performances.
NEIL STRAUSS


Art in Review
Robert Moskowitz Recent Paintings Joseph Helman Gallery 20 West 57th Street Manhattan Through tomorrow Robert Moskowitz Recent Drawings Lawrence Markey 55 Vandam Street South Village Through Dec. 16


His Own Worst Enemy
Joseph Dedrick is one game warden who is unlikely to let anybody off with a warning.
Even himself.
Mr.
Dedrick, the game warden for Caroline County, recently went quail hunting on his day off, bagged one bird and, he said, came home "happy as a clam." That was on Nov. 21.
A few days later, a friend told him quail season did not open until Nov. 27, and produced a game department brochure to prove it.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)


In Package Deal, Greenspan May Stay On at Fed
Passing up a chance to reshape the Federal Reserve for fear of a political battle with Congress, the Clinton Administration is leaning toward reappointing  the central bank's top two officers as a package deal.
Administration officials hope that Senate Republicans' fondness for the Fed's chairman, Alan Greenspan, will persuade them to accept another term for the vice chairman, Alan S. Blinder.


A Combustible Compound Of Geometry and Intuition
Tony Smith is best known for his huge, black modular sculptures in complex geometric configurations.
He began to exhibit these works in the mid-1960's, and by his death in 1980 they had established him as one of the preeminent artists to have emerged in America after the first-generation of Abstract Expressionists.
This is to say, Mr.
Smith came to be regarded as a star of the succeeding generation, the one that included the Minimalists, a movement he helped to launch with his participation in a show at the Jewish Museum in 1964 called "Primary Structures."
Smith didn't entirely belong to that later generation, though, a fact that becomes clear in the excellent survey of his drawings now at Matthew Marks Gallery.
There are other lessons to be learned from the show as well.


Nets' Goal: Help Bradley on Offense
Jayson Williams is worried about his new teammate, the 7-foot-6-inch center Shawn Bradley, who makes his home debut as a Net against the Indiana Pacers Friday night at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
It has nothing to do with Bradley being nervous or how he will play or how he will be treated by the home fans.
It has to do with Bradley's fair complexion.
"I told him the first thing he has to do is get a tan," Williams said after today's practice at Fairleigh Dickinson University.
"The way he looks now, when  he puts that white jersey on, he's going to look like a ghost."


Corrections
An article in The Home Section on Nov. 16 about a residence in a renovated factory in New Jersey described the aluminum beam supports incorrectly.
They are welded, not cast.


25 and Under
Mad Fish is more than a cute name.
It's also a fish house where the inventive cooking is drawing a cross section of Upper West Siders who seem thrilled to have a place like this on Broadway.
"Cute" is part of the restaurant's heritage.
Among the owners are Issac Davidov, who also owns the News Bars, a chain of coffee bars with a journalism theme, and Simon Oren, owner of the French Roast Cafes, two 24-hour bistros, and Brother's Bar-B-Q, the uptown branch of which formerly occupied these quarters.
But the kitschy themes that characterize these places are absent from  Mad Fish, where only the name is cute.


Matityahu Shmuelevitz, Israeli Aide, 75
Matityahu Shmuelevitz, a close aide to the late Prime Minister Menachem Begin, died on Sunday.
He was 75.
Yehiel Kadishai, a longtime Begin spokesman, said that doctors at Tel Aviv's  Tel Hashomer Hospital, where Mr.
Shmuelevitz was taken after he collapsed on Saturday, reported that the cause of death was a blood clot.


On My Mind;The Future of Hope
This man was wandering in the deep jungle, not knowing where he was.
Suddenly he saw an older man walking toward him so he cried out: "Help me, I am lost."
The older fellow shook his head and said he was lost too but he did have one  piece of advice.
He gestured back over his shoulder.
"Don't go that way. I've tried it already."


Yanks Get Martinez For Davis, Hitchcock
Tino Martinez had been floating in baseball limbo, realizing that he was definitely on the verge of being traded from the Seattle Mariners but not knowing where he was headed.
He knew the Yankees were interested; everyone knew  the Yankees were interested.
Yesterday, Martinez's private wish to play in New York and the Yankees' desperate wish to replace Don Mattingly were both realized with an agreement on a five-year, $20.25 million contract.
In exacting Martinez, reliever Jeff Nelson and a Triple-A relief pitcher named Jim Mecir from Seattle for third baseman Russ Davis and left-hander Sterling Hitchcock, the Yankees finally consummated the transaction that had fluctuated between being on and off for the past week.
The trade was not triggered until the Yankees and Martinez agreed on the multiyear deal.
That's not all: On the same day he became a Yankee, Martinez celebrated his 28th birthday and the birth of his daughter, Victoria.


Market Place;Who would win in a split-up at Cigna? It depends who is asked.
A PROPOSAL by the Cigna Corporation to divide its property and liability insurance business into two parts, one stronger and one weaker, might benefit shareholders but is being criticized by policyholders, competing insurers and consumer groups, some of which will testify at a hearing today in Harrisburg, Pa.
Critics of the plan contend that it could allow the company to avoid paying claims related to asbestos and environmental cleanups.
They also complain that the Pennsylvania Insurance Commissioner, on whose approval the plan depends, is  a former Cigna employee who has not excused herself from the case and that she has provided the department's study of the company's proposals to Cigna and its  backers, but not to others.


Nearly Half of House Members Sign Letter Opposing Bosnia Deployment
In a strong display of opposition to the sending of 20,000 American troops to Bosnia, nearly half of the House of Representatives signed a letter today to President Clinton opposing the deployment.
By day's end, 201 members, including 15 Democrats, had signed the letter, which said simply, "We urge you not to send ground troops to Bosnia."


5 Police Officers Are Indicted, Among Them a Father and Son
A father and his son, both New York City police officers honored for heroism, were charged minutes apart yesterday in the same courtroom, two of five officers from two Bronx precincts indicted on charges ranging from assault to perjury.
Officer Henry Pelayo 3d, 28, of the 41st Precinct, preceded his father up the courtroom aisle and was charged with 15 counts of first-degree perjury, as well  as several counts of falsifying business records.


Officials Seeking Financial Detail on Lilco Plan
Two Democratic appointees to the Long Island Power Authority called today for delaying a vote on a plan backed by Gov.
George E. Pataki to dismantle the Long  Island Lighting Company, which he said would cut electric rates by 12 percent.
The two members, Richard M. Kessel and Deborah Pfeiffer, said that evaluating the plan would be impossible until the board's Republican leaders disclosed financial details.


Jackson May Have Heart Ailment, Doctors Say
Michael Jackson, who collapsed as he rehearsed on a Manhattan stage Wednesday, may be suffering from cardiac arrhythmia, a potentially serious condition in which an irregular heartbeat impairs blood flow through the body, doctors said yesterday.
The entertainer was in serious but stable condition yesterday in the intensive care unit of Beth Israel Medical Center North in Manhattan, and may remain hospitalized for several more days, doctors said.
His illness forced the  postponement of a highly publicized television special that promoters hoped would reach a worldwide audience of 250 million people and help restore luster to the singer's sagging career.


A Fuel Tanker Explodes in Iraq, Killing 10, With 2 From U.N.
At least 10 people, including two United Nations guards, were killed and 30 were injured today when a fuel tanker exploded in northern Iraq, a United Nations spokesman said.
The two dead guards were a Pole and a Filipino.
A third guard, from Nepal, was also injured but his life was not in danger, according to the spokesman of the United Nations Department of Humanitarian Affairs.


I.B.M. Research Head Becoming an Adviser
The International Business Machines Corporation said today that Jim McGroddy  had stepped down as head of its research division and had been appointed to a new position as special adviser to the chairman.
Mr.
McGroddy, 58, is a 31-year I.B.M. employee.
The company said he told the  chairman, Louis V. Gerstner Jr., earlier this year that he planned to retire.
In an internal memo announcing the changes, Mr.
Gerstner said he had asked Mr.
McGroddy to delay naming a successor until now.


Idea of Sale Is Rejected In Vote at Littlewoods
Littlewoods Organization P.L.C., a British retailer, catalogue company and football pools operator, said yesterday that its shareholders had voted against  putting Britain's largest privately held company up for sale.
At an extraordinary meeting, shareholders rejected by an "overwhelming majority" a sale and resolutions that would have forced the board of the company to release  financial information to any serious bidder.
The result rejects two public bids.
N.
Brown Group P.L.C. and Iceland Group  P.L.C. announced a joint bid of L1.1 billion ($1.69 billion) earlier this week,  while the company's ousted chief executive, Barry Dale, led an approach last August.
Liverpool-based Littlewoods is owned by 32 descendants of Sir John Moores, who founded the company in 1923.
(Bloomberg Business News)


CHRYSLER RAISES DIVIDEND 20 PERCENT
The Chrysler Corporation raised its quarterly dividend 20 percent yesterday to 60 cents a share as the company continued to bow to Kirk Kerkorian's criticism that it is not giving enough back to shareholders.
Mr.
Kerkorian, Chrysler's second-largest stockholder, has been badgering the auto maker for more than a year to raise its dividend and buy back more stock.
Mr.
Kerkorian initiated an unsuccessful takeover bid for Chrysler in April.
The dividend declared yesterday is payable on Jan. 12 to shareholders of record on Dec. 15.
Last December, Chrysler increased its dividend to 40 cents and announced a $1 billion stock buyback.
The dividend was raised again in March to 50 cents, and the stock buy back was doubled to $2 billion in September.
The dividend increase was dismissed as "another small step in the right direction" by Anna Cordasco, a spokeswoman for Mr.
Kerkorian's investment arm, the Tracinda Corporation.


HUDSON GENERAL IN TALKS TO SELL A STAKE TO LUFTHANSA
The Hudson General Corporation said yesterday that it was in talks to sell a  26 percent interest in its North American Aviation Services Business to a unit of Deutsche Lufthansa A.G. for about $23.8 million.
Hudson General, based in Great Neck, L.I., provides various services at airports in the United States and Canada.
Its stock jumped $2.75 yesterday, to $34.25.


Corrections
A list of film credits in Weekend on Dec. 1 with a review of "The Dancer," part of the "Dance on Film" series at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center, omitted the name of the film's distributor.
It is First Run Features.


F.D.A. Backs A New Drug To Fight AIDS
The Food and Drug Administration yesterday approved the first of a new class  of drugs designed to attack the AIDS virus, and the manufacturer promised to have the compound on pharmacy shelves within 48 hours.
The drug, saquinavir, manufactured by Hoffmann-La Roche Inc. of Nutley, N.J., is a member of the new class of drugs called protease inhibitors that attack the ability of the virus that causes AIDS, H.I.V., to reproduce.
It does so by inhibiting an enzyme called protease that is crucial to H.I.V. reproduction.


In Memorial For Rabin, Jews Forge Fragile Unity
The idea, to begin with, was for a memorial service and rally, a massive show of American Jewish unity for Israel.
The planners made little distinction between honoring Israel's assassinated prime minister and supporting the peace negotiations that were his culminating life's work.
But the challenge of filling 17,000 seats at Madison Square Garden on short notice quickly moved the rally's organizers to call on the dense network of Orthodox Jewish organizations and their loyal members.
And in so doing, they were forced to modify their original plans, and conduct negotiations among Jewish groups that at times seemed as fragile and complex as those between Israel and the Palestinians.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)


Ruling Party In Egypt Wins Big Majority
The Egyptian ruling party won an overwhelming parliamentary majority in a violent election during which at least 28 people were killed as rival parties' gangs roamed constituencies armed with sticks, clubs and guns.
Interior Minister Hassan el-Alfi said today that the ruling National Democratic Party of President Hosni Mubarak won 317 of the 444 seats at stake in the two rounds of voting.


For a Joyous Holiday Season, Canines and Crooners
Here are reviews of Christmas compact disks by pop critics of The New York Times.
The CD's range in price from $9.98 to $16.98. (An introduction appears on page C1.)


In a new campaign, G. H. Mumm's Cordon Rouge Champagne takes its name literally.
DON'T tell Tony Orlando, but the Seagram Company is tying on a ribbon -- and  it's not yellow.


Spending $2,000 to Save $76
It took 16 months and cost him $2,000, but William Schneider finally beat a $76 speeding ticket.
"Justice is not cheap, but my innocence, my reputation and  my standing in the community is important enough to me that I stuck with this," said Mr.
Schneider, 67.


Fear the Fed Won't Cut Hurts Bonds
Prices of bonds dropped yesterday as nervous investors sold amid concern that the economy might not be slowing fast enough to warrant an interest-rate cut by  the Federal Reserve.
The 30-year bond fell by 25/32, to a price of 110 28/32 to yield 6.08 percent, up from 6.03 percent on Wednesday.
The yield of a bond moves in the opposite direction of its price.


Serbs in Sarajevo Suburbs Protest Dayton Accord


N.C.A.A. Soccer Lists Semifinals
Virginia (21-0-2) and Duke (15-6-1) will play in the second semifinal on Friday of the National Collegiate Athletic Association soccer tournament.
Portland will meet Wisconsin (18-4-1), which is in the semifinals for the first time, in the first game.
The title game is Sunday.


What American Homes Displayed
This is a decade in which people get high on peeking into other people's houses.
Never have so many houses been open to the public, or so many books been published about interiors in general, or so many magazines raised and fattened by this licensed voyeurism.


Diner's Journal
There's a man throwing money at the belly dancer, following her around the room flinging dollar bills in her direction.
People are clapping wildly and as she edges toward one table, another man, embarrassed, tries to stick some folded bills into her costume.
His wife urges him on, but he fumbles and the bills fall onto the floor.
The dancer does not so much as glance in their direction.
There is energy at the new Layla.
People scoop up the Middle Eastern appetizers: hummus with pine nuts and a slick of olive oil across the top and taramosalata, smooth, salty and fine.
Baba gannouj tastes more of sesame than smoke, and imam bayaldi, another eggplant dish, is rich with fennel, tomatoes and onions.
There are big piles of the restaurant's own warm pita to scoop it all up, and we find ourselves eating with abandon and enthusiasm.
The phyllo-wrapped sardines are incredibly delicious, and manti, lamb ravioli with a creamy, mint-laced yogurt sauce, are fine.


On the Couch, Culture Affects All
To the Editor:
At first blush, "Making Room on the Couch for Culture" (Science Times, Dec. 5) seems to describe an advance in psychiatry.
Instead of being diagnosed psychotic and treated with antidepressants, the bereaved woman is understood in  the context of her Hispanic culture.
Her "loss of soul" is helped through loving family support in a mourning ritual.


Corrections
A report and a picture caption in the Food Notes column of The Living Section on Wednesday about the planned opening of Sullivan's Restaurant and Broadcast Lounge in February misstated the owner's name.
He is Earl Geer, not Ed Greer.


Lots of Russian Jews Still Seek to Emigrate;Interfaith Marriage
To the Editor:
As partners in an interfaith marriage, we support Rabbi Eric Yoffie's emphasis on setting boundaries for interfaith children and his endorsement of outreach to interfaith families (news article, Dec. 3).
But Reform Judaism faces a higher hurdle at the Central Conference of American Rabbis convention next March in Philadelphia: Should Reform rabbis officiate at interfaith weddings?


Drive on Drugs In the Americas
Mexico and the nations of Central America joined recently in a coordinated drive against narcotics, a United States official said today.
The 10-day campaign, which began on Nov. 25, involved military and police forces from Panama to the United States-Mexico border, conducting air patrols and making inspections at ports and on roads..


Avon Products Plans $29.6 Million Charge
Avon Products Inc. said yesterday that it would take a fourth-quarter charge  of $29.6 million, or 43 cents a share, to settle a lawsuit with its former Mallinckrodt Inc. unit.
The company said that the settlement would result in a charge to discontinued operations.
Profit from continuing operations is expected to exceed last year's  $110.1 million, or $1.59 a share, Avon said.


Galileo Pulls Through
Its main antenna is broken.
Because of launch delays and reductions in the power of the rocket that hurled it toward Jupiter, the spacecraft had to take a  circuitous, 2.3-billion-mile journey.
But right on its revised schedule, Galileo arrived this week and settled into orbit around the giant planet.
A small probe  that had hitched a ride to Jupiter on Galileo pierced the planet's gaseous atmosphere on Thursday.
Scientists who had worked for 18 years to send a tiny mechanical messenger from Earth to Jupiter were justifiably proud.
"This is really neat," one said.
While the moment did not match in drama the first steps of Neil Armstrong on  the moon, it was another milestone for the American space program, hobbled in recent years by budget cuts and technical setbacks.
Like Apollo 13, which was saved by Rube Goldberg repairs, Galileo was kept alive by its earthbound minders, who fiddled with its software, cobbling together programs that allow data to be transmitted to Earth through a small, secondary antenna.


Education Chief Faults L.I. School Board for Lavish Spending Sprees
While the troubled school district here headed toward a $1.9 million budget gap and some students went without textbooks, school board members spent lavishly on themselves, using school funds to pay for limousines, luxury hotel suites and tickets to an Everly Brothers concert, state education officials said today.


White House Says Veto Is Planned for Ban on a Type of Late-TermAbortion
The White House said today that President Clinton intended to veto a bill passed by the Senate on Thursday night that would outlaw a rarely used late-term form of abortion.
Following the lead of the House, which approved a similar measure a month ago, the Senate voted, 54 to 44, to approve a bill that would make it a felony for doctors to perform the procedure.


Sports of The Times;Prom Time Is Upon Us Once Again
THE Heisman Trophy reminds me of an old high school yearbook.
You look at photos and wonder what became of classmates who won individual honors -- best dressed, best looking.
The Heisman is like the most likely to succeed designation, someone who peaked early, an honor for that moment.
In the last few years the trophy has become one of the most hotly debated awards in sports, largely because it has the least coherent rationale for who receives it.
It's part political campaign, part beauty contest, part popularity  poll, part athletic achievement.
Often in that order.
And the only people who can win are running backs, quarterbacks and, once every blue moon, a receiver.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about a new national public opinion survey being taken as part of the National Issues Convention referred incorrectly to Senator Bob Dole.
A spokeswoman for Mr.
Dole said he would not attend a meeting of survey participants in January in Austin, Tex.


Kitt Tears Knee Ligament in France
A J KITT, one of America's top skiers, sustained a severe knee injury yesterday at Val D'Isere, France, on the same course where he gained his only World Cup victory.
Preliminary examinations indicated a tear of an anterior cruciate ligament in the left knee.
He crashed during the downhill practice for the men's World Cup race on the famed Oreiller-Killy course.


Sydney D. Bailey, 79, a Quaker Long Active in Global Affairs
Sydney Dawson Bailey, a devout pacifist, mediator and prolific writer on international affairs, died on Nov. 26 at his home in North London.
He was 79.
The cause was cancer, Stephen Collett, head of the Quaker United Nations Office, said.
Word of the death arrived late this week at the office, which Mr.
Bailey and his wife, Brenda Friedrich Bailey, had led in the 1950's.


Bridge
Those who wish to give a Christmas gift to a bridge enthusiast have a wide variety to choose from.
Other than books, always popular, the following are worth considering:
Play tournament deals on your computer and compare with the actual results.
Call Meadowlark Software, (701) 235-5113 for details.


Helms, After Winning Leaner Foreign Policy, Clears Way to ApproveAmbassadors
The Senate is expected to begin next week to confirm more than a dozen ambassadorial appointments that have been held up for months in a political dispute that left nearly a fifth of United States embassies without ambassadors.
The ambassadorial appointments, and other pending actions, were freed up after an agreement was reached on Thursday night between the Administration and  Senator Jesse Helms, the North Carolina Republican who is chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
He had held the appointments hostage in an effort to force the Administration to shrink its foreign policy apparatus.


Bad Luck and Horror For Seven in a Shop
Luz Ramos was torn.
The 20-year-old from the Bronx always wanted to have a job.
But she also felt the pull to be with her two young sons, ages 3 and nine months.
"You don't get a job, and it's bad; you get a job, and it's bad," said Jose Ramos, Luz's brother.


Report Shows Little Job Growth, Improving Odds for Rate Cut
Job growth was modest in November and the unemployment rate edged up to 5.6 percent, the Labor Department reported today, raising the likelihood that the weak economy would cause the Federal Reserve to lower short-term interest rates  this month.
"All the way through it was a very soft report," said Donald E. Maude, an analyst in New York for Scotia McLeod, an investment firm.
He raised his estimate of the odds of a rate cut this month to 50-50 instead of 70-30 against  a cut previously.
The markets have already moved in anticipation of a reduction.


It's Official. Grateful Dead Are Gone.
The Grateful Dead have decided to disband, the group announced yesterday.
After 30 years of free-form shows that were never the same twice, the San Francisco band that incarnated psychedelic rock will retire.
Its lead guitarist  and main songwriter, Jerry Garcia, died on Aug. 9.


Could Things Be Worse? and Other Questions for a Teachers' Leader
If yesterday was not the worst day of Sandra Feldman's professional life, it  came close.
Not only was Ms.
Feldman, the president of the New York City teachers' union, coping with the fallout from her membership's rejection of a contract she had negotiated for months to get and then praised as "a good educational package for teachers and kids."


The Gingrich Protection Committee
Following months of partisan gridlock, the House Ethics Committee has finally decided to retain an outside counsel to help it resolve ethics complaints against Speaker Newt Gingrich.
Even so, the obvious relief expressed by Mr.
Gingrich's spokesman was understandable.
The committee's Republican chairwoman,  Nancy Johnson of Connecticut, has defined the counsel's mandate very narrowly, in an attempt to shield Mr.
Gingrich at a time when many Republican House members are questioning his finances, his sensitivity to conflict of interest and his leadership.
The circumstances call for a thorough inquiry by an outside counsel with full authority to delve into all relevant areas -- the sensible process Mr.
Gingrich  advocated in the case of Speaker Jim Wright.
What the committee plans instead is to hire a lawyer and keep him on a short leash, after having already fenced off  some charges by saying that Mr.
Gingrich behaved shabbily but not so badly as to warrant an official sanction.


CHRONICLE
The party invitation says that no one younger than 40 will be admitted "unless accompanied by an adult," and that is just fine with the guest of honor, MARY-LOU WEISMAN.
She is the author of "My Middle-Aged Baby Book: A Record of Milestones, Millstones and Gallstones," and the party to be held for her on Wednesday at the Upper West Side home of the writer Judith Rossner will celebrate its publication by Workman.


Schools Chancellor Is Proposing Limits To Condom Lessons
Saying he does not believe that condom demonstrations in the classroom are appropriate for any age group, Chancellor Rudy Crew will ask the Board of Education next week to adopt a curriculum on AIDS and H.I.V. that would offer instruction on how to use a condom only to high-school students who specifically request it.
His request would require the board to reverse a decision it made in January  to teach ninth graders how to use a condom.
The decision addressed the issue of  an AIDS curriculum for seventh through ninth grades.
The issue before the board  now is what should be taught in high schools.


Rookie's Goal Helps Lightning Top Bruins
Lightning 3, Bruins 1


Imagine All the People


Gunman and 7 Others Die in Blaze at Harlem Store
Eight people in a Harlem clothing store were killed yesterday in a fierce, smoky blaze that the police said they believe was deliberately set as part of a  bitter landlord-tenant dispute that led to angry protests in the neighborhood.
Among the dead was a man the police suspect set fire to the store before apparently shooting himself in the chest.
The fire gutted the first-floor storefront that housed Freddie's Fashion Mart on Harlem's main thoroughfare, 125th Street, shortly after a tall gunman, waving a .38-caliber handgun, burst into the store across the street from the Apollo Theater.
The police said last night that they believed the gunman had once joined a group of demonstrators who had picketed the store in recent weeks in a  feud over the threatened eviction of a subtenant, the Record Shack, a neighborhood institution.


The Neediest Cases;For 3 Neglected Children, a Novelty: A Happy Home
Sitting in a room filled with bright watercolor paintings, pictures of smiling children and plates brimming with cookies, Laura J. told how her nephew  and two nieces had found refuge and solace there after years of neglect.
Ms.
J. was made the legal guardian of her nephew, 12, and two nieces, 14 and  8, in June, after their mother, a drug addict, abandoned them.
Seven months earlier, their stepfather had died of AIDS.
"It's been a big adjustment for everyone," Ms.
J. said.


Gunman and 7 Others Die in Blaze at Harlem Store
Eight people in a Harlem clothing store were killed yesterday in a fierce, smoky blaze that the police said they believe was deliberately set as part of a  bitter landlord-tenant dispute that led to angry protests in the neighborhood.
Among the dead was a man the police suspect set fire to the store before apparently shooting himself in the chest.
The fire gutted the first-floor storefront that housed Freddie's Fashion Mart on Harlem's main thoroughfare, 125th Street, shortly after a tall gunman, waving a .38-caliber handgun, burst into the store across the street from the Apollo Theater.
The police said last night that they believed the gunman had once joined a group of demonstrators who had picketed the store in recent weeks in a  feud over the threatened eviction of a subtenant, the Record Shack, a neighborhood institution.


Teacher Vote Puts Unions Back at Square 1, Leaders Say
Labor leaders said today that the vote by New York City's public-school teachers to reject their proposed five-year contract instantly changed the dynamics of the debate over a similar labor agreement for 140,000 municipal workers and worsened the chances that city workers would ratify it.
"I think the teachers' vote will embolden people to vote against," said William Henning, vice president of Local 1180 of the Communications Workers of America, which represents 7,000 administrative city workers.
"Once someone says  the emperor has no clothes, then other people will be willing to say the emperor has no clothes."


Corrections
A report and a picture caption in the Food Notes column of The Living Section on Wednesday about the planned opening of Sullivan's Restaurant and Broadcast Lounge in February misstated the owner's name.
He is Earl Geer, not Ed Greer.


Education Chief Faults L.I. School Board for Lavish Spending Sprees
While the troubled school district here headed toward a $1.9 million budget gap and some students went without textbooks, school board members spent lavishly on themselves, using school funds to pay for limousines, luxury hotel suites and tickets to an Everly Brothers concert, state education officials said today.


Citing Tax Proposal, Monsanto Drops Plan for 100-Year Bonds
The Monsanto Company yesterday scuttled plans to raise $200 million through a sale of 100-year bonds, one day after the Clinton Administration proposed eliminating deductions for such securities and their cousins.
"This decision was made in light of the uncertainties created by the balanced-budget proposal," the company, whose products are marketed under such brand-names as Nutra-Sweet and Searle, said in a statement yesterday.
"If adopted, this proposal could negatively affect the tax treatment of certain debt securities."


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
How to Make a Case For Vocal Conservation Helen Donath, soprano Alice Tully Hall


Torch Run Takes a Wrong Turn
When it comes to honoring Jim Thorpe, the 1912 Olympic decathlon and pentathlon champion who is considered by many the greatest athlete of the first  half of the century, Atlanta's Olympic organizers have not won any gold medals for geography or sensitivity.
In planning the Olympic torch relay over 15,000 serpentine miles from Los Angeles to Atlanta for the start of the 1996 Summer Games, organizers plotted a  course through Thorpe's hometown in Oklahoma.
Except they identified the wrong hometown and, for five months, declined to acknowledge the mistake or do anything to correct it.


Diamond Offshore Is Planning Takeover of Oil-Rig Competitor
Diamond Offshore Drilling Inc., one of the largest companies operating drilling rigs in deep water, said yesterday that it planned to take over a fast-growing competitor, Arethusa Ltd., for $516 million in stock.
If the two companies combine, they will have 30 semisubmersible rigs, which are floating rigs capable of drilling in deep water.
That would be far more than any competitor.


Jupiter Rendezvous Is Marvel of Perfection
The timing and accuracy of the Galileo spacecraft's entry into an orbit of Jupiter were so precise that mission officials here today canceled as unnecessary a planned maneuver to refine the craft's course around the giant planet.
They also predicted that the craft would reach its next target, the moon Ganymede, a week earlier than originally scheduled.
The two-and-a-half-ton Galileo swung into an orbit of Jupiter on Thursday, beginning a planned two-year reconnaissance of the largest planet in the solar system and three of its major moons: Europa and Callisto, as well as Ganymede.
It is the first spacecraft to orbit one of the enormous outer planets, which are primarily spheres of turbulent gases.


Rookie's Goal Helps Lightning Top Bruins
Lightning 3, Bruins 1


Bosnia: Proving Ground For NATO Contenders
For the Central European countries anxious to join NATO, deploying their troops in Bosnia amounts to a beauty contest of sorts.
In the Czech Republic, Poland and Hungary, defense officials acknowledge that the troops and equipment they are sending to Bosnia will be under Western scrutiny to assess their progress in moving from a Soviet-style military to one  compatible with NATO.


Corrections
An obituary on Sept. 27 about John L. Bates, a United States Army officer and Russian-speaking aide at Roosevelt's talks with Stalin at Teheran and Yalta during World War II, referred incompletely to the interpreters there.
A retired  Foreign Service officer phoned several weeks ago to point out that Charles E. Bohlen was Roosevelt's official interpreter at those meetings.
This correction was delayed by an editing lapse.


Kitt Tears Knee Ligament in France
A J KITT, one of America's top skiers, sustained a severe knee injury yesterday at Val D'Isere, France, on the same course where he gained his only World Cup victory.
Preliminary examinations indicated a tear of an anterior cruciate ligament in the left knee.
He crashed during the downhill practice for the men's World Cup race on the famed Oreiller-Killy course.


U.S. Opposing Welfare Rules In Connecticut
In the next month, Connecticut is to enact a series of tough new welfare measures, but the state has run into a hitch: the Clinton Administration appears to be balking at some of the most controversial proposals.
As part of his effort to reduce welfare, Gov.
John G. Rowland, a Republican,  wants to discourage poor out-of-staters from moving here, and so has proposed a  two-tier benefit plan that would pay newcomers 10 percent less than longtime residents.
He also wants to impose the nation's shortest time limit for collecting benefits, 21 months.


Religion Journal;Departing Shaper of Reform Judaism
In his long tenure as president of the Union of American Hebrew Congregations, Rabbi Alexander Schindler has had the unusual distinction of heading up a liberal religious organization whose rolls have grown, rather than  shrunk, in a period when the momentum in American religion (as in politics) has been on the conservatives' side.
In 1973, when he became president of the union, which represents Reform Jewish congregations, it included about 700 synagogues.
Now, as he prepares to step down next year, there are more than 850.


New Navy Scandal: An Admiral Guilty Of Sex Harassment
In the latest embarrassment for the Navy, a senior admiral in Europe has been demoted and forced to retire early after being found guilty of sexually harassing a woman who worked for him, the Navy said today.
A Navy inquiry concluded this week that the officer, Rear Adm.
Ralph L. Tindal, who is deputy commander of NATO forces in Spain and Portugal, had been involved in "an inappropriate" yearlong affair with a female enlisted aide.


Laporte Stock Falls On Low Profit Estimate
Shares in Laporte P.L.C. plunged 22 percent yesterday after the company, Britain's fourth-largest chemical maker, warned that 1995 pretax profits before  exceptional charges would drop 10 percent.
The company also said it would take an exceptional charge of L85 million ($130 million) in 1995 to close sites, cut  jobs and write down assets.
Shares plunged 169 pence, to 614, in London.
Laporte said it encountered "a downturn in the second half," particularly in chemicals it sells to the construction and bulk polymer industries.


In South, Drug Abusers Turn to a Smuggled Sedative
A prescription drug sold abroad is becoming the fastest-growing abused drug among young people in Florida and one that has found its way to a dozen other states, law-enforcement officials say.
Manufactured by Hoffmann-La Roche, the Swiss pharmaceutical company, and sold by prescription in about 60 countries as Rohypnol, the pills are not made or approved for use in the United States.
But Drug Enforcement Administration officials say the police in Florida, Texas and other Southern states are reporting an increase in smuggled shipments from Colombia, a Hoffmann-La Roche distribution site for other Latin American countries, and from Mexico, where some pharmacies sell Rohypnol over the counter.


DAVIDSON ASSOCIATES' STOCK SLIDES ON SALES REPORT
The education and entertainment software publisher Davidson Associates said yesterday that its fourth-quarter sales would be lower than expected, prompting  a 27 percent plunge in the company's stock.
Davidson said products it makes for  other companies to sell were hurt, but partly made up for by sales of software the company sells under its own name.
The company said it expected its fourth-quarter earnings to be in the range of 14 to 18 cents a share.


Justices to Hear Players' Case Against N.F.L.
Accepting a case with important implications for labor relations in professional sports, the Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether National Football League team owners violated Federal antitrust law when they imposed a salary cap of $1,000 a week for practice players during the 1989 football season.
The case is an appeal by 235 players who were members of "developmental squads" that year, assigned to serve as practice and replacement players.
The $30 million antitrust judgment they won against the 28 N.F.L. teams after a jury trial in 1993 was overturned this year by a Federal appeals court here on the ground that actions of the team owners in any phase of the collective bargaining process are exempt from antitrust scrutiny.


G.M. in Argentina
The General Motors Corporation broke ground this week on a $300 million assembly plant in Argentina for Chevrolet Corsa passenger cars.
G.M. plans to hire 1,300 workers for the 860,000-square-foot plant and expects annual production of 84,000 cars for sale in Argentina and other South American countries.
G.M. announced the plant after sales at its Latin America division rose 21 percent, to 370,000, for the first nine months of 1995.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Voters Turn Off to Big-Money Politics
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 3 news article on voter participation in the gubernatorial primaries in Kentucky last spring neglects to mention one reason that newly registered voters might not turn out on Election Day.


Honda May Expand
The stock of the Honda Motor Company surged yesterday to its highest level in more than six years on news the car maker may build a new North American factory to assemble mini-vans.
Analysts said the factory, which is likely to be in Canada, would help Honda seize a bigger share of the growing market for light trucks and vans.
On Japanese exchanges, Honda's shares rose as much as 150 yen,  to 2,060 yen, the highest since Aug. 24, 1989.
The stock closed up 60 yen, at 1,970.
The American depository receipts were up $1.25, to $39.25, on the New York Stock Exchange.
(Bloomberg Business News)


On the Ballot in New Hampshire


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Food and Drug Administration's approval of a new drug, Invirase, made by Hoffmann-La Roche Inc. to attack the AIDS virus, misstated the telephone number for doctors and patients seeking information.
The number is (800) 526-6367.


Jobless Rate Worsens a Bit


COMPANY BRIEFS
SYNTELLECT INC., Phoenix, which supplies interactive voice response systems, agreed to acquire Pinnacle Investment Associates Inc., for stock valued at about $16.5 million.
Syntellect will exchange 1.15 shares of its stock for each Pinnacle share.


Westinghouse Plans Selloffs To Help Pay Debt on CBS Deal
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation said yesterday that it would sell the military-related businesses of its electronic systems unit to help pare the debt it incurred in buying CBS Inc.
Westinghouse also said it would sell a smaller unit, which it did not name.


Ernest Boyer, National Leader In Education, Dies at 67
Ernest L. Boyer, who helped to shape American education as Chancellor of the  State University of New York, as United States Commissioner of Education and as  President of the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, died yesterday at his home in Princeton, N.J.
He was 67.
Dr.
Boyer had been treated for lymphoma for nearly three years, his assistant, Bob Hochstein, said.


Texas Executes Man For Slaying of Two
A man who killed two people and wounded five others in a shooting spree at a  pool hall was executed on Thursday by lethal injuection.
After being strapped to the gurney, Hai Hai Vuong, 40, smiled at three women  in the witness room before he was put to death, nine years after the crime.
The women, from a Houston church, had befriended him several years ago.


HIGH SCHOOL BASKETBALL REPORT
The city lights have always shone brightest on New York's high school basketball players.
Two years ago, it was Felipe Lopez grabbing the headlines.
Last season, it was Stephon Marbury.
But this season, New Jersey has two of the  best players in the nation: Shaheen Holloway of St.
Patrick's in Elizabeth, and  the 6-foot-10-inch Tim Thomas of Paterson Catholic.
The following players, listed alphabetically, are likely to get most of the  headlines in the metropolitan area.


U.S. Opposing Welfare Rules In Connecticut
In the next month, Connecticut is to enact a series of tough new welfare measures, but the state has run into a hitch: the Clinton Administration appears to be balking at some of the most controversial proposals.
As part of his effort to reduce welfare, Gov.
John G. Rowland, a Republican,  wants to discourage poor out-of-staters from moving here, and so has proposed a  two-tier benefit plan that would pay newcomers 10 percent less than longtime residents.
He also wants to impose the nation's shortest time limit for collecting benefits, 21 months.


New York Welfare Limits Will Prove Costly
To the Editor:
You detail (front page, Dec. 3) Gov.
George E. Pataki's proposed overhaul of  New York's welfare system, but its effect on the state was not addressed.


Sony Announces a Reorganization of Its U.S. Operations
The Sony Corporation of America said yesterday that it was broadening its executive committee to include the heads of its main operating divisions.
The committee charts long-term strategy, future investments and companywide operations.
The heads of the electronics, films and record businesses will join the committee, which in the past included only corporate staff.
It had been led by Michael P. Schulhof, the president and chief executive officer of the Sony Corporation of America until he resigned under pressure on Tuesday.


U.S. Moving To Safeguard Worker Funds
Alarmed by evidence that hundreds of small companies have stolen their employees' 401(k) retirement money, the Clinton Administration is planning to introduce new safeguards aimed at curbing such abuses.
Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich, officials said, told Government lawyers to work through the weekend drafting rules that will make it harder for employers to dip into the 401(k) pool for their own needs.
The tighter rules are expected to be announced on Monday.


9 Companies Announce Videodisk Specifications
Nine companies working on a new type of digital videodisk announced specifications yesterday for the medium, which would resemble today's compact disk or CD-ROM, but would be able to store far more music, video or data in a common format.
The companies agreed in September to work together following a heated battle  between rival standards proposed by the Sony Corporation and Philips Electronics on one side, and the Toshiba Corporation on the other.
Sony and Philips jointly created the compact disk, but most of the industry had lined up  behind the Toshiba proposal, and that format ultimately won out.


Jackson Still in Stable Condition
Michael Jackson's condition was reported unchanged yesterday at the Beth Israel Medical Center North.
Mr.
Jackson's personal physician, Dr.
Allan Metzger, said the entertainer, in serious but stable condition, was expected to remain in the hospital for up to two weeks of further observation and treatment.


Oil Company Can't End the Tyranny in Nigeria
To the Editor:
Re "Shell Game in Nigeria" (editorial, Dec. 3):


$10 Million Bail in Murder
Bail of $10 million was set for Do Young Yoo, charged with killing Kyu Su Chun, his girlfriend's mother, on Nov. 27.
The assistant Bergen County prosecutor, Robert Holmson, had asked for bail of $50 million, saying that the defendant posed "a great risk of flight" because his father, a wealthy Korean industrialist, might help him escape the country, The Associated Press reported.


HFS AGREES TO THE PURCHASE OF THE REST OF CENTURY 21
HFS Inc. agreed yesterday to buy the remaining six Century 21 regions in the  United States with which it did not already have direct franchise agreements for about $140 million in stock.
The move will increase the number of Century 21 franchises with direct agreements with HFS by about 1,000, to 7,000 worldwide.
The six regions were controlled by four independent master licensees.
HFS was licensing the Century 21 name to the master licensees, who in turn issued and ran the franchises.
HFS's stock was up $2.125 yesterday, at $75.375.
HFS, the world's largest hotel franchise company, bought Century 21 from the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company in August for $200 million.


Direct Dialing for Competitors
Starting late next year, customers of phone companies that compete with Bell  Atlantic will be able to make local toll calls without dialing a five-digit access code.
The state Board of Public Utilities decided yesterday that the codes create a competitive disadvantage for long-distance carriers offering in-state calls.


CATERPILLAR AND EMERSON ELECTRIC IN JOINT VENTURE
Caterpillar Inc. and the Emerson Electric Company agreed in principle yesterday to establish a joint venture to develop and manufacture diesel generator sets.
Caterpillar said it would take an equity position in Emerson's F. G. Wilson (Engineering) Ltd. subsidiary, a leading European supplier of electric power generation equipment, based in Larne, Northern Ireland.
Financial arrangements were not disclosed.
Caterpillar, based in Peoria, Ill., is the world's largest manufacturer of construction and mining equipment.
It is also a  leading global supplier of diesel engines, which accounted for about 30 percent  of its $14.3 billion in sales last year.
Emerson Electric, based in St.
Louis, manufactures a broad range of electrical, electronic and related products.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


After Bitter Legislative Battle, Mexico Revises Social Security
After a bruising session that lasted until 3 A.M., the lower house of Mexico's Congress today approved a sweeping overhaul of the social security and  health care systems, which now cover about one of every three Mexicans.
The changes will allow Mexicans for the first time to set up individual retirement accounts, managed by private administrators, starting in January 1997.


Rabin's Way


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Orff's 'Christmas Story,' With Some Harlem Slang New York Philharmonic Avery Fisher Hall


Ice Show to Benefit Grinkov's Family
The Feb. 27 performance of Stars on Ice, the show that starred the world champion pair of Sergei Grinkov and Yekaterina Gordeyeva, will be dedicated to Grinkov, who died last month.
International Management Group, the producer of the show, said Thursday that  the performance at the Hartford Civic Center would be a tribute to Grinkov, who  died of a heart attack Nov. 20.
Grinkov, 28, was practicing for the opening of the show tour when he collapsed on the ice at Lake Placid, N.Y.


White Soldiers Held in Killing Of 2 Blacks
Investigators charged a third Fort Bragg soldier today in the slaying of a black couple who, the police say, were gunned down on a downtown street by white soldiers looking for blacks to harass.
Two suspects, Pvt.
Malcolm Wright, 21, and Pvt.
James Norman Burmeister 2d, 20, were each charged on Thursday with two counts of first-degree murder, said Lieut.
Tom Bergamine of the Fayetteville police.


Justices to Hear Players' Case Against N.F.L.
Accepting a case with important implications for labor relations in professional sports, the Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether National Football League team owners violated Federal antitrust law when they imposed a salary cap of $1,000 a week for practice players during the 1989 football season.
The case is an appeal by 235 players who were members of "developmental squads" that year, assigned to serve as practice and replacement players.
The $30 million antitrust judgment they won against the 28 N.F.L. teams after a jury trial in 1993 was overturned this year by a Federal appeals court here on the ground that actions of the team owners in any phase of the collective bargaining process are exempt from antitrust scrutiny.


A New Safety Net Is Created For Homeowners in Quakes
California took a big step yesterday toward overhauling its homeowners' earthquake insurance market to create a new financial safety net for homeowners, replacing insurance companies.
After a heated competition among 40 securities firms, the state said firms led byMorgan Stanley &amp; Company would handle an innovative $1.5 billion bond sale that would be part of a $10.5 billion package to pay homeowners' claims.


World News Briefs;A Case of Deadly Virus Reported in Ivory Coast
International health experts said today that they had identified a case of infection by the Ebola virus in the western Ivory Coast.
Ebola causes the lethal and highly contagious hemorrhagic fever that killed scores of people in central  Africa this year.


Gordone Memorial
A memorial service for Charles Gordone, the first black playwright to win a Pulitzer Prize, will be held from 7 to 9 P.M. on Monday at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village.
His play "No Place to Be Somebody" won the prize in 1970.
Mr.
Gordone died last month in Texas at the age of 70.
At the service, in the Newman Theater of the Public, Dick Gregory is to speak.


RESULTS PLUS


Metro Digest
NEW YORK CITY


Bronx Teacher Is Arrested In Sex-and-Drugs Scandal
A public high school English teacher in the Bronx had sex with several teen-age girls in sessions that included using alcohol and drugs, watching pornographic films and making videotapes of their encounters, the authorities said yesterday.
The teacher, Raymond Farrell, 33, was arrested in the principal's office at Evander Childs High School after having been summoned there when police officers from the 49th Precinct arrived, according to a spokeswoman for Edward F. Stancik, the Special Commissioner of Investigation for the New York City school district.


Rio Journal;Where's Jobim Street? Don't Even Ask
Ask any Brazilian who ponders such things and he will most likely say Antonio Carlos Jobim's music put Brazil on the map.
But a year after his death, the city that so inspired the creator of bossa nova has yet to return the favor.
Instead, the efforts to find a place to bear Mr.
Jobim's name have turned into a peculiarly Rio saga, as indelibly printed with the charms and foibles of  his native city as his music was with its rhythms.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Neo-Classical Twists And a Mahler Novelty Yosif Feigelson 92d Street Y


Treasury Bonds Rally on Weak Jobs Data
Prices of Treasury bonds moved higher yesterday in a rally induced by a weaker-than-expected employment report, but closed off their peaks.
The soft jobs numbers lifted investor hopes for a cut in interest rates by the Federal Reserve, bringing in buyers and reversing the effects of Thursday's  selloff.
Then, news services reported that the Fed's vice chairman, Alan S. Blinder, had said that the markets were overly optimistic about an easing in December, and trading chilled.


In Nightmare of Anger, Store Becomes Flaming Madhouse
It was just after 10 o'clock and Harlem had begun like an orchestra to tune up for another great performance.
Traffic rumbled.
Stores were open.
Sidewalk vendors were out.
And people moved briskly in the cold December morning, headed  for work or shops or favorite haunts, carrying bags like responsibilities.
Across from the famed Apollo Theater, on the southeast corner of 125th Street and Frederick Douglass Boulevard, the gunman appeared out of nowhere at Freddie's Fashion Mart, a white-owned business that for months had been picketed and boycotted over a plan to expand that meant the eviction of a black-owned record shop next door.
Feelings had run high.
There had been threats.


Cold in Midwest and Northeast Pushes Heating Oil Prices Higher
Heating oil prices jumped on the New York Mercantile Exchange yesterday as colder weather bolstered expectations of increased demand for heating fuels.
On other markets, soybeans rose while coffee fell.
The Commodity Research Bureau index of 17 commodities gained 0.97 point, to 245.17.


France Gives Serbs Deadline on Lost Pilots
France said today that it had given the Bosnian Serbs until Sunday to clarify the fate of two French pilots shot down more than three months ago and to return them if they are alive.
Speaking to a conference on rebuilding Bosnia that opened here today, Foreign Minister Herve de Charette said the unwillingness of the Serbs to return the pilots was "intolerable" and had created a crisis for the peace effort.


The A Train to the Plane Is a Bargain
Word of mouth seems to be accomplishing what a splashy advertising campaign did not: getting air travelers to go to Kennedy International Airport by public  transit.
Every day, legions of the budget conscious strap on their backpacks and lug their suitcases onto the A train for a ride to the Howard Beach-Kennedy stop in  Queens, about an hour from midtown Manhattan.
Port Authority buses then take them to the terminals, 10 to 15 minutes away.


Longtime Winner and a Premiere in an Ailey Gala
The novelty in the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater's annual City Center gala was the premiere of "Riverside" by Judith Jamison, the company's artistic director.
But what would an annual Ailey gala be without "Revelations," the masterpiece that Ailey created in 1960?
Or what would "Revelations," so deeply inspired by Southern spirituals, be without the encore that the audience clamors for ritualistically after the rousing finale?
Those who wonder how traditions are established can take note of this history and the fact that Ailey himself once tried to present a full season without his  classic: "Revelations" was too much of a good thing.
The audience wouldn't buy Ailey's act of exasperation, and the piece was restored to the repertory.


Blue-Chip Issues Off a Bit, But Technology Stocks Rise
Stock prices were mixed yesterday in lackluster trading, amid indications that the economy was continuing to lose momentum.
Blue chips fell, while computing issues led the broader market higher.
"There has been a definite shift in the mood of the equity market," said E. Wayne Nordberg, equity partner of Lord Abbett &amp; Company.
"You've got a lot of nervous holders out there looking for the slightest hole in the dike to run for cover."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Agreed to terms with Charles Nagy, pitcher, on a two-year contract.


I.R.A. Says It Won't Work With New Panel
In its response to President Clinton's call to all sides to work together in  the Northern Ireland peace effort, the Irish Republican Army asserted today that it would not cooperate with the new international panel on disarmament of paramilitary groups in the British province.
It was not immediately clear what effect the statement would have on the peace effort, but officials noted that there was no indication that the outlawed, overwhelmingly Roman Catholic I.R.A. was preparing to resume the violent campaign it suspended more than 15 months ago.
Nevertheless, the statement was being taken seriously here and in Northern Ireland and Britain.


Ending as Begun: Civilized
Virtually every moment is poignant for the Cleveland Quartet these days as it wraps up 26 years of history, but some are more touching than others.
Such was the case at Mechanics Hall here on Wednesday morning, when the group began recording Haydn's late String Quartet in D (Op. 76, No. 5): specifically, the work's plush, soulful slow movement.
"It's a work I've always wanted to record," said Paul Katz, the group's cellist.
"We've played it a lot."


Law Firm of Melvin Belli Petitions for Bankruptcy
Melvin Belli, the redoubtable San Francisco lawyer and self-proclaimed King of Torts, said today that his law firm had been laid low by repercussions from one of its king-size tort cases and had filed for bankruptcy protection.
Mr.
Belli attributed the firm's financial problems primarily to the decision  by the Dow Corning Corporation earlier this year to declare bankruptcy of its own, an effort to shelter itself from injury claims filed by women who had received silicone breast implants, which the company manufactured.


Gordone Memorial
A memorial service for Charles Gordone, the first black playwright to win a Pulitzer Prize, will be held from 7 to 9 P.M. on Monday at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village.
His play "No Place to Be Somebody" won the prize in 1970.
Mr.
Gordone died last month in Texas at the age of 70.
At the service, in the Newman Theater of the Public, Dick Gregory is to speak.


Bosnia: Proving Ground For NATO Contenders
For the Central European countries anxious to join NATO, deploying their troops in Bosnia amounts to a beauty contest of sorts.
In the Czech Republic, Poland and Hungary, defense officials acknowledge that the troops and equipment they are sending to Bosnia will be under Western scrutiny to assess their progress in moving from a Soviet-style military to one  compatible with NATO.


Virginia's Drive for Five Stalled by Duke in Semis
In what amounted to the big shot on the block being upstaged by the kid around the corner, Virginia's bid for a fifth consecutive national championship  in soccer came to an end today at the hands of a league rival.
The Duke Blue Devils, like Virginia a member of the Atlantic Coast Conference, eliminated the Cavaliers in the semifinals of the National Collegiate Athletic Association  tournament with a stunning 3-2 triumph.
"I don't honestly know what to say," said Duke Coach John Rennie, whose team  scored twice early, once late and withstood a dominant second half by the Cavaliers.
"The bottom line is today was our day, our day to win."


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Food and Drug Administration's approval of a new drug, Invirase, made by Hoffmann-La Roche Inc. to attack the AIDS virus, misstated the telephone number for doctors and patients seeking information.
The number is (800) 526-6367.


U.S. Mustn't Drop the Ball on Peacemaking;Don't Abet Timor Woes
To the Editor:
Re "The Clinton Gamble" (column, Dec. 6):


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a report in the Chronicle column in some editions yesterday, about heart surgery performed on Jerome Robbins, referred incorrectly to Mr.
Robbins's co-founding choreographer at the New York City Ballet.
He was George Balanchine, not Peter Martins.


U.S. Mustn't Drop the Ball on Peacemaking
To the Editor:
Re "The Clinton Gamble" (column, Dec. 6):


Foster-Care Groups Fault City on Case Notifications
The first fax arrived unceremoniously on the morning of Nov. 20 at the Salvation Army's foster-care office in Manhattan.
The memo from the Child Welfare Administration, which was transferring hundreds of foster children from  the care of two troubled private agencies, notified the Salvation Army that it would be taking over responsibility for some of the children.
That afternoon, in a hastily prepared second memo, the city faxed the names of 11 children who, as of that moment, were the Salvation Army's responsibility.


Largest State Union Ratifies 4-Year Pact
Members of New Jersey's largest state workers' union ratified a four-year contract today that includes a wage freeze and their first employee health insurance co-payments.
The final results were announced shortly after 9 P.M.
Of 13,053 ballots counted, 8,780 were in favor of ratification and 4,253 against.
More than 26,000 workers were eligible to vote.


Victory on 42d Street
The life and times of 42d Street's newest theater -- which is also its oldest -- mirror precisely the life and times of that gaudy, legendary strip.
It went from riches to rags.
First it was the Theater Republic, built by Oscar Hammerstein and home to players like Lionel Barrymore.
In 1902 Hammerstein leased it to David Belasco, who named it after himself, made bees (for the B in  Belasco) part of its decor and presented many notable actors and a truly notable show -- "Abie's Irish Rose." Then it started hitting the skids.
In 1931 it became Billy Minsky's Republic Burlesque.
During World War II it became a second-run movie house named the Victory, and for most of the 80's it showed porn.
Today, however, it is the New Victory Theater, an accomplishment of New 42d Street, a nonprofit organization established by the city and state to bring new  life to the old strip.
The theater, where there will be a gala opening Monday night, represents a solid step in the reclamation of 42d Street.
Its facade is perhaps the handsomest in the theater district, and its interior one of the prettiest.
Its productions will be a long way from porn.
The New Victory, which  is nonprofit, is the first children's theater in New York.
A Canadian circus, Cirque Eloize, will launch it on Dec. 19, after four days of free shows for school and youth groups.


Witnesses to Murder Found
The Union County Prosecutor's office said yesterday that it has located 8 of  the 12 people who witnessed the unsolved fatal stabbing of Wendy Sue Wolin, 7, nearly 30 years ago.
The case was reopened in October after a woman, now in her 60's, approached police with information she said she had only recently recalled.


BEVERLY ENTERPRISES TAKING A CHARGE AGAINST EARNINGS
Beverly Enterprises Inc. said yesterday that it would take a charge of $100 million to $110 million against fourth-quarter earnings.
The company, based in Fort Smith, Ark., said it was taking the charge because of a reduction in book value of 140 of its 706 nursing homes, including 50 homes whose leases will not  be renewed in 1996.
The charge also includes the write-off of $25 million for software and business development costs.


The Neediest Cases;For 3 Neglected Children, a Novelty: A Happy Home
Sitting in a room filled with bright watercolor paintings, pictures of smiling children and plates brimming with cookies, Laura J. told how her nephew  and two nieces had found refuge and solace there after years of neglect.
Ms.
J. was made the legal guardian of her nephew, 12, and two nieces, 14 and  8, in June, after their mother, a drug addict, abandoned them.
Seven months earlier, their stepfather had died of AIDS.
"It's been a big adjustment for everyone," Ms.
J. said.


Sony Announces a Reorganization of Its U.S. Operations
The Sony Corporation of America said yesterday that it was broadening its executive committee to include the heads of its main operating divisions.
The committee charts long-term strategy, future investments and companywide operations.
The heads of the electronics, films and record businesses will join the committee, which in the past included only corporate staff.
It had been led by Michael P. Schulhof, the president and chief executive officer of the Sony Corporation of America until he resigned under pressure on Tuesday.


King of Pork' Is Leaving Congress After 15 Terms
Representative Tom Bevill, a Democrat who has become known as the King of Pork for sending millions of Federal dollars to his home state of Alabama, said  today that he would retire after 15 terms in Congress.
And in further bad news for Democrats who had hoped to recapture the House, Representative John Bryant, Democrat of Texas, said he would abandon the seat he has held for seven terms to run against Senator Phil Gramm in 1996.
Mr.
Gramm, a Texas Republican, is seeking a third term and running for President at the same  time.


Labor Chiefs Say Giuliani Raised Anger With Raises
The ample pay raises planned for top city officials should have had nothing to do with the fate of the teachers' contract, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said icily yesterday.
Mr.
Giuliani gave his oft-repeated explanation of why he and other officials deserved higher salaries after eight years.
But for the teachers, who voted down their contract on Thursday night, the Mayor's decision to forge ahead with the raises just as the union was considering the contract, which included a two-year wage freeze, was an invitation to rejection.
Along with some labor experts, the teachers said the Mayor had badly miscalculated the emotional impacts of the raise on people who are paid far less.


The A Train to the Plane Is a Bargain
Word of mouth seems to be accomplishing what a splashy advertising campaign did not: getting air travelers to go to Kennedy International Airport by public  transit.
Every day, legions of the budget conscious strap on their backpacks and lug their suitcases onto the A train for a ride to the Howard Beach-Kennedy stop in  Queens, about an hour from midtown Manhattan.
Port Authority buses then take them to the terminals, 10 to 15 minutes away.


Dylan Adds a Show
Bob Dylan, with Patti Smith as an opening act, has added a second show at the Beacon Theater next week.
In addition to Thursday's sold-out concert, the two are to perform on Monday.
Tickets are to go on sale today at the Beacon box office, Broadway and 74th Street, and at Ticketmaster outlets.


Forget Raises, Lawmakers Say
Forget it, two legislative heavyweights said yesterday, responding to reports that their colleagues are thinking about voting themselves hefty pay raises.
The Assembly Speaker, Chuck Haytaian, a Republican of Warren, and the Senate Minority Leader, John Lynch, a Democrat of Middlesex, said they won't support any raises, the A.P. said.


MK RAIL DROPS EFFORTS TO SOLICIT PURCHASE BID
The MK Rail Corporation said yesterday that it had dropped its efforts to solicit bids for the purchase of the company.
MK Rail's stock fell to a new 52-week low after the announcement, touching $3.875.
It closed at $4.125, down 87.5 cents in Nasdaq trading.
Since its announcement on June 28 that it was seeking offers to purchase the entire company, it has not received any offers that a committee of independent directors deems adequate.
MK Rail manufactures locomotive component parts, provides fleet maintenance and overhauls locomotives.
Pittsburgh-based MK and its largest shareholder, the Morrison Knudsen Corporation, have struggled with cost overruns and delays on contracts to build locomotives and transit cars.


U.S. Military Takes Guam for Granted
To the Editor:
While a Dec. 3 news article questions the long-term presence of United States military forces in Japan and South Korea, the Department of Defense is reducing  operations on Guam, a United States territory.


C.I.A. Chief's Report Says Moscow Duped Washington With Help FromDouble Agent
With the help of a mole inside the Central Intelligence Agency, Moscow warped Washington's perceptions of crucial political, military and diplomatic developments inside the Soviet Union and Russia for nine years, the Director of  Central Intelligence said in a report released today.
The deception scheme "diminished our ability to understand" what was really happening in Moscow from 1986 to 1994, said the director, John M. Deutch.
The consequences were enormous.


Japanese Executives Become More Optimistic
Japanese business executives are the most optimistic they have been in almost four years, according to one of Japan's most important economic indicators, a Bank of Japan survey that polls 10,000 managers across the nation.
The key figure in the survey, the business outlook index for major manufacturers, rose to negative 14 from negative 18 in August.
Economists had expected it to come in at negative 16.
The central bank said low interest rates, the weaker yen -- which increases  exporters' overseas income -- and corporate cost-cutting were supporting growth.
Paper and electronics makers were particularly optimistic, the survey showed.
But the survey showed persistent concerns about weak demand, bloated payrolls and falling prices.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Some Smirnoffs Sue Over Use of Their Name
Some of the Russian descendants of Peter Smirnoff, who was a vodka purveyor to the imperial court and whose name is known worldwide thanks to an American brand of vodka, filed a lawsuit yesterday in Federal District Court in Wilmington, Del., to prevent Heublein Inc., which makes Smirnoff, from using the name Smirnoff in the United States.
The suit asserts that Heublein, a subsidiary of Grand Metropolitan P.L.C., has engaged in false and deceptive advertising, and it represents an escalation  of the dispute, which began in Russian courts.


Officer Is Reindicted in Death of Suspect in the Bronx
The prosecution of a police officer accused in the choking death of a Bronx man, which halted three months ago when a judge threw out the indictment, is about to resume, a lawyer for the dead man's family said yesterday.
A new indictment, for criminally negligent homicide, has been handed up against the officer, Francis X. Livoti, said Susan Karten, the lawyer for the family of Anthony Baez.
Mr.
Baez died after a confrontation with the police on Dec. 22.


Burden of Strikes Increases but France Bends Just a Bit
A wave of strikes that has paralyzed much of France swept into a third week today as miners fought with the police in the east of the country and the Government abandoned a position of unyielding aloofness by opening negotiations  with striking rail workers.
There was no immediate sign of a breakthrough, and it appeared certain that the strikes -- staged to protest France's attempts to streamline its overburdened state sector, trim social programs and cut chronic budget deficits  -- would continue at least until Tuesday, when labor unions are planning demonstrations.


The Teachers Say No
The rejection of a five-year labor contract by New York City's schoolteachers was a surprising setback for Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and the teachers' union leadership.
It was also a reversal for the cause of restoring financial health to the city.
Mr.
Giuliani was right to stand firm and say there was no more money to pay for the wage increases the teachers are demanding.
The Mayor could, however, listen to any idea the teachers have to finance the wage hikes with more concessions in work rules and benefits, something that should have been part of the contract from the beginning.
The rejected contract called for a wage freeze in the first two years, a sacrifice justified by the worst fiscal crisis in the city in a generation.
But  the teachers got a city pledge not to lay anyone off for three years, and a promise of wage increases of about 13 percent by the end of five years.
In return for these benefits the teachers made small concessions of their own, permitting somewhat more autonomy for schools to hire teachers and requiring teachers to spend more time with students during the day, primarily in counseling, tutoring and other activities outside the classroom.


Thaw in Budget Talks Freezes Over a Bit
A day after President Clinton submitted revisions to his budget and a slight  thaw seemed to have developed in the budget negotiations, the President and Republican leaders in Congress reverted today to casting aspersions and drawing  lines in the sand.
With further formal negotiations put off until next week, Mr.
Clinton called  reporters to the Cabinet Room at the White House before a meeting with Democratic governors to say he would stand firm against the Federal Government's relinquishing control of Medicaid, the health insurance program for the poor.


White House Says Veto Is Planned for Ban on a Type of Late-TermAbortion
The White House said today that President Clinton intended to veto a bill passed by the Senate on Thursday night that would outlaw a rarely used late-term form of abortion.
Following the lead of the House, which approved a similar measure a month ago, the Senate voted, 54 to 44, to approve a bill that would make it a felony for doctors to perform the procedure.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a report in the Chronicle column in some editions yesterday, about heart surgery performed on Jerome Robbins, referred incorrectly to Mr.
Robbins's co-founding choreographer at the New York City Ballet.
He was George Balanchine, not Peter Martins.


Melvin Kranzberg, 78, Historian of Technology
Melvin Kranzberg, a scholar who helped establish the study of the history of  technology and explained its impact on society, died on Wednesday at his home in Atlanta.
Dr.
Kranzberg, a professor at the Georgia Institute of Technology, was  78.
The cause was cancer, said August Giebelhaus, a professor of history at Georgia Tech and a longtime colleague.


MOORE ADVANCES BID FOR WALLACE COMPUTER
The Moore Corporation said yesterday that it had advanced in its bid to take  over Wallace Computer Services Inc., capturing three of eight board seats at Wallace's annual meeting.
Among those unseated was Robert Cronin, Wallace's president.
"With this strong show of support, we are hopeful that Wallace's directors will now work with us and the newly elected directors to reach a mutually satisfactory agreement," said Reto Braun, Moore's chief executive.
Moore is offering $1.4 billion for Wallace, a business forms supplier, which has rejected the offer as inadequate.
Wallace's shares fell $1.25, to $57.75, on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday.
Moore's shares were unchanged at $18.125.


Teacher Vote Puts Unions Back at Square 1, Leaders Say
Labor leaders said today that the vote by New York City's public-school teachers to reject their proposed five-year contract instantly changed the dynamics of the debate over a similar labor agreement for 140,000 municipal workers and worsened the chances that city workers would ratify it.
"I think the teachers' vote will embolden people to vote against," said William Henning, vice president of Local 1180 of the Communications Workers of America, which represents 7,000 administrative city workers.
"Once someone says  the emperor has no clothes, then other people will be willing to say the emperor has no clothes."


Honda May Expand
The stock of the Honda Motor Company surged yesterday to its highest level in more than six years on news the car maker may build a new North American factory to assemble mini-vans.
Analysts said the factory, which is likely to be in Canada, would help Honda seize a bigger share of the growing market for light trucks and vans.
On Japanese exchanges, Honda's shares rose as much as 150 yen,  to 2,060 yen, the highest since Aug. 24, 1989.
The stock closed up 60 yen, at 1,970.
The American depository receipts were up $1.25, to $39.25, on the New York Stock Exchange.
(Bloomberg Business News)


G.M. in Argentina
The General Motors Corporation broke ground this week on a $300 million assembly plant in Argentina for Chevrolet Corsa passenger cars.
G.M. plans to hire 1,300 workers for the 860,000-square-foot plant and expects annual production of 84,000 cars for sale in Argentina and other South American countries.
G.M. announced the plant after sales at its Latin America division rose 21 percent, to 370,000, for the first nine months of 1995.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Rabin's Way


New Navy Scandal: An Admiral Guilty Of Sex Harassment
In the latest embarrassment for the Navy, a senior admiral in Europe has been demoted and forced to retire early after being found guilty of sexually harassing a woman who worked for him, the Navy said today.
A Navy inquiry concluded this week that the officer, Rear Adm.
Ralph L. Tindal, who is deputy commander of NATO forces in Spain and Portugal, had been involved in "an inappropriate" yearlong affair with a female enlisted aide.


ING Receives Offers
Internationale Nederladen Groep N.V. said yesterday that it had received several offers for its 35 percent ownership stake in the Dutch book and newspaper publisher PCM N.V., but has no immediate plans to sell.
The Amsterdam-based banking and insurance company received the stake in PCM earlier  this year after ING arranged financing for PCM's acquisition of the Dutch newspaper company Dagbladunie N.V. from Reed Elsevier.
An ING spokesman said four interested parties had approached the company.
(Dow Jones)


Law Firm of Melvin Belli Petitions for Bankruptcy
Melvin Belli, the redoubtable San Francisco lawyer and self-proclaimed King of Torts, said today that his law firm had been laid low by repercussions from one of its king-size tort cases and had filed for bankruptcy protection.
Mr.
Belli attributed the firm's financial problems primarily to the decision  by the Dow Corning Corporation earlier this year to declare bankruptcy of its own, an effort to shelter itself from injury claims filed by women who had received silicone breast implants, which the company manufactured.


BEVERLY ENTERPRISES TAKING A CHARGE AGAINST EARNINGS
Beverly Enterprises Inc. said yesterday that it would take a charge of $100 million to $110 million against fourth-quarter earnings.
The company, based in Fort Smith, Ark., said it was taking the charge because of a reduction in book value of 140 of its 706 nursing homes, including 50 homes whose leases will not  be renewed in 1996.
The charge also includes the write-off of $25 million for software and business development costs.


In Nightmare of Anger, Store Becomes Flaming Madhouse
It was just after 10 o'clock and Harlem had begun like an orchestra to tune up for another great performance.
Traffic rumbled.
Stores were open.
Sidewalk vendors were out.
And people moved briskly in the cold December morning, headed  for work or shops or favorite haunts, carrying bags like responsibilities.
Across from the famed Apollo Theater, on the southeast corner of 125th Street and Frederick Douglass Boulevard, the gunman appeared out of nowhere at Freddie's Fashion Mart, a white-owned business that for months had been picketed and boycotted over a plan to expand that meant the eviction of a black-owned record shop next door.
Feelings had run high.
There had been threats.


For a Bosnian Schoolgirl, and Uneasy Homecoming
Amina Brka returned this week to a world she had only seen on television and  read about in letters from home.
This was her country, but it bore little resemblance to the one she had left nearly four years ago.
Much of its beauty had been burned or mangled under the barrage of war, and when she rode into Sarajevo, she was surprised that anything was left at all.
"It's not as bad as I had pictured it," said Amina, 14, as she tussled with new school books on her first day of class here.
"My visions were much worse. And from the pictures I saw on television, with all the grenades thrown from the mountains, I thought Sarajevo had been flattened."


Corrections
An article on Sunday about a new national public opinion survey being taken as part of the National Issues Convention referred incorrectly to Senator Bob Dole.
A spokeswoman for Mr.
Dole said he would not attend a meeting of survey participants in January in Austin, Tex.


Indians Avoid Arbitration With Nagy
The Cleveland Indians, on a roll, signed another of their key players yesterday.
One day after reaching agreement with five players, including a new first baseman, JULIO FRANCO, the Indians erased CHARLES NAGY from the list of players eligible for salary arbitration.
Nagy, who had a 16-6 record last season, agreed to a two-year, $6.85 million  contract with a club option for a third year.
JAIME NAVARRO, a free agent, accepted the Chicago Cubs' salary arbitration offer, then agreed to a contract that will pay him $3.4 million for next season.
The deal also includes options for 1997 (Navarro's) and 1998 (mutual).
Navarro had a 14-6 record last season.


Thaw in Budget Talks Freezes Over a Bit
A day after President Clinton submitted revisions to his budget and a slight  thaw seemed to have developed in the budget negotiations, the President and Republican leaders in Congress reverted today to casting aspersions and drawing  lines in the sand.
With further formal negotiations put off until next week, Mr.
Clinton called  reporters to the Cabinet Room at the White House before a meeting with Democratic governors to say he would stand firm against the Federal Government's relinquishing control of Medicaid, the health insurance program for the poor.


Imagine All the People


Report Shows Little Job Growth, Improving Odds for Rate Cut
Job growth was modest in November and the unemployment rate edged up to 5.6 percent, the Labor Department reported today, raising the likelihood that the weak economy would cause the Federal Reserve to lower short-term interest rates  this month.
"All the way through it was a very soft report," said Donald E. Maude, an analyst in New York for Scotia McLeod, an investment firm.
He raised his estimate of the odds of a rate cut this month to 50-50 instead of 70-30 against  a cut previously.
The markets have already moved in anticipation of a reduction.


Seton Hall Shuffles Roles
Seton Hall University realigned its front office, naming Monsignor Robert Sheeran as president, in charge of internal operations.
The Rev.
Thomas Peterson will retain the title of chancellor and concentrate on outside initiatives.


FACTORY STORES SAYS ROTHSCHILD ENDS AGREEMENT
Factory Stores of America Inc. said yesterday that Rothschild Realty had scrapped a deal that would have made Factory Stores the biggest operator of factory outlets in the country.
The news pushed Factory Stores' stock down $2.25, to $15.50, on the New York Stock Exchange, where its 12 percent decline was the worst of the day.
Factory Stores announced in June that it had agreed with Rothschild Realty to combine the factory outlet centers owned by the Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio and management operations of Rothschild's Charter Oak Group.
The deal was worth about $311 million in cash, debt and stock.


Schools Chancellor Is Proposing Limits To Condom Lessons
Saying he does not believe that condom demonstrations in the classroom are appropriate for any age group, Chancellor Rudy Crew will ask the Board of Education next week to adopt a curriculum on AIDS and H.I.V. that would offer instruction on how to use a condom only to high-school students who specifically request it.
His request would require the board to reverse a decision it made in January  to teach ninth graders how to use a condom.
The decision addressed the issue of  an AIDS curriculum for seventh through ninth grades.
The issue before the board  now is what should be taught in high schools.


Unemployment Rate Rises
The state's unemployment rate was up again in November, to 6.1 percent, from  5.8 in October, the Bureau of Labor Statistics said yesterday.
New Jersey continues to suffer from manufacturing job losses, the bureau noted.


DAVIDSON ASSOCIATES' STOCK SLIDES ON SALES REPORT
The education and entertainment software publisher Davidson Associates said yesterday that its fourth-quarter sales would be lower than expected, prompting  a 27 percent plunge in the company's stock.
Davidson said products it makes for  other companies to sell were hurt, but partly made up for by sales of software the company sells under its own name.
The company said it expected its fourth-quarter earnings to be in the range of 14 to 18 cents a share.


Cold in Midwest and Northeast Pushes Heating Oil Prices Higher
Heating oil prices jumped on the New York Mercantile Exchange yesterday as colder weather bolstered expectations of increased demand for heating fuels.
On other markets, soybeans rose while coffee fell.
The Commodity Research Bureau index of 17 commodities gained 0.97 point, to 245.17.


C.I.A. Chief's Report Says Moscow Duped Washington With Help FromDouble Agent
With the help of a mole inside the Central Intelligence Agency, Moscow warped Washington's perceptions of crucial political, military and diplomatic developments inside the Soviet Union and Russia for nine years, the Director of  Central Intelligence said in a report released today.
The deception scheme "diminished our ability to understand" what was really happening in Moscow from 1986 to 1994, said the director, John M. Deutch.
The consequences were enormous.


Diamond Offshore Is Planning Takeover of Oil-Rig Competitor
Diamond Offshore Drilling Inc., one of the largest companies operating drilling rigs in deep water, said yesterday that it planned to take over a fast-growing competitor, Arethusa Ltd., for $516 million in stock.
If the two companies combine, they will have 30 semisubmersible rigs, which are floating rigs capable of drilling in deep water.
That would be far more than any competitor.


CLOTHESTIME FILES FOR BANKRUPTCY PROTECTION
Clothestime Inc. filed for bankruptcy court protection from creditors and will close 140 of its more than 500 apparel and lingerie stores, resulting in the loss of at least 600 jobs.
In the third quarter, Clothestime, based in Anaheim, Calif., posted a loss of $2.3 million on revenue of $78.7 million.


Journal;Bennett's Moral Filter
William Bennett, our best-selling arbiter of virtues, couldn't resist congratulating himself this week.
When he announced his campaign against companies that sponsor vulgar TV talk shows, he noted that some of those companies "have been friendly to the Republican Party." Indeed, Philip Morris, which sponsors Montel Williams and Maury Povich, is a big giver to Mr.
Bennett's own conservative political action group, Empower America.
No matter.
When your friends sponsor trash TV, Mr.
Bennett told The Washington Post, then, by golly,  "you've got to go after your friends."
Well, bully for Bill.
But even as he talked of his friends at Philip Morris,  I was thinking of a friend of mine, Rob Buford, who was buried at age 46 in Richmond on Thursday -- the same day that Mr.
Bennett and two Senators, Sam Nunn and Joseph Lieberman, were holding a press conference unveiling the commercials  in which they berate Philip Morris, among others, for sponsoring TV's "cultural  rot." Rob wasn't killed by "cultural rot." He was killed by cigarettes.


Texas Executes Man For Slaying of Two
A man who killed two people and wounded five others in a shooting spree at a  pool hall was executed on Thursday by lethal injuection.
After being strapped to the gurney, Hai Hai Vuong, 40, smiled at three women  in the witness room before he was put to death, nine years after the crime.
The women, from a Houston church, had befriended him several years ago.


Observer;Easy On the Pedal
Scotty Reston died after the first edition Wednesday.
He was as good a newspaperman as I ever saw, and better than most.
He learned his trade in the school of hard knocks.
This taught him to prefer understatement and simple sentences to the long-winded flourishes once so common in American journalism.
In a rare criticism of a Times colleague he once wrote that Arthur Krock "thought a sentence couldn't be immortal unless it was interminable."


Burden of Strikes Increases but France Bends Just a Bit
A wave of strikes that has paralyzed much of France swept into a third week today as miners fought with the police in the east of the country and the Government abandoned a position of unyielding aloofness by opening negotiations  with striking rail workers.
There was no immediate sign of a breakthrough, and it appeared certain that the strikes -- staged to protest France's attempts to streamline its overburdened state sector, trim social programs and cut chronic budget deficits  -- would continue at least until Tuesday, when labor unions are planning demonstrations.


Citing Tax Proposal, Monsanto Drops Plan for 100-Year Bonds
The Monsanto Company yesterday scuttled plans to raise $200 million through a sale of 100-year bonds, one day after the Clinton Administration proposed eliminating deductions for such securities and their cousins.
"This decision was made in light of the uncertainties created by the balanced-budget proposal," the company, whose products are marketed under such brand-names as Nutra-Sweet and Searle, said in a statement yesterday.
"If adopted, this proposal could negatively affect the tax treatment of certain debt securities."


Jailed Official Seeks Release
Two months after starting a 10-year prison sentence for bribery, the former Camden County Clerk, Michael S. Keating, has applied for early release under a program that frees nonviolent convicts who agree to work full-time, perform community service and abide by a curfew.
A supervisor for the state program said that Mr.
Keating's application probably will not be considered for another year.


INSIDE
Move to Guard 401(k)'s


A New Safety Net Is Created For Homeowners in Quakes
California took a big step yesterday toward overhauling its homeowners' earthquake insurance market to create a new financial safety net for homeowners, replacing insurance companies.
After a heated competition among 40 securities firms, the state said firms led byMorgan Stanley &amp; Company would handle an innovative $1.5 billion bond sale that would be part of a $10.5 billion package to pay homeowners' claims.


ING Receives Offers
Internationale Nederladen Groep N.V. said yesterday that it had received several offers for its 35 percent ownership stake in the Dutch book and newspaper publisher PCM N.V., but has no immediate plans to sell.
The Amsterdam-based banking and insurance company received the stake in PCM earlier  this year after ING arranged financing for PCM's acquisition of the Dutch newspaper company Dagbladunie N.V. from Reed Elsevier.
An ING spokesman said four interested parties had approached the company.
(Dow Jones)


A Concession Is Offered To Help Flag Amendment
Struggling to line up the required two-thirds majority for his constitutional amendment against flag-burning, Senator Orrin G. Hatch said today he would support efforts to limit its impact.
Mr.
Hatch, a Utah Republican, said he would support an effort to give only the Federal Government, and not the states, the power to "prohibit the physical  desecration of the flag of the United States." He said that would eliminate a problem some opponents of the amendment saw: that the definition of desecration  or even of the flag itself could vary by state.


FACTORY STORES SAYS ROTHSCHILD ENDS AGREEMENT
Factory Stores of America Inc. said yesterday that Rothschild Realty had scrapped a deal that would have made Factory Stores the biggest operator of factory outlets in the country.
The news pushed Factory Stores' stock down $2.25, to $15.50, on the New York Stock Exchange, where its 12 percent decline was the worst of the day.
Factory Stores announced in June that it had agreed with Rothschild Realty to combine the factory outlet centers owned by the Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio and management operations of Rothschild's Charter Oak Group.
The deal was worth about $311 million in cash, debt and stock.


First Lady Officially Sets Off Clinton Race
Stepping back onto the campaign trail and abandoning her self-imposed lower profile, Hillary Rodham Clinton officially registered her husband as a candidate in the nation's first primary state today.
She lost no time in accusing Republicans of making budget proposals that would "knock down the ladder of opportunity after they themselves have reached the top."
With scores of reporters and camera people shoving each other to catch a glimpse of her, Mrs.
Clinton stood at an antique desk in the office of the New Hampshire Secretary of State to submit the papers that officially begin President Clinton's re-election campaign.


No Stopping Nets, When They're Home
It's baffling how the Nets can play so horribly on the road and so heroically at home.
Same team, same players.
Totally opposite results.
"Maybe we should just take the Meadowlands with us," forward Jayson Williams  said.
"We just know we can win at home."


Turgeon Is Named Captain of Canadiens
PIERRE TURGEON became the captain of the Montreal Canadiens yesterday, replacing MIKE KEANE, who was sent to the Colorado Avalanche as part of the trade that included the star goalie PATRICK ROY.
Rather than being elected by his teammates, Turgeon, who was obtained from the Islanders last season, was appointed by General Manager REJEAN HOULE and Coach MARIO TREMBLAY. (AP)


TEXACO IS SET TO REDUCE 4TH-PERIOD EARNINGS
Texaco Inc. will reduce its fourth-quarter earnings by about $640 million after adopting new accounting standards, the oil company said yesterday.
The company said that to comply with the provisions of the rule, which dictates how  soon companies record lower asset values, it would restate operating results for the first three quarters of 1995.
About 75 percent of the fourth-quarter charge  being taken by Texaco reflects the write-down of certain producing properties in the United States.
The remaining 25 percent covers write-downs for assets that are scheduled for disposal.
Texaco reported income from continuing operations for the fourth quarter of 1994 of $381 million, or $1.42 a share.


CLINTON REBUFFS A SENATE DEMAND OVER WHITEWATER
The White House forced a constitutional showdown today by refusing a Senate demand for information about a 1993 meeting at which President Clinton's senior  lawyers and aides discussed Whitewater.
The independent counsel investigating Whitewater has demanded the same information, and has also been rebuffed by the White House, according to people  involved in the discussions.


HFS AGREES TO THE PURCHASE OF THE REST OF CENTURY 21
HFS Inc. agreed yesterday to buy the remaining six Century 21 regions in the  United States with which it did not already have direct franchise agreements for about $140 million in stock.
The move will increase the number of Century 21 franchises with direct agreements with HFS by about 1,000, to 7,000 worldwide.
The six regions were controlled by four independent master licensees.
HFS was licensing the Century 21 name to the master licensees, who in turn issued and ran the franchises.
HFS's stock was up $2.125 yesterday, at $75.375.
HFS, the world's largest hotel franchise company, bought Century 21 from the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company in August for $200 million.


In an Iowa District, Second Thoughts on the G.O.P.
Iowa's Fourth Congressional District, stretching east from the Nebraska border across the bridges of Madison County and into Des Moines, offers a window on how Newt Gingrich and the Republican Party came to take control of Congress.
But these days, it also offers a window on how they could lose it.
In 1992, as the district was giving Bill Clinton the same percentage of the Presidential vote he got nationwide, it sent a Democratic Congressman, Neal Smith, back to Washington for an 18th term.


So Much for Friendly Skies;2 Corporate-Jet Makers Go After a Market and Each Other
The corporate jet business used to be the model of civility, catering to customers who preferred to be stirred, not shaken, by salesmanship.
But that was before the Gulfstream Aerospace Corporation and Bombardier Inc.  decided to invest about $1 billion between them in new high-end planes -- each of which cost about $35 million, use the same engines, and can whisk passengers from New York to Tokyo in about 14 hours, nonstop.


Helms, After Winning Leaner Foreign Policy, Clears Way to ApproveAmbassadors
The Senate is expected to begin next week to confirm more than a dozen ambassadorial appointments that have been held up for months in a political dispute that left nearly a fifth of United States embassies without ambassadors.
The ambassadorial appointments, and other pending actions, were freed up after an agreement was reached on Thursday night between the Administration and  Senator Jesse Helms, the North Carolina Republican who is chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
He had held the appointments hostage in an effort to force the Administration to shrink its foreign policy apparatus.


With No McDowell, The Focus Is on Cone
The Yankees made a last-ditch attempt to maintain dialogue with Jack McDowell by asking him to reject salary arbitration if they offered it to him by Thursday's deadline.
Not surprisingly, McDowell refused this proposal because it would have heavily favored the Yankees.
Thus, they relinquished their negotiating rights to the pitcher and essentially terminated any possibility of  re-signing him.
If McDowell had accepted the proposal, he would have rejected their arbitration offer by Dec. 19, meaning that the Yankees would not have had to pay him as much as $6 million in 1996.
Then the Yankees could have still discussed a more economically feasible contract with him and held his rights until Jan. 8.


CLOTHESTIME FILES FOR BANKRUPTCY PROTECTION
Clothestime Inc. filed for bankruptcy court protection from creditors and will close 140 of its more than 500 apparel and lingerie stores, resulting in the loss of at least 600 jobs.
In the third quarter, Clothestime, based in Anaheim, Calif., posted a loss of $2.3 million on revenue of $78.7 million.


Virginia's Drive for Five Stalled by Duke in Semis
In what amounted to the big shot on the block being upstaged by the kid around the corner, Virginia's bid for a fifth consecutive national championship  in soccer came to an end today at the hands of a league rival.
The Duke Blue Devils, like Virginia a member of the Atlantic Coast Conference, eliminated the Cavaliers in the semifinals of the National Collegiate Athletic Association  tournament with a stunning 3-2 triumph.
"I don't honestly know what to say," said Duke Coach John Rennie, whose team  scored twice early, once late and withstood a dominant second half by the Cavaliers.
"The bottom line is today was our day, our day to win."


Trying to Sell Radioactive Waste;Finding Taker in New Jersey Is Job of a Nuclear-Age Willy Loman
On some days, "when people shake my hand and think they'll glow in the dark," John Weingart does not feel very loved.
On other days, when his office phone doesn't ring, he seems as lonely as the Maytag repairman.
What makes the responses -- or lack of them -- so odd is that Mr.
Weingart has millions of dollars to give away.


World News Briefs;China Installs Its Choice As Reincarnated Lama
The Chinese authorities staged a grand ceremony in Tibet today to enthrone the 6-year-old boy they chose last week as the 11th Panchen Lama, hoping to conclude a tumultuous selection process that has sharpened the struggle over Tibet between China and the exiled Dalai Lama.
In India, supporters of the Dalai Lama, who recognize a different 6-year-old  as the true reincarnation of the Panchen Lama, Tibet's second most important leader, denounce China's choice as a pretender.


Japanese Executives Become More Optimistic
Japanese business executives are the most optimistic they have been in almost four years, according to one of Japan's most important economic indicators, a Bank of Japan survey that polls 10,000 managers across the nation.
The key figure in the survey, the business outlook index for major manufacturers, rose to negative 14 from negative 18 in August.
Economists had expected it to come in at negative 16.
The central bank said low interest rates, the weaker yen -- which increases  exporters' overseas income -- and corporate cost-cutting were supporting growth.
Paper and electronics makers were particularly optimistic, the survey showed.
But the survey showed persistent concerns about weak demand, bloated payrolls and falling prices.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Robert Fizdale, 75, for 30 Years Half of a Celebrated Piano Duo
Robert Fizdale, a pianist, biographer, gastronome and for more than 30 years  a partner in the piano duo known as Gold and Fizdale, died on Wednesday in Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 75.
The cause was Alzheimer's disease.


Plans to Evict Record-Shop Owner Roiled Residents
During the last two decades, the Record Shack on West 125th Street became a neighborhood institution, the place to go in Harlem for calypso music, old-time  gospel recordings and jazz 45's.
But several months ago, the owner, Sikhulu Shange, learned of plans to evict  him from his storefront, and he fought back.
Making it clear that he considered himself a model of black entrepreneurship, he wrote letters to his local political leaders and successfully rallied community and business leaders  to his aid.
By September, protesters were picketing in front of Freddie's Fashion Mart, whose white owner -- Fred Harari, a tenant himself of the black church that owned the building -- subleased space to the Record Shack.


Some Smirnoffs Sue Over Use of Their Name
Some of the Russian descendants of Peter Smirnoff, who was a vodka purveyor to the imperial court and whose name is known worldwide thanks to an American brand of vodka, filed a lawsuit yesterday in Federal District Court in Wilmington, Del., to prevent Heublein Inc., which makes Smirnoff, from using the name Smirnoff in the United States.
The suit asserts that Heublein, a subsidiary of Grand Metropolitan P.L.C., has engaged in false and deceptive advertising, and it represents an escalation  of the dispute, which began in Russian courts.


Hamilton Ready to Join Rules Fight
When Giants defensive lineman Keith Hamilton first heard that Marvin Washington and Erik Howard of the Jets had been fined $12,000 each for hits on St.
Louis quarterback Chris Miller, he wanted to call each player and wish him luck with his appeal.
But when he heard that the Jets players were talking of suing the league over the rules, he said he would do more than just offer support; he wanted to join any potential lawsuit.


British Company Wins Second Asbestos Case
Shares in the British engineering company T &amp; N P.L.C. rose sharply yesterday in London on news that the company had won a United States asbestos case brought by The Chase Manhattan Bank.
Shares in the company rose 21 percent, adding 35 pence, to 165.
On Thursday the stock gained 8.3 percent after T &amp; N settled a separate dispute with the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey over asbestos contamination.
On Thursday a New York jury dismissed a $185 million claim by Chase over the use of asbestos in the construction of its New York headquarters in 1959.
Chase  had contended that T &amp; N was aware of the dangers of asbestos at the time.
(AP)


Jobless Rate Worsens a Bit


No Stopping Nets, When They're Home
It's baffling how the Nets can play so horribly on the road and so heroically at home.
Same team, same players.
Totally opposite results.
"Maybe we should just take the Meadowlands with us," forward Jayson Williams  said.
"We just know we can win at home."


9 Companies Announce Videodisk Specifications
Nine companies working on a new type of digital videodisk announced specifications yesterday for the medium, which would resemble today's compact disk or CD-ROM, but would be able to store far more music, video or data in a common format.
The companies agreed in September to work together following a heated battle  between rival standards proposed by the Sony Corporation and Philips Electronics on one side, and the Toshiba Corporation on the other.
Sony and Philips jointly created the compact disk, but most of the industry had lined up  behind the Toshiba proposal, and that format ultimately won out.


Rio Journal;Where's Jobim Street? Don't Even Ask
Ask any Brazilian who ponders such things and he will most likely say Antonio Carlos Jobim's music put Brazil on the map.
But a year after his death, the city that so inspired the creator of bossa nova has yet to return the favor.
Instead, the efforts to find a place to bear Mr.
Jobim's name have turned into a peculiarly Rio saga, as indelibly printed with the charms and foibles of  his native city as his music was with its rhythms.


Officer Is Reindicted in Death of Suspect in the Bronx
The prosecution of a police officer accused in the choking death of a Bronx man, which halted three months ago when a judge threw out the indictment, is about to resume, a lawyer for the dead man's family said yesterday.
A new indictment, for criminally negligent homicide, has been handed up against the officer, Francis X. Livoti, said Susan Karten, the lawyer for the family of Anthony Baez.
Mr.
Baez died after a confrontation with the police on Dec. 22.


Do Poor Shop for Best Welfare Deal? New Jersey Officials Say Yes andNo
Diane Goetz Stutesman says that many of the phone calls that come into her office get right to the point:
"They say, 'I can't stay where I am any longer and I want to move to New Jersey, and how much am I eligible for, and what about emergency shelter?' "


Congressman Is Convicted Of Extortion
Representative Walter R. Tucker 3d today was convicted of extortion and tax evasion, having failed to convince a jury that he was a victim of Government prosecutors who he said were bent on imprisoning black officeholders like himself.
Asked by reporters immediately afterward whether he would resign from Congress, Mr.
Tucker, a 38-year-old second-term Democrat from nearby Compton, replied: "Yes. I will not put the Congress through that."


The Pirandello Six, Singing but Still Dysfunctional
In Hugo Weisgall's operatic adaptation of Pirandello's "Six Characters in Search of an Author," questions of all sorts are deftly raised and usually left  dangling, the inevitable fate of musings on existence and predestination, and the relationship between art and reality.
But a more prosaic question stayed in  mind throughout the first performance of a new production that opened at the Manhattan School of Music on Wednesday and runs through Sunday: Why has this gem been absent from New York's stages since the New York City Opera presented its premiere in 1959?
This opera has everything.
Its libretto is sophisticated, compact and often funny, but turns starkly tragic in its final scene.
Its score is rich in characterization and melody, and if dissonances and angularity abound, they are  offset by some truly beautiful vocal writing and an orchestration that supports, amplifies and comments on the text.


Pippen Settles Paternity Suit
A Cook County (Ill.) judge approved a settlement yesterday in a paternity case against the Chicago Bulls star SCOTTIE PIPPEN.
The case was brought against Pippen by SONYA ROBY, who said he fathered her 17-month-old daughter in 1994.


In South, Drug Abusers Turn to a Smuggled Sedative
A prescription drug sold abroad is becoming the fastest-growing abused drug among young people in Florida and one that has found its way to a dozen other states, law-enforcement officials say.
Manufactured by Hoffmann-La Roche, the Swiss pharmaceutical company, and sold by prescription in about 60 countries as Rohypnol, the pills are not made or approved for use in the United States.
But Drug Enforcement Administration officials say the police in Florida, Texas and other Southern states are reporting an increase in smuggled shipments from Colombia, a Hoffmann-La Roche distribution site for other Latin American countries, and from Mexico, where some pharmacies sell Rohypnol over the counter.


World News Briefs;Jordan Identifies Arms Bound for Iraq as Russian
Missile parts being smuggled to Iraq that were intercepted by Jordanian authorities last month were Russian-made guidance components valued at $25 million, a senior Jordanian official said today.
The Jordanian attributed his information to the United Nations commission that is overseeing the elimination of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction.
A United Nations official in New York declined to give details of the goods but said they were part of an "ongoing pattern of procurement" of weapons that Iraq  is banned from having.


Executive Hired to Make Citicorp More Efficient Quits
Christopher J. Steffen, the outsider brought in by Citicorp two and a half years ago to help the bank, the nation's largest, become more efficient and productive, resigned unexpectedly yesterday.
Mr.
Steffen, 53, a certified public accountant whose reputation for improving operations was earned at Honeywell Inc. and the Chrysler Corporation, was recruited by Citicorp's chairman, John S. Reed, as part of his effort several years ago to turn the bank around.
Mr.
Steffen was made one of five vice chairmen at Citicorp earlier this year.


Jackson Still in Stable Condition
Michael Jackson's condition was reported unchanged yesterday at the Beth Israel Medical Center North.
Mr.
Jackson's personal physician, Dr.
Allan Metzger, said the entertainer, in serious but stable condition, was expected to remain in the hospital for up to two weeks of further observation and treatment.


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
Improvisations by Performers Unafraid to Look Their Age Steve Paxton and Simone Forti The Kitchen


World News Briefs;China Installs Its Choice As Reincarnated Lama
The Chinese authorities staged a grand ceremony in Tibet today to enthrone the 6-year-old boy they chose last week as the 11th Panchen Lama, hoping to conclude a tumultuous selection process that has sharpened the struggle over Tibet between China and the exiled Dalai Lama.
In India, supporters of the Dalai Lama, who recognize a different 6-year-old  as the true reincarnation of the Panchen Lama, Tibet's second most important leader, denounce China's choice as a pretender.


CHRONICLE
GARY CHRYST, a former principal dancer with the Joffrey Ballet, has a positive approach to middle age, too.
He had once intended to retire at the age  of 25, but two decades later, he's still dancing.
He is now with the Netherlands Dance Theater 3, which made its West Coast debut last night in Los Angeles.


No Headline
There weren't very many other people here when I was here before."
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON, contrasting a campaign stop in New Hampshire yesterday with 1991. [11:1.]


I.R.A. Says It Won't Work With New Panel
In its response to President Clinton's call to all sides to work together in  the Northern Ireland peace effort, the Irish Republican Army asserted today that it would not cooperate with the new international panel on disarmament of paramilitary groups in the British province.
It was not immediately clear what effect the statement would have on the peace effort, but officials noted that there was no indication that the outlawed, overwhelmingly Roman Catholic I.R.A. was preparing to resume the violent campaign it suspended more than 15 months ago.
Nevertheless, the statement was being taken seriously here and in Northern Ireland and Britain.


Talent From New Jersey Has the College Scouts Drooling
A crooked smile crossed Tim Thomas's face as he gloated a bit over how New Jersey had eclipsed New York as a cradle of high school basketball talent.
"In the past, everything has always been about Felipe Lopez, Stephon Marbury  or Kareem Reid," Thomas, a 6-foot-10-inch center/forward for Paterson Catholic High School, told reporters the other day, referring to recent blue-chip graduates from the Big Apple.
"But this year is our year. New Jersey has a lot to offer colleges."


Sydney D. Bailey, 79, a Quaker Long Active in Global Affairs
Sydney Dawson Bailey, a devout pacifist, mediator and prolific writer on international affairs, died on Nov. 26 at his home in North London.
He was 79.
The cause was cancer, Stephen Collett, head of the Quaker United Nations Office, said.
Word of the death arrived late this week at the office, which Mr.
Bailey and his wife, Brenda Friedrich Bailey, had led in the 1950's.


Paralyzed Boston U. Player Moves Hand
TRAVIS ROY moved his hand ever so slightly, and tears flowed from his father's eyes.
It may not be a huge breakthrough.
There's no indication he will  be able to use his fingers or have feeling in his legs.
But on the 48th day since he was paralyzed in his first college hockey game, Roy moved his hand.


Guggenheim Fellows
To the Editor:
"Trouble at the Guggenheim Foundation" (editorial, Nov. 12) implies disapproval of alleged too-generous support of Guggenheim fellows in the distant past.


NEWS SUMMARY
International
3-5


Corrections
An obituary on Sept. 27 about John L. Bates, a United States Army officer and Russian-speaking aide at Roosevelt's talks with Stalin at Teheran and Yalta during World War II, referred incompletely to the interpreters there.
A retired  Foreign Service officer phoned several weeks ago to point out that Charles E. Bohlen was Roosevelt's official interpreter at those meetings.
This correction was delayed by an editing lapse.


World News Briefs;Russian Candidate Slain In a 'Political' Act
A candidate for Russia's Parliament was found dead today on the doorstep of his village home in the Urals, shot in what his party said was an attempt to frighten voters before the Dec. 17 elections.
The candidate, Mikhail Lezhnev, 48, was on the ticket of Our Home Is Russia,  the party led by Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin.
The party called the slaying "a malicious, deliberate political act intended to intimidate voters who plan to support this party."


Dollar Leaps in Early Trading But Falls Back on Profit Taking
The dollar soared in early trading yesterday to an 11-week high against the German mark, but then European traders took their profits and the currency ended little changed.
Currency traders said the dollar's ascent was set off by a rally in United States Treasury bond prices, which caused traders to push the currency through important technical levels.


Turgeon Is Named Captain of Canadiens
PIERRE TURGEON became the captain of the Montreal Canadiens yesterday, replacing MIKE KEANE, who was sent to the Colorado Avalanche as part of the trade that included the star goalie PATRICK ROY.
Rather than being elected by his teammates, Turgeon, who was obtained from the Islanders last season, was appointed by General Manager REJEAN HOULE and Coach MARIO TREMBLAY. (AP)


Dollar Leaps in Early Trading But Falls Back on Profit Taking
The dollar soared in early trading yesterday to an 11-week high against the German mark, but then European traders took their profits and the currency ended little changed.
Currency traders said the dollar's ascent was set off by a rally in United States Treasury bond prices, which caused traders to push the currency through important technical levels.


Guilty Plea in 2 Killings
Abdulla Basha, who killed his wife and the man with whom she had an affair in 1989, pleaded guilty yesterday to two charges of aggravated manslaughter.
Mr.
Basha, 54, of Nutley, faces up to 60 years in prison.
JOE SHARKEY


The Jets' Offensive Line: Different Faces, Same Results
It has been 13 games, a long 13 games.
With erratic protection from a scrambled offensive line, the Jets have had only one pass completion -- other than Boomer Esiason's desperation heave against the Bills -- that has traveled 30 yards.
And that came in Week 2.
The plan that had seemed so right has turned out all wrong.
The offensive line, the building block of any team, could be headed for the scrap heap in the  wake of a season in which the Jets are last in the league in offensive yardage.


Ice Show to Benefit Grinkov's Family
The Feb. 27 performance of Stars on Ice, the show that starred the world champion pair of Sergei Grinkov and Yekaterina Gordeyeva, will be dedicated to Grinkov, who died last month.
International Management Group, the producer of the show, said Thursday that  the performance at the Hartford Civic Center would be a tribute to Grinkov, who  died of a heart attack Nov. 20.
Grinkov, 28, was practicing for the opening of the show tour when he collapsed on the ice at Lake Placid, N.Y.


Robert Fizdale, 75, for 30 Years Half of a Celebrated Piano Duo
Robert Fizdale, a pianist, biographer, gastronome and for more than 30 years  a partner in the piano duo known as Gold and Fizdale, died on Wednesday in Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 75.
The cause was Alzheimer's disease.


The Calls And Curves Break Right For Rangers
It would not be fair to say the Rangers didn't earn their 2-1 victory over Detroit last night at Madison Square Garden.
They did, in many ways, and their fans deserved to celebrate after Pat Verbeek scored the winner on a two-man power play at 27 seconds of overtime.
But it is also true that the Red Wings lost because of two strange penalties  in the final two minutes of regulation time that put them down, five skaters to  three.


France Gives Serbs Deadline on Lost Pilots
France said today that it had given the Bosnian Serbs until Sunday to clarify the fate of two French pilots shot down more than three months ago and to return them if they are alive.
Speaking to a conference on rebuilding Bosnia that opened here today, Foreign Minister Herve de Charette said the unwillingness of the Serbs to return the pilots was "intolerable" and had created a crisis for the peace effort.


British Company Wins Second Asbestos Case
Shares in the British engineering company T &amp; N P.L.C. rose sharply yesterday in London on news that the company had won a United States asbestos case brought by The Chase Manhattan Bank.
Shares in the company rose 21 percent, adding 35 pence, to 165.
On Thursday the stock gained 8.3 percent after T &amp; N settled a separate dispute with the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey over asbestos contamination.
On Thursday a New York jury dismissed a $185 million claim by Chase over the use of asbestos in the construction of its New York headquarters in 1959.
Chase  had contended that T &amp; N was aware of the dangers of asbestos at the time.
(AP)


Pippen Settles Paternity Suit
A Cook County (Ill.) judge approved a settlement yesterday in a paternity case against the Chicago Bulls star SCOTTIE PIPPEN.
The case was brought against Pippen by SONYA ROBY, who said he fathered her 17-month-old daughter in 1994.


About New York;In a Neighborhood Where Stores Count
BUNDLED up for the cold, but not insulated from the chill of violence that claimed eight lives on a Harlem block, Joann Sanders let out a fleeting smile -- perhaps the only of the day -- when she recalled her frequent trips to the Record Shack.
She liked it for being a black-owned store with a friendly atmosphere.
"Oooh, for years I used to buy 45's there!" she said, recalling a time when those digits referred to non-lethal hits by the likes of James Brown and the Manhattans.
"This was a place you could find albums. Not discs. Old stuff you wanted."


A Concession Is Offered To Help Flag Amendment
Struggling to line up the required two-thirds majority for his constitutional amendment against flag-burning, Senator Orrin G. Hatch said today he would support efforts to limit its impact.
Mr.
Hatch, a Utah Republican, said he would support an effort to give only the Federal Government, and not the states, the power to "prohibit the physical  desecration of the flag of the United States." He said that would eliminate a problem some opponents of the amendment saw: that the definition of desecration  or even of the flag itself could vary by state.


RETIREMENT CARE ASSOCIATES TO ADD NEWCARE HEALTH
Retirement Care Associates Inc. said yesterday that it planned to acquire the Newcare Health Corporation, an operator of nursing homes, for about $31.8 million in stock.
Retirement Care, based in Atlanta, said it would acquire Newcare for 2.65 million shares.
Retirement Care's stock was unchanged yesterday at $11.75 in Nasdaq trading.
Retirement Care said the combined company would have more than $200 million in annual revenues.
Retirement Care owns or operates 75 nursing homes and retirement centers in Georgia, Florida, Alabama, Tennessee, South Carolina and Virginia.
Newcare, based in Largo, Fla., owns or leases nursing homes in Florida and Georgia and has annual revenues of about $50 million.


Bronx Teacher Is Arrested In Sex-and-Drugs Scandal
A public high school English teacher in the Bronx had sex with several teen-age girls in sessions that included using alcohol and drugs, watching pornographic films and making videotapes of their encounters, the authorities said yesterday.
The teacher, Raymond Farrell, 33, was arrested in the principal's office at Evander Childs High School after having been summoned there when police officers from the 49th Precinct arrived, according to a spokeswoman for Edward F. Stancik, the Special Commissioner of Investigation for the New York City school district.


MOORE ADVANCES BID FOR WALLACE COMPUTER
The Moore Corporation said yesterday that it had advanced in its bid to take  over Wallace Computer Services Inc., capturing three of eight board seats at Wallace's annual meeting.
Among those unseated was Robert Cronin, Wallace's president.
"With this strong show of support, we are hopeful that Wallace's directors will now work with us and the newly elected directors to reach a mutually satisfactory agreement," said Reto Braun, Moore's chief executive.
Moore is offering $1.4 billion for Wallace, a business forms supplier, which has rejected the offer as inadequate.
Wallace's shares fell $1.25, to $57.75, on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday.
Moore's shares were unchanged at $18.125.


For a Bosnian Schoolgirl, and Uneasy Homecoming
Amina Brka returned this week to a world she had only seen on television and  read about in letters from home.
This was her country, but it bore little resemblance to the one she had left nearly four years ago.
Much of its beauty had been burned or mangled under the barrage of war, and when she rode into Sarajevo, she was surprised that anything was left at all.


Data Show Fewer Jobs in New York Region
Employment in the New York City metropolitan region dipped in November as a national slowdown continued to spill over into sluggish hiring across New York City, New York State and New Jersey.
According to the Federal Government's monthly employment report, there were 35,000 fewer jobs in New York State in November than in October, a decline of four-tenths of 1 percent.
The loss was concentrated in New York City, where there were 46,000 fewer jobs in November than in the previous month, a 2 percent decline.


Talent From New Jersey Has the College Scouts Drooling
A crooked smile crossed Tim Thomas's face as he gloated a bit over how New Jersey had eclipsed New York as a cradle of high school basketball talent.
"In the past, everything has always been about Felipe Lopez, Stephon Marbury  or Kareem Reid," Thomas, a 6-foot-10-inch center/forward for Paterson Catholic High School, told reporters the other day, referring to recent blue-chip graduates from the Big Apple.
"But this year is our year. New Jersey has a lot to offer colleges."


Sports of The Times;Prom Time Is Upon Us Once Again
THE Heisman Trophy reminds me of an old high school yearbook.
You look at photos and wonder what became of classmates who won individual honors -- best dressed, best looking.
The Heisman is like the most likely to succeed designation, someone who peaked early, an honor for that moment.
In the last few years the trophy has become one of the most hotly debated awards in sports, largely because it has the least coherent rationale for who receives it.
It's part political campaign, part beauty contest, part popularity  poll, part athletic achievement.
Often in that order.
And the only people who can win are running backs, quarterbacks and, once every blue moon, a receiver.


The Calls And Curves Break Right For Rangers
It would not be fair to say the Rangers didn't earn their 2-1 victory over Detroit last night at Madison Square Garden.
They did, in many ways, and their fans deserved to celebrate after Pat Verbeek scored the winner on a two-man power play at 27 seconds of overtime.
But it is also true that the Red Wings lost because of two strange penalties  in the final two minutes of regulation time that put them down, five skaters to  three.


CATERPILLAR AND EMERSON ELECTRIC IN JOINT VENTURE
Caterpillar Inc. and the Emerson Electric Company agreed in principle yesterday to establish a joint venture to develop and manufacture diesel generator sets.
Caterpillar said it would take an equity position in Emerson's F. G. Wilson (Engineering) Ltd. subsidiary, a leading European supplier of electric power generation equipment, based in Larne, Northern Ireland.
Financial arrangements were not disclosed.
Caterpillar, based in Peoria, Ill., is the world's largest manufacturer of construction and mining equipment.
It is also a  leading global supplier of diesel engines, which accounted for about 30 percent  of its $14.3 billion in sales last year.
Emerson Electric, based in St.
Louis, manufactures a broad range of electrical, electronic and related products.


Data Show Fewer Jobs in New York Region
Employment in the New York City metropolitan region dipped in November as a national slowdown continued to spill over into sluggish hiring across New York City, New York State and New Jersey.
According to the Federal Government's monthly employment report, there were 35,000 fewer jobs in New York State in November than in October, a decline of four-tenths of 1 percent.
The loss was concentrated in New York City, where there were 46,000 fewer jobs in November than in the previous month, a 2 percent decline.


Foster-Care Groups Fault City on Case Notifications
The first fax arrived unceremoniously on the morning of Nov. 20 at the Salvation Army's foster-care office in Manhattan.
The memo from the Child Welfare Administration, which was transferring hundreds of foster children from  the care of two troubled private agencies, notified the Salvation Army that it would be taking over responsibility for some of the children.
That afternoon, in a hastily prepared second memo, the city faxed the names of 11 children who, as of that moment, were the Salvation Army's responsibility.


World News Briefs;A Case of Deadly Virus Reported in Ivory Coast
International health experts said today that they had identified a case of infection by the Ebola virus in the western Ivory Coast.
Ebola causes the lethal and highly contagious hemorrhagic fever that killed scores of people in central  Africa this year.


Lots of Russian Jews Still Seek to Emigrate
To the Editor:
A Dec. 3 news article paints a rosy picture of the future of Russian Jewry.
You say "Jewish emigration from Russia is dropping sharply" yet cite no statistics.
Almost 70,000 Jews have emigrated to Israel this year, a rate higher than last year.
And the United States has no problem filling the Jewish part of  its quota of 64,000 visas for the former Soviet Union.
You say emigration is confined largely to the elderly, yet Israeli statistics show a normal age distribution of Russian immigrants coming to Israel.


Hamilton Ready to Join Rules Fight
When Giants defensive lineman Keith Hamilton first heard that Marvin Washington and Erik Howard of the Jets had been fined $12,000 each for hits on St.
Louis quarterback Chris Miller, he wanted to call each player and wish him luck with his appeal.
But when he heard that the Jets players were talking of suing the league over the rules, he said he would do more than just offer support; he wanted to join any potential lawsuit.


Paralyzed Boston U. Player Moves Hand
TRAVIS ROY moved his hand ever so slightly, and tears flowed from his father's eyes.
It may not be a huge breakthrough.
There's no indication he will  be able to use his fingers or have feeling in his legs.
But on the 48th day since he was paralyzed in his first college hockey game, Roy moved his hand.


Westinghouse Plans Selloffs To Help Pay Debt on CBS Deal
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation said yesterday that it would sell the military-related businesses of its electronic systems unit to help pare the debt it incurred in buying CBS Inc.
Westinghouse also said it would sell a smaller unit, which it did not name.


Melvin Kranzberg, 78, Historian of Technology
Melvin Kranzberg, a scholar who helped establish the study of the history of  technology and explained its impact on society, died on Wednesday at his home in Atlanta.
Dr.
Kranzberg, a professor at the Georgia Institute of Technology, was  78.
The cause was cancer, said August Giebelhaus, a professor of history at Georgia Tech and a longtime colleague.


So Much for Friendly Skies;2 Corporate-Jet Makers Go After a Market and Each Other
The corporate jet business used to be the model of civility, catering to customers who preferred to be stirred, not shaken, by salesmanship.
But that was before the Gulfstream Aerospace Corporation and Bombardier Inc.  decided to invest about $1 billion between them in new high-end planes -- each of which cost about $35 million, use the same engines, and can whisk passengers from New York to Tokyo in about 14 hours, nonstop.


Executive Hired to Make Citicorp More Efficient Quits
Christopher J. Steffen, the outsider brought in by Citicorp two and a half years ago to help the bank, the nation's largest, become more efficient and productive, resigned unexpectedly yesterday.
Mr.
Steffen, 53, a certified public accountant whose reputation for improving operations was earned at Honeywell Inc. and the Chrysler Corporation, was recruited by Citicorp's chairman, John S. Reed, as part of his effort several years ago to turn the bank around.
Mr.
Steffen was made one of five vice chairmen at Citicorp earlier this year.


In an Iowa District, Second Thoughts on the G.O.P.
Iowa's Fourth Congressional District, stretching east from the Nebraska border across the bridges of Madison County and into Des Moines, offers a window on how Newt Gingrich and the Republican Party came to take control of Congress.
But these days, it also offers a window on how they could lose it.
In 1992, as the district was giving Bill Clinton the same percentage of the Presidential vote he got nationwide, it sent a Democratic Congressman, Neal Smith, back to Washington for an 18th term.


Trying to Sell Radioactive Waste;Finding Taker in New Jersey Is Job of a Nuclear-Age Willy Loman
On some days, "when people shake my hand and think they'll glow in the dark," John Weingart does not feel very loved.
On other days, when his office phone doesn't ring, he seems as lonely as the Maytag repairman.
What makes the responses -- or lack of them -- so odd is that Mr.
Weingart has millions of dollars to give away.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Sony of America to Widen Its Executive Committee The Sony Corporation of America, reorganizing itself after the departure of its  chief executive, Michael Schulhof, said it would broaden its executive committee, adding the heads of its main operating divisions.


CLINTON REBUFFS A SENATE DEMAND OVER WHITEWATER
The White House forced a constitutional showdown today by refusing a Senate demand for information about a 1993 meeting at which President Clinton's senior  lawyers and aides discussed Whitewater.
The independent counsel investigating Whitewater has demanded the same information, and has also been rebuffed by the White House, according to people  involved in the discussions.


White Soldiers Held in Killing Of 2 Blacks
Investigators charged a third Fort Bragg soldier today in the slaying of a black couple who, the police say, were gunned down on a downtown street by white soldiers looking for blacks to harass.
Two suspects, Pvt.
Malcolm Wright, 21, and Pvt.
James Norman Burmeister 2d, 20, were each charged on Thursday with two counts of first-degree murder, said Lieut.
Tom Bergamine of the Fayetteville police.


Move Weakens Payroll Tax
The future of the 1 percent payroll tax imposed on companies with payrolls of at least $2,500 per quarter -- approved this week by the City Council was cloudy yesterday after the proposal hit a snag in Trenton.
On Thursday, the State Senate approved an amendment sponsored by Senator Edward T. O'Connor Jr., a Jersey City Democrat, that would effectively derail the tax.
The amendment would make Jersey City ineligible for a payroll tax.
The Senate must vote on the amended bill.
Mayor Bret Schundler, a Republican, has said the tax, estimated to raise $20 million annually, would help hold down property taxes.


Bail Lowered in Fire Incident
Bail for William R. Johnston, charged with dousing his wife with kerosene and setting her on fire, was lowered to $150,000 from $250,000 yesterday, The A.P. said.
The suspect, who is 40, remained in the county jail, where he has been since the Oct. 28 incident.
His wife, Donna, is still hospitalized in critical condition.


Congressman Is Convicted Of Extortion
Representative Walter R. Tucker 3d today was convicted of extortion and tax evasion, having failed to convince a jury that he was a victim of Government prosecutors who he said were bent on imprisoning black officeholders like himself.
Asked by reporters immediately afterward whether he would resign from Congress, Mr.
Tucker, a 38-year-old second-term Democrat from nearby Compton, replied: "Yes. I will not put the Congress through that."


Avon Products Plans $29.6 Million Charge
Avon Products Inc. said yesterday that it would take a fourth-quarter charge  of $29.6 million, or 43 cents a share, to settle a lawsuit with its former Mallinckrodt Inc. unit.
The company said that the settlement would result in a charge to discontinued operations.
Profit from continuing operations is expected to exceed last year's  $110.1 million, or $1.59 a share, Avon said.


World News Briefs;Russian Candidate Slain In a 'Political' Act
A candidate for Russia's Parliament was found dead today on the doorstep of his village home in the Urals, shot in what his party said was an attempt to frighten voters before the Dec. 17 elections.
The candidate, Mikhail Lezhnev, 48, was on the ticket of Our Home Is Russia,  the party led by Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin.
The party called the slaying "a malicious, deliberate political act intended to intimidate voters who plan to support this party."


U.S. Moving To Safeguard Worker Funds
Alarmed by evidence that hundreds of small companies have stolen their employees' 401(k) retirement money, the Clinton Administration is planning to introduce new safeguards aimed at curbing such abuses.
Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich, officials said, told Government lawyers to work through the weekend drafting rules that will make it harder for employers to dip into the 401(k) pool for their own needs.
The tighter rules are expected to be announced on Monday.


The Jets' Offensive Line: Different Faces, Same Results
It has been 13 games, a long 13 games.
With erratic protection from a scrambled offensive line, the Jets have had only one pass completion -- other than Boomer Esiason's desperation heave against the Bills -- that has traveled 30 yards.
And that came in Week 2.
The plan that had seemed so right has turned out all wrong.
The offensive line, the building block of any team, could be headed for the scrap heap in the  wake of a season in which the Jets are last in the league in offensive yardage.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the Russian election campaign for Parliament converted some ruble figures incorrectly.
The pro-Government party, Our Home Is  Russia, reported that it had collected the equivalent of $17,000 (not $1.7 million); the ultranationalist Liberal Democratic Party said it had raised the equivalent of $2.1 million (not $21 million), and spent $900,000 (not $9 million).


King of Pork' Is Leaving Congress After 15 Terms
Representative Tom Bevill, a Democrat who has become known as the King of Pork for sending millions of Federal dollars to his home state of Alabama, said  today that he would retire after 15 terms in Congress.
And in further bad news for Democrats who had hoped to recapture the House, Representative John Bryant, Democrat of Texas, said he would abandon the seat he has held for seven terms to run against Senator Phil Gramm in 1996.
Mr.
Gramm, a Texas Republican, is seeking a third term and running for President at the same  time.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the Russian election campaign for Parliament converted some ruble figures incorrectly.
The pro-Government party, Our Home Is  Russia, reported that it had collected the equivalent of $17,000 (not $1.7 million); the ultranationalist Liberal Democratic Party said it had raised the equivalent of $2.1 million (not $21 million), and spent $900,000 (not $9 million).


After Bitter Legislative Battle, Mexico Revises Social Security
After a bruising session that lasted until 3 A.M., the lower house of Mexico's Congress today approved a sweeping overhaul of the social security and  health care systems, which now cover about one of every three Mexicans.
The changes will allow Mexicans for the first time to set up individual retirement accounts, managed by private administrators, starting in January 1997.


Drive on Drugs In the Americas
Mexico and the nations of Central America joined recently in a coordinated drive against narcotics, a United States official said today.
The 10-day campaign, which began on Nov. 25, involved military and police forces from Panama to the United States-Mexico border, conducting air patrols and making inspections at ports and on roads..


On the Ballot in New Hampshire


First Lady Officially Sets Off Clinton Race
Stepping back onto the campaign trail and abandoning her self-imposed lower profile, Hillary Rodham Clinton officially registered her husband as a candidate in the nation's first primary state today.
She lost no time in accusing Republicans of making budget proposals that would "knock down the ladder of opportunity after they themselves have reached the top."
With scores of reporters and camera people shoving each other to catch a glimpse of her, Mrs.
Clinton stood at an antique desk in the office of the New Hampshire Secretary of State to submit the papers that officially begin President Clinton's re-election campaign.


Treasury Bonds Rally on Weak Jobs Data
Prices of Treasury bonds moved higher yesterday in a rally induced by a weaker-than-expected employment report, but closed off their peaks.
The soft jobs numbers lifted investor hopes for a cut in interest rates by the Federal Reserve, bringing in buyers and reversing the effects of Thursday's  selloff.
Then, news services reported that the Fed's vice chairman, Alan S. Blinder, had said that the markets were overly optimistic about an easing in December, and trading chilled.


Bad Luck and Horror for 7 in an Store
Luz Ramos was torn.
The 20-year-old from the Bronx always wanted to have a job.
But she also felt the pull to be with her two young sons -- the older boy of 3 and his younger brother of only 9 months.
"You don't get a job, and it's bad," said Jose Ramos, the woman's brother.
"You get a job, and it's bad."


Ernest Boyer, National Leader In Education, Dies at 67
Ernest L. Boyer, who helped to shape American education as Chancellor of the  State University of New York, as United States Commissioner of Education and as  President of the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, died yesterday at his home in Princeton, N.J.
He was 67.
Dr.
Boyer had been treated for lymphoma for nearly three years, his assistant, Bob Hochstein, said.


With No McDowell, The Focus Is on Cone
The Yankees made a last-ditch attempt to maintain dialogue with Jack McDowell by asking him to reject salary arbitration if they offered it to him by Thursday's deadline.
Not surprisingly, McDowell refused this proposal because it would have heavily favored the Yankees.
Thus, they relinquished their negotiating rights to the pitcher and essentially terminated any possibility of  re-signing him.
If McDowell had accepted the proposal, he would have rejected their arbitration offer by Dec. 19, meaning that the Yankees would not have had to pay him as much as $6 million in 1996.
Then the Yankees could have still discussed a more economically feasible contract with him and held his rights until Jan. 8.


Torch Run Takes a Wrong Turn
When it comes to honoring Jim Thorpe, the 1912 Olympic decathlon and pentathlon champion who is considered by many the greatest athlete of the first  half of the century, Atlanta's Olympic organizers have not won any gold medals for geography or sensitivity.
In planning the Olympic torch relay over 15,000 serpentine miles from Los Angeles to Atlanta for the start of the 1996 Summer Games, organizers plotted a  course through Thorpe's hometown in Oklahoma.
Except they identified the wrong hometown and, for five months, declined to acknowledge the mistake or do anything to correct it.


RETIREMENT CARE ASSOCIATES TO ADD NEWCARE HEALTH
Retirement Care Associates Inc. said yesterday that it planned to acquire the Newcare Health Corporation, an operator of nursing homes, for about $31.8 million in stock.
Retirement Care, based in Atlanta, said it would acquire Newcare for 2.65 million shares.
Retirement Care's stock was unchanged yesterday at $11.75 in Nasdaq trading.
Retirement Care said the combined company would have more than $200 million in annual revenues.
Retirement Care owns or operates 75 nursing homes and retirement centers in Georgia, Florida, Alabama, Tennessee, South Carolina and Virginia.
Newcare, based in Largo, Fla., owns or leases nursing homes in Florida and Georgia and has annual revenues of about $50 million.


MK RAIL DROPS EFFORTS TO SOLICIT PURCHASE BID
The MK Rail Corporation said yesterday that it had dropped its efforts to solicit bids for the purchase of the company.
MK Rail's stock fell to a new 52-week low after the announcement, touching $3.875.
It closed at $4.125, down 87.5 cents in Nasdaq trading.
Since its announcement on June 28 that it was seeking offers to purchase the entire company, it has not received any offers that a committee of independent directors deems adequate.
MK Rail manufactures locomotive component parts, provides fleet maintenance and overhauls locomotives.
Pittsburgh-based MK and its largest shareholder, the Morrison Knudsen Corporation, have struggled with cost overruns and delays on contracts to build locomotives and transit cars.


Laporte Stock Falls On Low Profit Estimate
Shares in Laporte P.L.C. plunged 22 percent yesterday after the company, Britain's fourth-largest chemical maker, warned that 1995 pretax profits before  exceptional charges would drop 10 percent.
The company also said it would take an exceptional charge of L85 million ($130 million) in 1995 to close sites, cut  jobs and write down assets.
Shares plunged 169 pence, to 614, in London.
Laporte said it encountered "a downturn in the second half," particularly in chemicals it sells to the construction and bulk polymer industries.


TEXACO IS SET TO REDUCE 4TH-PERIOD EARNINGS
Texaco Inc. will reduce its fourth-quarter earnings by about $640 million after adopting new accounting standards, the oil company said yesterday.
The company said that to comply with the provisions of the rule, which dictates how  soon companies record lower asset values, it would restate operating results for the first three quarters of 1995.
About 75 percent of the fourth-quarter charge  being taken by Texaco reflects the write-down of certain producing properties in the United States.
The remaining 25 percent covers write-downs for assets that are scheduled for disposal.
Texaco reported income from continuing operations for the fourth quarter of 1994 of $381 million, or $1.42 a share.


Indians Avoid Arbitration With Nagy
The Cleveland Indians, on a roll, signed another of their key players yesterday.
One day after reaching agreement with five players, including a new first baseman, JULIO FRANCO, the Indians erased CHARLES NAGY from the list of players eligible for salary arbitration.
Nagy, who had a 16-6 record last season, agreed to a two-year, $6.85 million  contract with a club option for a third year.
JAIME NAVARRO, a free agent, accepted the Chicago Cubs' salary arbitration offer, then agreed to a contract that will pay him $3.4 million for next season.
The deal also includes options for 1997 (Navarro's) and 1998 (mutual).
Navarro had a 14-6 record last season.


Blue-Chip Issues Off a Bit, But Technology Stocks Rise
Stock prices were mixed yesterday in lackluster trading, amid indications that the economy was continuing to lose momentum.
Blue chips fell, while computing issues led the broader market higher.
"There has been a definite shift in the mood of the equity market," said E. Wayne Nordberg, equity partner of Lord Abbett &amp; Company.
"You've got a lot of nervous holders out there looking for the slightest hole in the dike to run for cover."


Making Light With History
They made the oddest of American political couples: the California pol with a gut suspicion of intellectuals and the immigrant academic given to quoting Metternich; the despiser of Republican liberals and the creature of Nelson Rockefeller; the President who pursued vendettas and the diplomat who knew how to court enemies; the driven hick and the worldly maneuverer.
They could have been grist for Henry James.
But "Kissinger and Nixon," tomorrow night's unflattering docudrama, also gets at the similarities of these two adroit players on the world stage and in the closets of power.
As captured or created by Beau Bridges and Ron Silver, both Richard M. Nixon and Henry A. Kissinger possessed outsize egos accompanied by large doses of paranoia, and both were shifty enough to spot the shiftiness in the other.


World News Briefs;Jordan Identifies Arms Bound for Iraq as Russian
Missile parts being smuggled to Iraq that were intercepted by Jordanian authorities last month were Russian-made guidance components valued at $25 million, a senior Jordanian official said today.
The Jordanian attributed his information to the United Nations commission that is overseeing the elimination of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction.
A United Nations official in New York declined to give details of the goods but said they were part of an "ongoing pattern of procurement" of weapons that Iraq  is banned from having.


More L.I.E., Fewer Trees?
A state plan to expand the Long Island Expressway has been criticized by Parks Department officials, who contend that the project will damage wooded areas in and around Alley Pond Park.
Marc A. Matsil, chief of the Natural Resources Group at the Parks Department, said the proposed expansion of the expressway from Exit 30 in Douglaston to Exit 64 in Medford, in Suffolk County, would cut into an area northwest of Exit  30 known as the Tulip Tree Trail, a section of Alley Pond Park that is home to some of the city's oldest tulip trees.


Philip Morris Responds To Memo
Philip Morris USA, the nation's largest tobacco company, moved quickly on Friday to limit fallout from the disclosure of a company memorandum that accepts without question the claim that the main reason people smoke is to get nicotine  into their bodies.
The issue of whether cigarettes are essentially a delivery system for nicotine is at the heart of the Food and Drug Administration's current proposal to regulate nicotine as a drug.
Philip Morris and other tobacco companies have long maintained that a yen for nicotine is just one of the reasons people smoke, the others including taste, social habits and oral satisfaction.


NEW JERSEY VOICES
I know I can't end employment discrimination single-handedly, but government should set an example of inclusiveness for others to follow." GOVERNOR WHITMAN at a conference of affirmative-action officers at Trenton State College
"On the one hand, she preaches diversity and inclusion; on the other, her layoff programs hurt the people she proposes to help." BOB PURSELL area director, Communications Workers of America.


No Headline
I am convinced without reservation that I can best affect the social, economic and political change in the broader capacity that the N.A.A.C.P. represents." -- KWEISI MFUME who is stepping down as chairman of  the Congressional Black Caucus to become the head of the N.A.A.C.P. [36:4.]


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
ERIC DOLPHY: 'THE COMPLETE PRESTIGE RECORDINGS' Milestone; nine CD's ($140)


NUMBER THEORY
In his discussion of "the Number," John Tierney has hit a raw nerve and comes close to what really makes the rich different from you and me (The Big City: "Number Theory," Nov. 19).
You can be certain that if Bill Gates, Ronald Perelman, Michael Milken and Henry Kravis ever got together at a cocktail party, the one thing they would definitely not be discussing would be "the Number."


Gwin Carter, Matthew Barr
Gwin Dalton Carter, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Carter of Linville, N.C., was married yesterday to Matthew Charles Barr, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald J. Barr of Old Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Leighton Ford, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Chapel-by-the-Sea on Captiva Island, Fla.
The Rev.
John Smyth, a Roman Catholic priest, participated.
The couple work at Sports Illustrated magazine in New York, she as a special  events coordinator in the sports marketing and promotion division, and he as publishing director of SI Presents, the division for annual, preview and special issues.


I'M BACK
I don't know if Donald J. Trump's About Men column "I'm Back" (Nov. 19) was meant to be taken tongue in cheek, but I certainly hope so.
I'm drawn to reading about him not so much for his accomplishments but for his extraordinary chutzpah.
His column did not disappoint.


One-Stop Permit Shopping Keeps Frigidaire in the State
Like most Northeastern states, New Jersey has lost manufacturing jobs by the  thousands in recent years.
But the Frigidaire Company, which makes 5,000 air conditioners and nearly 1,000 de humidifiers a day in Edison, seems to be settled here for the time being.
The company, which employs 1,600, is remaining in its plant on Route 27 in part because of the state's new "one-stop shopping" policy for operating and environmental permits.
Last week, Governor Whitman awarded the company a facility-wide permit, which will enable the plant, which has been in operation since 1952, to continue for five years.


A Spanish Splurge
To the Editor: I was thrilled to see Penelope Casas' article "Fish-Loving Madrid" (Oct. 1) four days before leaving on our first trip to Spain.
Our dinner splurge was to be a visit to La Trainera.
If this is one of the best that Madrid has to offer, it's time for a culinary revolution.
We began with the recommended Iberian ham.
What we received for our $19 was a plate of thinly sliced greasy, leather ham.
The shrimp in olive oil was significantly better.
My entree was a scallop dish that had three  (yes, three) medium-size scallops.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
THE JACKSON FIVE: 'SOULSATION!' Motown; four CD's ($60)


I'M BACK
I don't know if Donald J. Trump's About Men column "I'm Back" (Nov. 19) was meant to be taken tongue in cheek, but I certainly hope so.
I'm drawn to reading about him not so much for his accomplishments but for his extraordinary chutzpah.
His column did not disappoint.


Small Broadcasters Are Losing in Congress
To the Editor:
While I agree with Barry Diller (Op-Ed, Dec. 4) that the telecommunications bill before Congress is not serving the public interest in programming, I am more concerned that its language will eliminate small, local and minority broadcasters.


Jurors Deliberate In a Child Sex Case
A jury on Friday began deliberations in the case of a Pentecostal minister and his wife who are accused of raping children.
In closing arguments in Douglas County Superior Court, defense lawyers asserted that an "unholy alliance" of police officers, state child-protection workers and others had sided against the couple, Robert and Connie Roberson.


Light at End of Hotel Tunnel? No, a Fight at Its Beginning
In the late 1980's, Hank Sopher bought a sliver of vacant land on Houston Street from Greene to Mercer Streets to build a 78-room hotel.
But investors were scared away by a sagging real estate market and the project's diminutive size.
So in 1992 he bought an equally slender property, across Greene Street, to accommodate another 80 rooms.
This time, investors feared that twin hotels, separated by a street, would be inconvenient for guests and "would also present practical problems in terms of security and services," Mr.
Sopher said.


Giuliani and Bratton See Racism in Harlem Fire
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said yesterday that the black gunman-arsonist who killed seven people and himself in  a fiery attack on a Jewish-owned clothing store in Harlem on Friday had apparently been motivated by racism.


Turning Back the Clock Is a Waste of Time
It is a true story that a certain child was upset because his parents had to  go out one evening and were preparing to leave him with a baby sitter.
So the little boy crawled onto a chair and pushed the big hand on the wall clock back two or three hours, so mom and dad would not leave yet.
It is also a true story that some New Jersey state legislators believe they have a once-and-for-all solution to the decades-old school-financing lawsuit, which is a consequence of the State Constitution's requirement that all children be assured a "thorough and efficient" education.
They want to amend the constitution to take out "thorough and efficient."


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
TOM PETTY AND THE HEARTBREAKERS: 'PLAYBACK' MCA; six CD's ($80)


In Defense of John Madden And His Heartfelt Intensity
To the Editor:
In your Nov. 26 article "At the Mike With the Guru of Glib," Marty Glickman comments that John Madden talks too much, adding that he is "terrific -- but I can take him for only one quarter."


Hear the Beat of a Subway Feat on 42d Street


All That Glitters
It's not exactly the classic profile of an international jewel thief: a 19-year-old airport worker who lives with his parents in Queens, keeps a pet iguana and spends all his money on video games.
But last week Gilbert Terrero, a baggage handler at Kennedy International Airport, was accused of pulling off a caper that sent scores of investigators scrambling in London and New York.
Federal investigators said he stole half a million dollars worth of diamonds from Sarah, the Duchess of York.


NUMBER THEORY
Was Tierney trying to make New York taxpayers feel like suckers?
Most of us do not have the luxury of determining "the Number." Most of us try to figure out which bill to put off paying until next month.


The Aymara Trail
To the Editor: "The Island of the Incas" (Oct. 22) recalled our own visit of  several years ago to the vicinity of Lake Titicaca.
We would like to suggest some other important sites that will enhance a traveler's understanding of the Aymara Indians.
The archeological site of Tiwa naku, only 20 miles from the Bolivian side of  the lake, was a large ceremonial site from 1600 B.C. to A.D. 1200.
A boat ride on Lake Titicaca can take you to the 400-year-old cathedral, which houses the Black Madonna of Copacabana.
A visit to this shrine conveys the influence of the early Spanish colonists on the Aymara.


Ms. Bakewell, Mr. Woodward
Ann Elizabeth Bakewell, a daughter of Elsie-Ives and Henry Palmer Bakewell Jr., of Old Saybrook, Conn., was married yesterday to Gordon Howland Woodward, a son of Diane and John Hall Woodward of Pottstown, Pa.
The Rev.
Dr.
Charles R. Colwell performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of St.
Barnabas in Irvington-on-Hudson, N.Y.
Mrs.
Woodward, 27, is the associate director of admissions and financial aid  at the Masters School in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University and received a master's degree in public administration from Rutgers  University.
Her father is the head of the Towed Arrays Division of the Naval Underseas Weapons Center in New London, Conn.


Sunday, December 10, 1996: EN POINTE;Masters of Fantasy
Halloween is 326 days away, but a spectacular opportunity presents itself at  Sotheby's in London this Thursday when the largest private collection of Ballet  Russes costumes goes on the auction block.
Most of these magnificent outfits may be a bit pricey for neighborhood masquerading -- this gold lame sea monster designed by the Russian artist Natalia Gontcharova in 1916 is expected to fetch $13,000 -- but as pure art they may be bargains.
The 100 exotic items were assembled by George Howard, the late chairman of the BBC, in the 1960's and 70's, and include work by Henri Matisse, Leon Bakst and Georges Braque.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
'THAT'S ENTERTAINMENT: THE ULTIMATE ANTHOLOGY OF MGM MUSICALS' Rhino; six CD's ($90)


Light at End of Hotel Tunnel? No, a Fight at Its Beginning
In the late 1980's, Hank Sopher bought a sliver of vacant land on Houston Street from Greene to Mercer Streets to build a 78-room hotel.
But investors were scared away by a sagging real estate market and the project's diminutive size.
So in 1992 he bought an equally slender property, across Greene Street, to accommodate another 80 rooms.
This time, investors feared that twin hotels, separated by a street, would be inconvenient for guests and "would also present practical problems in terms of security and services," Mr.
Sopher said.


Investigation Targets Tests For Abortions
The F.B.I. is investigating whether the state's largest chain of abortion clinics has rigged ultrasound tests to convince clients they need riskier -- and more expensive -- abortions, The Boston Globe reported today.
The F.B.I. and Brookline police searched the Brookline office of Repro Associates on Nov. 30, seizing medical records and documents as part of an ongoing criminal investigation of the clinic owner, Dr.
Howard J. Silverman, the newspaper said, citing people it did not identify.


Method &amp; Madness;Racing to the Top
SCIENCE HAS SO many wins and losses, fumbles and fist fights, that one often  wonders why it doesn't enjoy the following of a major sport.
Of course, people with a taste for watching boxers slug each other insensate may not appreciate the somewhat more recondite slugfests between paleoanthropologists.
But scientists cannot reasonably blame the public for lack of fans: much of the fault lies with scientists themselves and the way they play the game.
That inattention to spectators' needs is a pity since all manner of exciting  races are shaping up: the mystery of the mind, the age of the universe, the origin of humankind, the engine of plate tectonics, the molecular record of evolution.
Just a glance at what is drolly called the scientific literature shows what is wrong.
Scientific journals are where scientists report new discoveries, cut up rivals and lay discreetly phrased claims to the next Nobel Prize.
Sounds like fun, right?
But it's literature only in Oscar Wilde's sense:  "The difference between journalism and literature is that journalism is unreadable and literature is unread."


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
VELVET UNDERGROUND: 'PEEL SLOWLY AND SEE' Polydor; five CD's ($55) Punk and alternative rock start here with the Velvet Underground's primal pulse  and drone, unflinching lyrics, bristling noise and underlying faith in rock-and-roll.
"Peel Slowly and See" includes the four Velvet Underground albums released from 1967 to 1970, surrounded by demo tapes, outtakes and live recordings, some newly unearthed.


Bribery Charge Stains Image Of Tatou
Tatou opened in 1990 at the old Versailles club, where Desi Arnaz once led the band, and soon won its own reputation as an elegant restaurant, nightspot and celebrity hangout.
During the 1992 Democratic convention, it showcased the internationally known saxophonist Bill Clinton.
But Tatou's reputation got an unexpected jolt shortly before dawn on Nov. 29.
A fight broke out, and the police said that the assault suspect they arrested told them he had been drinking in Tatou -- and was only 20.
They were issuing the club a summons for serving alcohol to a minor when, the officers said, a club manager, Michael Pappalardo of Queens, offered them money not to.
A captain from the 17th Precinct station house was called, ostensibly to seal the deal.
But he was wired with a tape recorder.
The police said Mr.
Pappalardo handed over $4,000, and was arrested on three counts of bribery.


Corrections
Two picture captions last Sunday, with an article about the selection of Tibetan lamas, were reversed.
The picture on the left showed Gyaincain Norbu, the Chinese Government's choice for Dalai Lama.
At the right was Gedhun Choekyi  Nyima, who had been selected for the same office by a monastic search committee.


WHAT A LOT OF MONEY CAN BUY
Mitchell Wolfson Jr. is that rare person with both a grand vision and the ability to share his insights on a massive scale in his Wolfsonian museum.
What  your article so cavalierly calls "junk," Wolfson sees as the very experience of  culture.
He understands the relationship of art to propaganda, that style can seduce.


Darinka Novitovic, Andrew Chase
FRIENDS describe Darinka Novitovic, an artist and a hostess at Restaurant Florent in Greenwich Village, as a downtown Babe Paley.
Her closet is filled with color-coordinated haute couture from the 1960's; she often wears gloves, occasionally long enough to serve as protective sleeves for golf clubs; her pocketbook always matches her shoes; she never swears.
As the late Mrs.
Paley was, she is a muse to many people, including the artist Alex Katz, who has a series of paintings titled "Views of Darinka."


Guernica Is Freed
Pablo Picasso's graphic portrayal of the Nazi bombing of the Basque town that is its namesake can now be seen more clearly by visitors to the Reina Sofia Art  Museum in Madrid.
From 1981, when "Guernica" was returned to Spain from the Museum of Modern Art in New York, until last month, the painting was displayed behind a thick shield to prevent its being vandalized or damaged.
Kept out of Spain until 1981 by Picasso's insistence that it not be shown there until democracy was restored, the painting is a potent political symbol.
Now curators  have had the shield removed.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
VARIOUS ARTISTS: 'DEF JAM -- THE FIRST 10 YEARS' Def Jam/Polygram, four CD's ($50)


Gift Alert: Time Is Short
The search for the perfect holiday gift can be a harrowing experience.
Here are some ideas -- from reasonably priced to very expensive -- to help you finish up.
Compiled by Anita M. Samuels.


100 Nations Move to Save Ozone Shield
Representatives of more than 100 governments agreed last week to phase out developed countries' production of methyl bromide, an agricultural pesticide that had been the only industrial chemical responsible for weakening the earth's protective ozone shield not previously designated for elimination.
The ozone layer prevents harmful ultraviolet rays from reaching the earth.
The rays can cause skin cancer and cataracts, and can damage immune systems and natural ecosystems.
Without the shield, plants and animals could not exist on land.


Accidental Witnesses to History
IF "Sheila's Day" is not a just-so re-creation of a seminal 1989 Crossroads Theater Company production, let it be a recollection of old glory, waned but still heady.
Every Thursday, 11 women, in what they intone as a gathering of spirits, honor their forebears, "the Sheilas of this world," Sheila being the code name for domestic workers so lowly that no one bothers to learn their real names.


Woeful '95 Leads U.S. Charities to Introspection
This year has been a tough one for charities and other nonprofit organizations, from arts enterprises to antipoverty groups to universities.
Many face sharp budget cuts.
They have been battling Congressional efforts to limit their lobbying.
And they have suffered collective embarrassment over the Foundation for New Era Philanthropy, a Ponzi scheme that fooled even some sophisticated financial executives, and over the conviction of William Aramony, former chief executive of United Way of America, for fraudulent use of  charitable funds.


Travel Advisory;A Geographic Exhibit Aimed at Children
An interactive exhibition designed to help prepare children for an increasingly global society is on view at the National Geographic Society's Explorers Hall in Washington.
Organized by the Smithsonian Institution Traveling Exhibition Service and the society, "Earth 2U, Exploring Geography" makes connections between people, places and the environment by incorporating education and entertainment into high-tech computer displays and hands-on activities.
The major exhibition areas focus on the adventure of exploration, geographers' tools and techniques,  the global origins of everyday things, mysteries behind landscapes and land forms, the impact of natural forces and the study of the earth's burgeoning population.


Landscapers' Work Pattern Helps Keep Them Around
To the Editor:
Leaf blower noise may not last long in Fair Lawn, but it does in Montclair and other high-income communities where as many as one out of seven homes use a  landscaping services ("The Noise of the Blowers Doesn't Last Very Long," Letters, Dec. 3).
What the writer fails to take into account is the work pattern of landscaping companies.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Fatal Attraction
THE STALKING OF KRISTIN A Father Investigates the Murder of His Daughter.
By George Lardner Jr. 340 pp.
New York: The Atlantic Monthly Press. $23.


Address to Aid Heritage Commission
I was impressed by "U.S. Prods to Reclaim Holocaust Cemeteries" [Nov. 26] and the work of Lee Seeman.
However, I was disappointed by the failure to include the address of the Commission for the Preservation of America's Heritage Abroad.
SYLVIA GROSSMAN Roslyn


Adventures in Math
To the Editor:
In his review of Morton N. Cohen's "Lewis Carroll: A Biography" (Nov. 12), Peter Ackroyd states that as a mathematician Charles Dodgson "remains . . . a significant theorist within that discipline." No evidence is presented for that  judgment.


Camby Comes Up Big In UMass's Pivotal Play
The two best players on the floor were going to be Danya Abrams, the 6-foot-7-inch, 265-pound Boston College captain who represents a loose cannon ball on a basketball court, and Marcus Camby, the 6-foot-11-inch titan for Massachusetts.
Everyone knew they were the best when this heralded match began, the first college basketball game in the new Fleet Center, which was filled by 18,974 spectators who had paid $50 and $35 for tickets.


HOW MUCH INEQUALITY CAN A DEMOCRACY TAKE?
Thurow surprisingly fails to mention the vital role that unions played in distributing wealth, by helping to develop the middle class in this country.
It's not just coincidence that the gap between rich and poor is growing greater  today precisely at a time when unions are getting weaker.


Accidental Witnesses to History
IF "Sheila's Day" is not a just-so re-creation of a seminal 1989 Crossroads Theater Company production, let it be a recollection of old glory, waned but still heady.
Every Thursday, 11 women, in what they intone as a gathering of spirits, honor their forebears, "the Sheilas of this world," Sheila being the code name for domestic workers so lowly that no one bothers to learn their real names.


Travel Advisory;New Nonstop Flights Going to Mexico
Two United States airlines are expanding their service to Mexico.
Trans World Airlines, (800) 221-2000, has recently begun flying nonstop between St.
Louis and Mexico City.
Flights using McDonnell Douglas 83 aircraft will depart St.
Louis International Airport on Thursday to Sunday at 10:20 P.M.  and arrive in Mexico City at 2 A.M.
Northbound flights will depart Mexico City on Friday to Monday at 3 A.M. and arrive St.
Louis at 6:25 A.M.
The round trip fare starts at $228, when purchased at least seven days in advance.
A passenger must stay over Saturday night.


Address to Aid Heritage Commission
Thank you for "U.S. Prods to Reclaim Holocaust Cemeteries. If it weren't for  human beings like Lee Seeman and Dr. David Rudolph, ideals would die and the flames of the Holocaust would be extinguished.
We cannot be expected to keep quiet about the new dark voices that lament Adolf Hitler's "unfinished" goal.
Some shout this aloud, some utilize what we call the media.
Of course, today we live in a technological era of great progress and in 1995 the tactics are different.
However the objective is the same as in 1940.


Modell Faces Hurdles Before Browns Move
The Browns' owner, Art Modell, could not have anticipated the furor his decision to move his team from Cleveland to Baltimore would cause.
Ultimately, it could work against him when his fellow team owners meet in Atlanta on Jan. 17 to vote on the relocation.
Since he announced the move on Nov. 6, Browns fans have been up in arms.
Politicians from City Hall to Congress are looking for ways to keep the Browns from moving and want to stamp out rampant franshise relocations in the National  Football League.


Global Thinkers Urged to Bring Some Money Home
STEVE LORENZEN took his first trip abroad in 1957, when his parents drove the family to Mexico City for a vacation.
Since then, Mr.
Lorenzen, now 49, has returned to Mexico dozens of times, and has visited Africa, Europe and Central America.
In fact, foreign lands have become a field of study for him.
"I have a longstanding interest in the former Soviet Union and in Central and Eastern Europe," Mr.
Lorenzen said.
An economist at the Texas Department of Human Services, he has also done research on how people eke out a living in the slums  outside Mexico City, and he continues to stay in touch with Mexican friends.


In the Region: Westchester;White Plains Salutes the State's Reprieve for Macy's
THIS city's Mayor and business leaders are hailing the decision last month to reverse an antitrust agreement that had put Macy's, this city's oldest department store, on a list of stores that had to shut down.
The agreement was a result of the merger of Federated Department Stores and R.H.
Macy &amp; Company last year.
"We reviewed the competitive situation, and drew up a modified package," said Stephen Houck, assistant attorney general in charge of the antitrust bureau of the New York State Attorney General's office.
"Macy's in White Plains was removed from the list because we believe there's a significant competitive situation in the city."


Corrections
An article in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday about a dispute over whether a naked statue of Zeus at the Queens Museum of Art should be displayed during a memorial service for the slain Israeli Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, misstated the role of the Metropolitan Museum.
The Metropolitan lent the statue  to the Queens Museum, but was not involved in the decision to leave the statue undraped and move the memorial service to another part of the museum.


Last of the Big-Time Rockefellers
IT has been a rough year for the standard-bearer of one of the most fabled families in American history.
Just as David Rockefeller was solidifying his role as the business dynasty's  third-generation patriarch, two of the proudest symbols of the Rockefeller name  suffered embarrassing blows to their prestige.


Shaw Warmed Over Before a Tour
IS this the B group?" a member of the audience wondered out loud after the Acting Company's opening night at the George Street Playhouse. The question could have been ingenuous or incisive.
Whatever, it was understandable but unsettling, given the evening's lumbering display of George Bernard Shaw's "Arms and the Man." And the question was, alas, answerable.
No, this was not the B group.
The Acting Company has 12 members; 7 are in the play at George Street.
One is a playhouse intern.


Yankees' Tactics Are Raising Eyebrows
In a remake of "Frankenstein Meets Dracula," the George Steinbrenner Reign of Error meets the George Steinbrenner Reign of Terror.
Based on the behavior of Steinbrenner's baseball employees and the observations of officials of other clubs, agents and other people involved with  the Yankees, the principal owner, in his iron-fisted rule and ham-handed decisions, is worse than ever, if that's possible.


THE RICH
The last thing that we of the middle class (yes, the ones who need two incomes to stand still) need is another paean to Newt Gingrich and the rest of the current Congress.
I do not care that Bo Polk has a place in the mountains.
Michael Eisner may make good business decisions, but no one deserves $200 million a year, especially when we cannot find the political courage to raise the minimum wage to a livable level.
In the future, please spare us gold-plated, barrel-vaulted-ceilinged bathrooms.
I have seen the great churches of Europe, built to the glory of a higher power.
I do not care to see the temples of the wealthy, built to the glory of their own egos.


Death on 125th Street: The Victims;A Cross-Section of the City's Everyday People
The gunman had burst in and opened fire, yet none of the seven had been hit.
Spared, several ran in fear to the back of the store.
Others, hearing the gunfire above, took cover in the basement.
But the flight to what they believed  was safety was an awful mistake.
The gunman had set fire to the store.
Those who were shot, it turned out, were the lucky ones and fled with their lives; none of the seven who dodged gunfire survived.
Their oxygen was stolen by the smoke of the fire, their lives gone moments later.


Look Left for a Few Good Sinners!
WHEN the Luntz Research Companies, court pollsters to the Republican Revolution, issued the damning results of a survey on the behavior of political  liberals last month, some people dismissed it as a publicity gimmick.
Republicans have always known in their hearts that liberals were a tawdry lot, after all.
Who could possibly be interested in statistical evidence to support it?
Who? Well, for starters. . . .


When Italian Dishes Defy Expectations
IT is no accident that the signature dish at Piccolo Arancio in Farmington features oranges; the restaurant's name, after all, means little orange tree.
The dish is ravioli all' arancia, so heavenly it should be required eating for anyone to whom it is available.
Five oversize, al dente pasta squares, stuffed with spinach, ricotta and orange rind, are surrounded by a fragrant, luminous sauce made with orange, butter, a tease of sage leaves and parmigiano reggiano cheese.
This was not Piccolo Arancio's only stellar performer, just its most original.
The medium- small menu has an earthy charm, surprising because the austere decor led us to expect a more formal, traditional menu.


Honduras Trying to Identify Disease That Kills Infants
The baffled health authorities here are struggling to identify and combat a mysterious disease that has apparently afflicted only infants, often killing them in a matter of hours, in the six weeks since it suddenly appeared in Honduras.
At least 10 children under the age of 12 months have died of the disease, whose origins remain unknown.
The Ministry of Health has determined that an orally transmitted bacterial infection was the cause of death, and has sent material from three autopsies to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  in Atlanta in an effort to isolate what Honduran health officials describe as a  particularly aggressive "mutant" micro-organism.


Liberties;Send in the Clones
My suspicions were overpowering. I had to find out the truth.
So I went to the White House press room and looked into the perfectly green eyes of the perfectly elegant NBC correspondent.


INSIDE
INVESTING IT /Page 4/ When employees exercise stock options, they sometimes all sell the stock at the  same time, which can depress the price.
One strategy that can help.
By Patrice Duggan Samuels.


Making A Co-op A Condo
CONVERTING a co-op building into a condominium can be done -- but it isn't easy.
It takes time, money, planning and near-perfect cooperation among shareholders.
But these days a lot of people are interested in seeing whether they can do it.
"I think people see it as a way to increase values," said Ronni Lynn Arougheti, president of Heron Management in Manhattan.
"Generally, condos do sell for more."


Not Some Brainless Beauty
LOOKING FOR GATSBY My Life.
By Faye Dunaway with Betsy Sharkey.
Illustrated. 416 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.


Stargazers Seeking Clearer Skies as Light Pollution Limits Visibility
SUSAN FARRELL'S great-grandmother called her a "moona-gazer" and feared that  her love of perusing the night skies would make her crazy.
It was the mid-1950's in the Canarsie section of Brooklyn, and Susan was fascinated with the Milky Way galaxy.


Teller Machine Fees Going Up for Customers Who Use Banks Other ThanTheir Own
The cost of getting cash from an automated teller machine is likely to rise sharply for many people under rules being adopted by the banking industry.
Ninety percent of banks already charge a fee, averaging $1.10 a transaction,  to at least some customers when they use a machine owned by another bank.
Now people face a second charge -- an access fee from the bank whose machine they are using.


A Pacific Island Nation Is Stripped of Everything
Even the most diligent map-maker might be excused for overlooking this tiny wind-buffeted island -- a spit of sand and coral hidden in an obscure stretch of the western Pacific, a place literally close to nowhere.
Nauru (pronounced NAH-roo) is the world's smallest and most isolated republic.
The island has an area of eight square miles, about a third the size of Manhattan, and it is so remote that the nearest island of any size is hundreds of miles away.


Corrections
The Your Home column on Nov. 12, about regulations governing rentals to families with children, misstated the protection provided by current laws in New York.
The law that applies most broadly, the New York State Human Rights Law, exempts one- and two-family owner-occupied homes and certain dwellings reserved  exclusively for residents 55 years or older.


Day for U.C.L.A. and Villanova's Big Men
The obstacle course had a name: Jelani McCoy.
He turned 18 three days ago.
He enrolled in college three months ago, and he  had three more blocked shots today than any player in U.C.L.A. history.


WHAT A LOT OF MONEY CAN BUY
I sure missed your "Sunday" page.
However, Passell's article made up for it.
Every item was interesting.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 26 about a new revival of the blues misspelled the surname and misstated the sex of one author of a biography of the singer Charley Patton.
The author is a man, Gayle Dean Wardlow, not Wardlaw.


Wanted: A New Salt Mine;One-Industry Town Presses for State Aid
Just before dawn on March 12, 1994, an earthquake rumbled across the gentle slopes and rich flood plains of the Genesee River Valley here, 30 miles south of Rochester.
The tremor, registering 3.6 on the Richter scale, did not come from a natural shift in a fault; it was the sound of the largest salt mine in the Americas dying.


Take the Money and Walk? How to Decide
A buyout offer is a bribe to leave.
Compared with outright dismissal or a companywide pay cut, it is more humane, but more expensive for the company.
Still, a buyout helps insure that workers who stay are not so demoralized by  the exodus that productivity is harmed.
Shabby treatment of those who leave guarantees poor morale, benefits consultants say.


Mason Shift: Sixth Man to Iron Man
It was May 23.
Anthony Mason, clad all in black, opened the drawer beneath his locker-room cubicle at Madison Square Garden.
He picked up his belongings, reached around his neck and carefully fastened the clasp on his gold rope.
He then politely answered a deluge of questions about his future in New York and began the summer unsure of anything.
The last game of the season, and the Knicks were suddenly finished.
Patrick Ewing had missed, Reggie Miller had kissed midcourt and Anthony Mason, who had played out his contract, was free to go.


Recitals, Seasonal And More
THE South Congregational Church in Hartford will once again be the scene this week of a "Music for Christmas" pageant.
Richard Donohue has designed the pageants for the last two decades and "with  each ensuing year, the concept grows and deepens in thought," said Pamela Hill,  the music committee chairwoman.
"Within this darkest part of the year, the dramatic unfolding of Christ's birth, in choral song, poetry and instrumental music from the fourth to the 20th centuries, brings light, life, beauty and joy  into all of our hearts."


Accord On Budget Won't End The Debate
THERE is a deep and impatient hunger among much of the Washington establishment for a budget deal.
Why, they ask, can't the sensible centrists in  each party hunker down in some back room of the Capitol, split the difference on Medicaid, Medicare and the size of the tax cut, find a suitable fudge on the differing economic assumptions and let the Government get back to business?
It is, after all, the way things are usually done, and it is still considered a reasonably likely outcome of the budget war of 1995.
But there is another school of thought: that at least some of the differences between the two parties are too profound for the closed-door politesse of budget summitry; that these differences ought to be taken to the voters in 1996, and that the unresolved philosophical debate of the 1980's, which was always finessed, ought to be rejoined.


The Outer Limits Of Cable Create A Comfort Zone
AT FIRST, IT LOOKS AS IF A tiny flying saucer has appeared in the lower right corner of the screen.
At second glance, the object turns out to be something almost as odd: a ringed planet, the logo of the Sci-Fi Channel, where endless reruns of "The Twilight Zone," "She-Wolf of London" and "Tales From the Darkside" make it possible to watch television all day and most of the night without encountering one normal human being.
For some of us, of course, cooking is a kind of science fiction, so those identifying logos really help while flipping channels.
When the words TV Food Network appear beneath a miniature serving cover, you have landed in the home of shows like "Chef du Jour" (it's not about cannibalism but has a different guest  chef each day) and "How to Boil Water" (which recently advanced to cooking with  tofu).
For relief from all that instruction, look for the block letters that spell out Cartoon Network, a fantasy land of wall-to-wall cartoons, most of them much older than their viewers.


Books in Brief: FICTION
FAULT LINES By Anne Rivers Siddons. HarperCollins, $24.


The Moor's Pavane


A Zillion Points of Light
CHARLES CAUCCI, a South Jersey designer of Christmas decor, says he misses "the good old days of Atlantic City, when the casinos were out to impress each other and the bottom line was on the bottom."
The good days for Mr.
Caucci (pronounced KOO-chee), 45, who, with his brother Robert, owns Tom's Christmas World in McKee City, were in the first decade of legalized gambling, when high rollers were packing the Boardwalk and casinos celebrated Christmas in high style.


MARKET TIMING
Tuesday


Books in Brief: NONFICTION;Hot Type
Many people already know everything there is to know about the contents of Howard Stern's MISS AMERICA (Regan Books, $27.50), the cover of which shows Mr.
Stern in drag on the front and in a tuxedo hobnobbing with O. J. Simpson on the  back.
Inside, the jacket tells us, you'll find details of Mr.
Stern's secret meeting with Michael Jackson and his pact with Adolf Hitler, as well as 40 pictures of naked breasts, so there is little point in discussing the literary merits here.
But what readers may take for granted is the book's design, a complex melange of typographic hierarchies.
It is a remarkable display of deconstructive, post-structural, post-modern experimentation -- or to put it simply for the layman, words explode across the page.
The text and binding were  designed by Chip Kidd and Nina Gaskin; the jacket and the inserted color section were designed by Jack Heller (no relation) and Ralph Cirella.
Each of the 482 pages is a distinct design experience.
But this kind of expressive typography is not new.
In 1918 Guillaume Apollinaire published an antiwar poem, "Il Pleut," with lines of type falling down the page simulating a rainstorm; in 1914 F. T. Marinetti wrote and designed the Futurist book "Zang Tumb Tuuuum," using discordant typefaces designed to visually approximate the sounds that he described in words; and in 1967 Quentin Fiore gave a visual voice to Marshall McLuhan's "Medium Is the Massage" through a rebuslike integration of word and image complemented by shifts in typographic size and weight.
In 1970 Mr.
Fiore brought the same kinetic type and page design to Jerry Rubin's book "Do It!," to which "Miss America" owes a distinct debt.
Unfortunately, "Miss America" really  doesn't go as far as some of these books.
While the design shouts and screams, by the standards of other 20th-century books it is actually pretty timid.
STEVEN HELLER


Poor Little Rich Boys
PAINFULLY RICH The Outrageous Fortune and Misfortunes of the Heirs of J. Paul Getty.
By John Pearson.
Illustrated. 270 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $23.95.


Hooked on Hotels: A Confession
WHEN I was a child, my favorite place in the whole world was the Biltmore Hotel in Los Angeles.
In love with the Biltmore's coffered and gilded ceilings and grand staircases, I could spend hours mooning around its public rooms, and insisted on doing so at every possible occasion.
It was my good luck that such occasions arose fairly regularly, since the Biltmore was near the now defunct Civic Auditorium, the venue for musicals and ballets and other birthday treats.
Lunch or dinner in the hotel coffee shop, glamorous by association, was  the cherry on the whipped cream on the birthday cake.
Although I never got to stay in the Biltmore -- it was too near home -- the die was cast.
When, living in the Bay Area some years later, I was about to be married, I demanded a honeymoon in San Francisco, specifically at the St.
Francis (with its marble columns and coffered and gilded ceilings, it was as close to the Biltmore as I could get).


Bribery As a Way Of Life In Italy
Cheating the Government is such an old and popular sport in Italy that stories about fraud, graft and abuse of public office take on a certain ho-hum quality.
True, the great corruption scandals of 1992 made a big noise, bringing  down an entire political class, but since then, it has been pretty much business as usual.
Evermore investigations produce evermore evidence of wrongdoing, not just among top politicians and businessmen but also among ordinary Italians.


Hurley Guides Seton Hall's Winning Run
Seton Hall 85; Northwestern 70
Danny Hurley had 15 points and 13 assists and engineered a 23-10 second-half spurt that led Seton Hall to an 85-70 victory over Northwestern last night at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Magnet School Plans to Carry On Despite Loss of Federal Funds
For the last two years, Public School 154 has received Federal funds to support its magnet program in in arts, design and technology, which was formed in the hopes of balancing the ratio of white students to minority students.
The program proved popular with parents and students, who were treated to 30  state-of-the-art computers with laser printers and CD-ROMs, along with design equipment like a loom, a bookbinder and a poster-maker.


Word for Word/Television Sociology;The Deconstruction of Jenny And Jerry, Maury and Montel
WHAT do you call it when half a dozen neo-Nazi skinheads break chairs over Geraldo Rivera's head?
Excellent television, of course.
But valuable social-science data, too.
Even critics of "The Oprah Winfrey Show," "Jerry Springer" and their ilk concede that the programs say something profound, or profoundly disturbing, about the national character.
Unfortunately, the debate over the syndicated talk-show swamp has been all heat, no light, all politics and no social studies.
Just this week, William J. Bennett and Senators Joseph I. Lieberman and Sam Nunn unveiled a commercial urging Philip Morris and Finesse Shampoo to pull their advertising from some of  the racier talk shows.


Niantic's Way With Women in Prison
APPROACHING the grounds of the state's women's correctional institution in Niantic, a visitor is not likely to think of a prison.
The buildings, low and modern, display a sort of academic motif with contemporary arches and angles.
The Janet S. York Correctional Institution, the prison's maximum security compound, opened a year ago and visits by outsiders are not often allowed.
But a recent tour started at an expansive entryway, a corridor with polished glass, skylights and an immaculate tiled floor.
Beyond, on the prison grounds, inmates  walk by speaking softly as guards monitor their activity.


Marcos in Bid to Halt Dispersal of Swiss Funds
Imelda Marcos has asked a Los Angeles appeals court to stop a Federal judge from ordering the transfer of millions of dollars from her late husband's Swiss  accounts to victims of abuses under his Government, she said today.
A Federal court jury in Honolulu awarded the victims nearly $2 billion in damages after they won a class action suit against the former President, Ferdinand Marcos, who was found culpable for summary execution, disappearance and torture.


The Fine Art of the Furrowed Brow: Becoming Nixon and Kissinger
THERE was this guy, Henry, who was really having trouble at work.
His boss, Richard, didn't like him (wanted to dismiss him, in fact) and snubbed him by never inviting him to dinner with his family.
He had even ordered Henry's assistant, Al, to spy on Henry.
Richard sometimes made what seemed like completely off-the-wall decisions, then left Henry to explain them to the press.
He would send Henry on business trips and give him the authority to set deadlines and make agreements, then refuse to abide by them.
Worst of all, whenever Henry did a really good job on a difficult project, Richard would take  all the credit.


THE RICH
It is not often that an issue leaves me in awe, but it happened when I read your special issue on the rich.
It was difficult to know exactly where to aim my first salvo.
Did I object most to the assumption that I would be interested in "Scenes From a Synergetic Wedding," or in being bundled into the "us" that your  editors believe are so captivated by the rich?
Having lived the first 25 years of my life in England's know-your-place class structure, and having spent the last 10 out of it, I'm appalled to find myself back in a culture in which the population still has its nose pressed against the windows of wealth.
I guess an entire Magazine dedicated to how to get by on a Social Security check simply doesn't cut the mustard.
A newspaper subscription would, after all, not be on those families' lists.


Cultivating Color and Form in Winter
HOLLY berries, the holiday show-offs, take center stage at this time of year.
Yet hollies are but one of many shrubs that present a colorful December show, a fact now being taken advantage of by many landscape professionals who realize  that it is quite possible to have a four-season garden even in the Northeast.


Death in Rome
THE ALDO MORO MURDER CASE By Richard Drake.
Illustrated. 318 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. $45.
ON the morning of March 16, 1978, Aldo Moro, the leader of the Christian Democratic Party, headed off to Parliament for the inauguration of the first Italian Government to be actively supported by the Communist Party.
It was the beginning of the "historic compromise" between left and right of which Moro himself was the chief architect.
But before he could reach Parliament, a squad of Red Brigades terrorists blocked his motorcade, murdered his five bodyguards and spirited him off to a so-called people's prison in a Rome apartment.
Fifty-five days later, after the Italian Government refused to negotiate for Moro's release, the Red Brigades executed him and placed his dead body in the trunk of a car abandoned halfway between the headquarters of the Christian Democratic and Communist parties.


Favorites of a Fast Crowd
MICHAEL KORDA Editor in chief, Simon &amp; Schuster


Guilty in Mother's Slaying
A 17-year-old skinhead pleaded guilty on Thursday to killing his mother, in an agreement with prosecutors under which they will not pursue charges against him of killing his father and youngest brother.
The agreement spared the teen-ager the possibility of execution.
The youth, Bryan Freeman, was immediately sentenced to life in prison by Judge Lawrence J. Brenner.
The sentence carries no parole.


Silver Bells, Gold Cards
IT is immaculate.
A hand-carved settee by an award-winning Canadian artisan,  it is the only one of its kind in New York.
The covering is of fine wool, dyed in subdued gold and scarlet stripes.
It's a perfect addition to your child's room.
She'll love it.
And at $290, shopkeepers say it's a steal.
One catch: it's four inches long.


BEST SELLERS: December 10, 1995
Weeks This Last
On Week Week  List Fiction


Of God and Weinerville
AROUND 1 O'CLOCK IN THE MORNING ON A SUMMER SATURDAY IN 1983, ONE OF THE hottest stand-up comics in the country finished his last set at a club in Cleveland.
In keeping with the Sabbath strictures of his new-found faith, he plunged on foot into the seediest part of downtown, walking for an hour or so past hookers and strip joints and topless bars to the hotel where the club put up its headliners.
The club owner cruised alongside him in a car, chatting through the window, remarking on the dangers of the neighborhood.
Every now and  then, he asked, "Sure you don't want to get in?"
Marc Weiner had never been more sure of anything in his life.
Orthodox Jews do not use cars on the Sabbath, and Weiner, a former Hebrew-school cutup who barely squeaked through his bar mitzvah, had fallen in love with Orthodox Judaism.
Indeed, the midnight walk was only one in a succession of strange scenes in his life at the time.
In dressing rooms in Atlanta or Indianapolis, for instance, he would find himself studying Torah while trying to block out the rhythmic sound of line, laugh, line from the opening act.
Stranger scenes and far harder days were to come, as his growing faith would first dismantle his career, then nearly tear his heart in two.


Glue and the Bottom Line
To the Editor:
Seeing pictures of children in San Salvador sniffing glue ("Black Mark for a  'Good Citizen,' " Nov. 26) made me wonder if they would be in school or day-care centers instead of wandering the streets had the popular movements won in Central America.
Our Government spent billions to insure the rights of corporations and landlords to pay starvation wages, so let's not heap the sins of Washington on the head of one glue maker.


Slayings Lead Army to Look At Extremism
After a third white soldier was charged in the killing of a black couple in Fayetteville, N.C., Army officials said that they were examining whether there were any patterns of extremist activity at Fort Bragg because the three harbored Nazi flags and white supremacist literature.
Major Rivers Johnson, a spokesman for the Army's 82d Airborne Division at Fort Bragg, said in a statement on Friday that the shootings were an "isolated incident," but he acknowledged that the Division was "reviewing the units" for any evidence of "patterns of activity that are incompatible with Army policy."


What a Difference Monet Makes
Art connoisseurs may sniff all they want at crowd-pleasing blockbusters, but  museums and cities are thrilled with them.
And the dollars that rained on Chicago during the Monet retrospective demonstrates why.
By Nov. 26, when the Impressionist show at the Art Institute of Chicago closed, 965,000 people had seen its 159 paintings; the Art Institute had added 55,000 new members to its roster (53 percent more than the 103,000 it had when the show opened on July 22), and the museum estimated that by the end of the year some $5 million will have been deposited in its coffers, above and beyond the exhibition's $4.6 million cost.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN


THE RICH
It is not often that an issue leaves me in awe, but it happened when I read your special issue on the rich.
It was difficult to know exactly where to aim my first salvo.
Did I object most to the assumption that I would be interested in "Scenes From a Synergetic Wedding," or in being bundled into the "us" that your  editors believe are so captivated by the rich?
Having lived the first 25 years of my life in England's know-your-place class structure, and having spent the last 10 out of it, I'm appalled to find myself back in a culture in which the population still has its nose pressed against the windows of wealth.
I guess an entire Magazine dedicated to how to get by on a Social Security check simply doesn't cut the mustard.
A newspaper subscription would, after all, not be on those families' lists.


History Lessons
To the Sports Editor:
Ira Berkow's column suggesting the National Football League does an inadequate job of honoring its past ("Not All N.F.L. Greats Are Given Their Due," The Times, Dec. 6) drew its conclusion from comments by Fran Tarkenton, whose name has been included in N.F.L. promotional material this year more often than Emmitt Smith's and Jerry Rice's combined.
Here's the rest of the story:


Bible Is No Basis for Creating Mideast Peace;Prophecies to Fulfill
To the Editor:
Re "Promised Land?" (Op-Ed, Dec. 6): I read with interest Jack Miles's article on the question of the borders of the biblical Israel.
I have been waiting for someone to raise this point.


A Balanced Program At Amity Regional
The article ("Politically Correct? Perish the Thought!," Nov. 5) raised questions about the writing program in English and social studies classes at Amity Regional High School in Woodbridge.
We wish to assure the residents of our community that our departments provide students with a balanced program that requires considerable practice in writing.


THE RICH
The younger generation of superambitious super-rich seems to have applied a new Puritan ethic of hard work and self-deprivation toward the enlargement of personal riches. (A Puritan ethic of greed. Hmmm, not something you might find in the best-selling "Book of Virtues.")
Chained to their laptops, beepers and maximum-speed faxes, these young titans consider work their very life's breath -- although the nature of the work seems  far less important than its end: the amassing of more and more money.


Former Chess-Shop Partners at War on Thompson St.
For more than 30 years, George Frohlinde has run the Village Chess Shop at 230 Thompson Street, thriving as a half-dozen local competitors came and went.
But this fall, Mr.
Frohlinde's decade-long monopoly was shattered when his former partner, Imad Khachchan, opened the Chess Forum, directly across the street.
Not since Bobby Fischer declared his last checkmate in 1972 has the downtown  chess world been so torn asunder.
Last month, Mr.
Frohlinde filed a lawsuit in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, charging Mr.
Khachchan with violating an agreement that Mr.
Frohlinde says barred him from opening his own store within 10 blocks of the Village Chess Shop.


I Think, Therefore I Am Not a Dog
LANGUAGE AND HUMAN BEHAVIOR By Derek Bickerton. 180 pp.
Seattle: University of Washington Press. $24.95.
WHEN a dog gazes soulfully into its master's eyes, it is hard for the human not to imagine that the animal has all kinds of interesting thoughts.
If only the poor thing had language to express them.
Instinctively, pet owners around the world come down on the side of philosophers and linguists who believe in the existence of "mental ese" -- a neurological language of thought coming before spoken and written communication.
Who knows what dog musings languish in limbo for want of words that would let them resonate inside another's brain?


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
'THE MUSIC OF VIETNAM' Celestial Harmonies, Box 30122, Tucson, Ariz. 85751; three CD's ($48)


Thibault Does Well in Debut, but Rangers Achieve a Tie
Jocelyn Thibault inherited the throne abdicated by the great Patrick Roy this evening.
And, at least for one night, the 20-year-old Thibault looked like he was more than deserving of playing in goal while wearing the red, white and blue sweater of the Montreal Canadiens.
But Glenn Healy, the Rangers' 33-year-old veteran and oft-forgotten backup, was just as flawless at the other end.
And after 65 minutes of entertaining, wide-open hockey -- and 37 shots on goal from each team -- the Rangers salvaged  a point in their last appearance at the storied Montreal Forum with a 2-2 tie.


Budget Dealmakers Forget About Equity
To the Editor:
Re "Inching Toward a Budget Deal" (editorial, Dec. 5): Your observations about Congress and the White House correctly draw attention to one contentious and incongruous aspect of the debate: the idea of a tax cut as part of a deficit-reduction package.
Several other principles that could produce a more equitable compromise also merit greater consideration.


When Hairy Paws Meet Pedigrees
FOR AFICIONADOS OF hairypaw Chippendale-style furniture, there is a mystery surrounding a newly discovered tea table.
Is it the same one that General John Cadwalader, a Revolutionary War hero, ordered in 1770 for his Philadelphia mansion?
No one knows for sure.
But John Hays, who heads the American furniture department at Christie's in New York, where the table will be auctioned on Jan.  27, hopes that it is.
There had been such a table at Cadwalader's sumptuously furnished house -- the closest thing to a palace in the Colonies at the time --  at which George Washington and other patriots often dined.
And since 1974, 10 pieces of hairy-paw furniture made for that house by the master cabinetmaker Thomas Affleck have been auctioned, with one commanding a record price of $2.7 million.


Ilyse Hyman and Michael D. Gisby
Ilyse Hyman, the daughter of Sandra and Martin Hyman of Valley Stream, L.I.,  is to be married today to Michael D. Gisby, the son of Mary-Kate Gisby of Auckland, New Zealand, and the late John Gisby.
Don Robert Johnson, a leader of  the New York Ethical Culture Society, is to perform the ceremony at the de Seversky Conference Center in Old Westbury, L.I.
The bride teaches nursery school at the Stephen Wise Early Childhood Center in New York City.
She is a graduate of the State University College at New Paltz, N.Y., and is a candidate for a master's degree in early-childhood and elementary education from the Bank Street College of Education.


The View Backstage


Glue and the Bottom Line
To the Editor:
As a member of an organization working on the problem of street children and  inhalant abuse, I was pleased to see your article on H. B.  Fuller.
Organizations that work with the increasing numbers of Latin American street children attest that nearly all of them use drugs, most commonly shoe glue, to ease hunger pangs, provide a false sense of security and help them escape, at least psychologically, their miserable conditions.


I'M BACK
Your author -- using the nom de plume Donald J. Trump -- was spot on: he set  the tone for an issue on the rich by highlighting precisely those qualities (self-centeredness, sanctimoniousness, petulance and vindictiveness) that we, the unwashed masses, have come to associate with the vulgarly wealthy in general, and with the real Donald J. Trump in particular.


The 'Nutcracker' Experience
PLAINFIELD
FOR children studying ballet, "The Nutcracker" comes around each year as predictably as Popsicles and swimming in summer.
At Christmastime, every Christmastime, these children rehearse and perform.
As they grow, they graduate  from dancing as mice and bonbons to dancing as soldiers, snowflakes, Marzipan, Chinese Tea, Arabian Coffee and possibly, conceivably -- if they stick around, practice, have talent and are lucky -- the Sugarplum Fairy.


Clothes That Hit The Spot
It had to happen: trompe l'oeil meets Op Art.
Coin-size dots printed on stretch fabric give clothes the appearance that they are see-through when they are pulled over the body like panty hose.
But the bras and panties are really part of the print.
This style came out of Jean-Paul Gaultier's collection this fall, and it is being worn by those who are not about to surrender the funky facet of fashion.
To add to the melange, one woman even put on the designer's coat with a Pop Art print.
For most people, the shirt is being worn on its own,  for both day and evening; for others, the dotted shirt is worn discreetly under a tailored jacket.
Another woman created her own dotted version of shirt and scarf.


Risk Is Inherent
To the Sports Editor:
The article on ski area liability laws ("Who Assumes the Risks on the Slopes?" The Times, Nov. 21) missed an important point.


FRAN LEBOWITZ, ANANTHROPOLOGIST AMONG THE AFFLUENT
James Atlas quotes Fran Lebowitz as saying that the rich are happier ("Fran Lebowitz, an Anthropologist Among the Affluent" Nov. 19).
Not so.
In the highflying late 1980's, when money was no object, I worked in a bookstore on Lexington Avenue and 71st Street frequented by pampered ladies who appeared to make shopping and lunching their life's work.
Why, then, were they so frequently disagreeable, irritable and generally difficult to deal with?
And because we had store charges and knew their addresses, we could see that the women who lived on Park Avenue were the snottiest of all.
No, alas, money does not seem to make people happier.
What, then?


Underappreciated, Sure, Yet Flying Above It All
TIRED of flashy funds that soar one year and tank the next?
Morningstar Inc., the mutual fund tracking service in Chicago, has a gift for you: a list of five  underappreciated funds that have turned in superior returns year after year.
The managers of these funds have been around too long to let today's frothy market unnerve them.
Just because stocks shot past the Dow's 5,000-point level with nary a pause is no reason to wait for prices to fall again before investing, most of these managers said last week.
If you balk, you'll miss some  terrific opportunities, their argument goes.
"I think inflation is whipped, and the stock market looks very attractive over the next 5 to 10 years," said Chuck Albers, whose Guardian Park Avenue, with $961 million, makes the Morningstar list.
The other four are Baron Asset, Clipper, Northeast Investors and Ivy International.


Martial America
IN THE SHADOW OF WAR The United States Since the 1930s.
By Michael S. Sherry.
Illustrated. 595 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press. $35.


The Bride Isn't the Only One He Has Fathered
The Baby Sitter Alicia Silverstone, J. T. Walsh, Lee Garlington, Nicky Katt, Jeremy London, George Segal Directed by Guy Ferland R 90 minutes (Playing exclusively at Film Forum in Manhattan; also available on videotape)


NOT SO DIFFERENT, PERHAPS, AFTER ALL
Charles McGrath's Endpaper "Not So Different, Perhaps, After All" (Nov. 19) about the celebrity name-droppers' party to end all parties was delicious.
But,  hey, how come I wasn't invited?
If my name ended in an "a" instead of an "o," I  probably would have made the cut.
Right?


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Nov. 26 about the movie "Reckless" misidentified the designer of the sets for the Off Broadway play on which the film was based.
He is Loy Arcenas; Andrew Jackness was the film's production designer.


Stars Walk A Question Treadmill
THE celebrities being fed into the media machine after appearing on the VH1 Fashion and Music Awards last Sunday looked a little worn.
Handlers hustled them like prize livestock from one curtained-off corral to the next at the armory on  Lexington Avenue between 25th and 26th Streets, where they were grilled by television reporters from five entertainment shows about their clothes, movie projects and personal trainers.
"We've got Veronica Webb here," a producer yelled into a walkie-talkie.
"Where do you want her now?"


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


NOT SO DIFFERENT, PERHAPS, AFTER ALL
Charles McGrath's Endpaper "Not So Different, Perhaps, After All" (Nov. 19) about the celebrity name-droppers' party to end all parties was delicious.
But,  hey, how come I wasn't invited?
If my name ended in an "a" instead of an "o," I  probably would have made the cut.
Right?


Pee Wee's Great Bus Adventure
A fair number of New York's 7,800 bus drivers may hand out transfers with a smile, utter the occasional greeting or announce an approaching stop with crystal-clear diction.
But only Ismael (Pee Wee) Rodriguez briefly dims his interior lights at night to give passengers a better glimpse of the Christmas tree at Rockefeller Center.
"I'm not supposed to be doing this, but isn't that the most beautiful thing you've ever seen?" asked Mr.
Rodriguez one evening last week as he steered his bus through Fifth Avenue's holiday gridlock.


The Bride Isn't the Only One He Has Fathered
Father of the Bride Part II Steve Martin, Diane Keaton, Martin Short Directed by Charles Shyer PG 106 minutes


Black Leader in Congress Chosen to Run N.A.A.C.P.
Hoping for a leader to bring it back to fiscal health and political relevance, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored people today  chose Representative Kweisi Mfume of Maryland as its chief executive officer.
The civil rights organization's board of directors chose the 47-year-old Congressman to fill the N.A.A.C.P.'s top staff job, which had been vacant for more than two years since the group's former executive director, Benjamin F. Chavis Jr., was dismissed after being accused of financial mismanagement and sexual harassment.
Several board members said today's vote had been unanimous.


Choosing Mussolini As Metaphor for Dad
SOMETHING is always going on in Mike's Deli.
So shouldn't Marco Greco, son of Mike, write a play about it?
For years, Dante Albertie, the artistic director of the Belmont Italian American Playhouse, prodded Mr.
Greco, the theater's co-founder, to do just that.
Mr.
Albertie even came up with the title: "Behind the Counter With Mussolini."
Behind the counter with whom?
It made perfect sense, given the propaganda poster and the photograph of the dictator from Calabria, which to this day hang  behind Mike's counter at 2344 Arthur Avenue.
That Mike Greco also came from Calabria is the first clue to understanding what the play is about.


Colombian Forfeits $150 Million in Drug Plea
After pleading guilty to drug smuggling on Friday, a Colombian woman forfeited $150 million in proceeds gained from the illicit operation, Federal officials reported.
It was the largest cash forfeiture ever in a drug case, the  officials said.
The woman, Sheila Miriam Arana de Nasser, 53, pleaded guilty to charges of conspiring to smuggle more than 55,000 pounds of cocaine and more than 3 million pounds of marijuana into the United States from 1976 to February 1994.
All of this was in cooperation with her family, the officials said.


Pee Wee's Great Bus Adventure
A fair number of New York's 7,800 bus drivers may hand out transfers with a smile, utter the occasional greeting or announce an approaching stop with crystal-clear diction.
But only Ismael (Pee Wee) Rodriguez briefly dims his interior lights at night to give passengers a better glimpse of the Christmas tree at Rockefeller Center.
"I'm not supposed to be doing this, but isn't that the most beautiful thing you've ever seen?" asked Mr.
Rodriguez one evening last week as he steered his bus through Fifth Avenue's holiday gridlock.


Peekskill Standout Rumbles in N.F.L.
OFFENSIVE linemen, it is said, are the most cerebral of football players.
Discipline and intelligence are important at a position where you must withstand punishment without striking out yourself and where you get recognition only when a mistake allows your quarterback to end up in a 300-pound bear hug.
Sometimes even stereotypes get it right.
Tre Johnson, right guard of the Washington Redskins, the only Westchester County resident currently playing in the National Football League and a thinking man's football player, began his career on the fields of Peekskill.
He is in the Meadowlands today to play against the Giants, his first pro start before the home folks, a high point of a frustrating, injury-marred season.


Modern-Day Gladiators Head for Denver, but the Welcome Mat Is RolledUp
For this genteel city, which prides itself on having the nation's highest concentration of library card holders, next week's Ultimate Ultimate Fighting Championship promises to be a jarring affair.
"He could literally pull the head off here," an announcer excitedly recounted at a recent bare-knuckles, no-pads fight in Buffalo.
"If they don't tap out, there is going to be some kind of damage to a ligament, a tendon -- or break of  a bone."


'The Super's Real-Life Sequel
The Hollywood version had a happy ending.
But the real saga of 320 Sterling Street drags on.
It was a dilapidated six-story hulk in 1988 when the landlord,  Morris Gross, was sentenced to live in a neglected apartment for failing to correct more than 400 housing code violations.
The sentence, the first of its kind in New York, inspired the film "The Super," starring Joe Pesci as an unscrupulous landlord.
In real life, Mr.
Gross fell behind on his real estate taxes.
In 1992 the 113-unit building was seized by the Department of Housing Preservation and Development, which trained tenants to manage it.
The goal: to sell them the building for $250 a unit.


Richard Barnett, 68, Maritime Lawyer
Richard Blair Barnett, a lawyer specializing in maritime and aviation finance cases and a Kansas-bred champion of Greenwich Village and its history, died on Tuesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
A Village resident, he was 68.
The cause was cancer, his law firm said.


BIG BOYS WILL BE COWBOYS
Mark Stevens's article "Big Boys Will Be Cowboys" (Nov. 19) should have been  titled "How the Locals View Well-to-Do Outsiders Who Are Buying Ranches in the West." His view of us is superficial and selective.
Some of us have been here for 20 or 30 years.
I have been here 8.
We are not just playing cowboy.
We do the work, just like those born into it.
The difference is that we have chosen to do it.


The Center Holds Out
If you are ever in front of an audience and searching for an engaging topic,  try this: suggest there is a "passionate center" to the American body politic -- or "sensible center," as Colin Powell would say, or "radical center" as others would argue.
Suggest that this center is held together by four basic points of agreement.
First, it is fiscally conservative.
It strongly supports a balanced budget -- not so much because of the economic consequences of large-scale debt but because of the irresponsibility such debt symbolizes.
While it is true that a balanced budget will reduce interest rates and free up capital to enhance America's global competitiveness, the passion for fiscal responsibility really flows from  people's adamant opposition to saddling their children with a $5 trillion debt.


Radiant Wonders of the Mid-Century World
NOTHING COULD BE FURTHER FROM the hard-sell strategies of the Christmas season than the triple bill of photographs by Hiroshi Sugimoto now at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The show has a timeless, seasonless quality.
The elements in Mr.
Sugimoto's troika have, at first sight, nothing in common except the will to push a specific and sharply defined experience to its farthest limit.
One section in this show of 80 black-and-white photographs, which runs through Jan. 14, deals with 10 of the fantasticated movie houses that date from the time when going to the movies was the archetypal American leisure  activity.
Mr.
Sugimoto, who was born in Tokyo in 1948 and has lived in New York  for 21 years, started the "Motion Pictures" series in 1978.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
A Tree Takes Root


Main Peril for G.I.'s in Bosnia Lies Just Beneath the Surface
Tech.
Sgt.
Lou Nelson marched up to the edge of an asphalt taxiway at Tuzla's air base today, and refused to take another step.
"I want to to know without a doubt that this area is clear," he demanded in a booming voice, his steel-tipped Air Force-issue boots stopping just short of a patch of untrodden grass where he feared a land mine might lurk.
"I don't want my men to go anywhere where it's not 100 percent absolutely safe. I don't want anybody hurt."


Russia, Vexing Partners, Asks For Changes in Space Station
Russia is proposing changing the planned international space station by incorporating all or part of the Russians' existing Mir orbiting outpost into the design.
The move is causing concern among other nations that are partners in the project, including the United States, which oppose any change that might add to the program's costs or delay its completion.
Officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration say that they  do not know exactly what changes in the international station the Russians want.
They are to get details in the coming week, when a delegation of Russian space agency and industry officials arrives in Houston to outline the proposal.


SCENES FROM A SYNERGETIC WEDDING
How inappropriate to place, in your pictorial of a wedding, photographs of the father's new wife and her family, when the mother of the bride was there ("Scenes From a Synergetic Wedding," photographs by Larry Fink; text by Alex Williams, Nov. 19).
So the wife from the moneymaking, hard-working years is missing from the photo essay, replaced by the father's new (three years) wife and her parents.


'Invisible' Brady Asks: What Has Gone Wrong?
Remember Kyle Brady?
On a Jets team that has stumbled to a 3-10 record, he has tumbled to obscurity.


WHAT A LOT OF MONEY CAN BUY
Mitchell Wolfson Jr. is that rare person with both a grand vision and the ability to share his insights on a massive scale in his Wolfsonian museum.
What  your article so cavalierly calls "junk," Wolfson sees as the very experience of  culture.
He understands the relationship of art to propaganda, that style can seduce.


On South Africa and Hope: A Dialogue
THE PLAYWRIGHTS ATHOL FUGARD AND Jon Robin Baitz know South Africa in different ways.
Mr.
Fugard, 63, has traced his country's agonies over apartheid  in such dramas as " 'Master Harold' . . . and the Boys" and "My Children! My Africa!" His newest work, "Valley Song," is set in the post-apartheid present.
It opens on Tuesday at the Manhattan Theater Club, with Mr.
Fugard directing and playing two roles: the autobiographical Author, who is white, and Abraam Yonkers, who is black and the grandfather of Veronica, played by Lisa Gay Hamilton.


Trouble Spots on the Roads To Steer Clear Of, If You Can
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.
1. INTERSTATE 80 , Saddle Brook. Westbound Exit 62 closed until tomorrow at 7 A.M.


Deer Hunting in Minnesota Brings Unexpected Delights
Snow and bitter cold greeted us when we arrived at our deer camp in this sparsely populated area of northwest Minnesota for several days of hunting.
Although somewhat startling to those of us who had come from 60-degree midday temperatures in New England, the snow was welcome because it makes seeing and tracking the animals much easier.


THE RICH
The younger generation of superambitious super-rich seems to have applied a new Puritan ethic of hard work and self-deprivation toward the enlargement of personal riches. (A Puritan ethic of greed. Hmmm, not something you might find in the best-selling "Book of Virtues.")
Chained to their laptops, beepers and maximum-speed faxes, these young titans consider work their very life's breath -- although the nature of the work seems  far less important than its end: the amassing of more and more money.


Comparing the Districts: The '95 High School Report Cards
Since 1989, the State Department of Education has issued an annual Report Card for every public school in New Jersey -- a compilation of data on everything from class size and test scores to per-pupil spending and what languages parents speak at home.
The reports are meant to allow parents to see how their schools measure up, taxpayers to see where their money is going, and education officials to monitor progress -- or lack of it -- in the state's 2,240 public schools.
The Report Cards for 1994-95 were issued last week, and basic information from them about every school district and high school is presented on the following pages.
Individual report cards also include details on faculty salaries, state and Federal aid, time spent on instruction and much else.
In every statistical category, each school is compared against the state average.


When to Conceive
Timing is everything, particularly in conception, and last week a scientific  study gave new meaning to that expression.
Government scientists announced their finding that conception is most likely  when intercourse occurs on the day of ovulation or the five days before it.Earlier studies had shown that women are fertile from about three days before ovulation to about three days after it.
But these were handicapped because they relied on "very fuzzy measures of ovulation," said Dr.
Allen Wilcox, the senior author of the study.


Commercial Property: Loans;Borrowers Find Green Pastures Across State Lines
MURRAY HILL PROPERTIES wanted an $18 million mortgage on a midtown office building.
It combed the New York lending market, and came up dry.
So now it is negotiating the loan, albeit for a lesser amount, with Ohio's Banc One.
"Local banks either won't do business or insist on unconscionable terms," said Norman Sturner, a Murray Hill partner.
"Out-of-town banks seem less apprehensive about New York commercial buildings."


Government and Unions Open Talks in France
The Government and labor unions met today to discuss overhauling the indebted welfare system, the first talks between the two sides since crippling transport  strikes began 16 days ago.
"We are holding out our hand," said a Government spokesman, Alain Lamassoure.
"We must know if the other side will take it."


Foreign Affairs;Before It's Too Late
Somehow it just got lost in the headlines, somewhere between the assassination of Yitzhak Rabin and the culmination of the Bosnia peace talks.
No one ordered flags lowered to half-staff and there was no saturation coverage on  CNN.
But the car-bombing of the Saudi-American military office in Riyadh on Nov. 13 deserves more reflection.
Five Americans were killed and some 30 wounded in the incident.
It was the most devastating terrorist attack on Americans in the Middle East since the Beirut Marine bombing 12 years ago.
If such an attack  were to happen in Bosnia, it could jeopardize the whole U.S. operation.
So why is it shrugged off in Saudi Arabia?
In part, it's because no one knows who did it -- although a number of shadowy Islamic groups have claimed responsibility and Saudi officials have put out a police sketch of one of the suspected car-bomb drivers.
In part, though, the silence is because U.S. officials fear drawing attention to anything unusual going on in Saudi Arabia.
U.S. interests there are so vital that officials don't want to say anything that might rattle the ruling family or the U.S.-Saudi relationship.
The U.S. has even withdrawn diplomats from Riyadh whom the Saudis  felt became too knowledgeable and frank about problems in the kingdom.


AT&amp;T Offer: One Said No, One Said Yes
JIM BOWERS wraps the ham, roast beef and cheese left over from lunch and talks about why he is refusing the voluntary severance package AT&amp;T offered him  last month.
Even though he may be "involuntarily separated" from his middle-management job as early as next month, it doesn't make sense for him to take the risk, said Mr.
Bowers, who at 48 has spent 13 years at AT&amp;T.
For him, the buyout offer is not much higher than severance would be.
Besides, he and his wife, Judith, do not want to uproot their teen-age daughter, Alaire, a talented flutist and a member of the New Jersey Youth Orchestra.
Given the poor New Jersey job market,  a move would be likely.


POSTINGS: 34,000 Square Feet or More at 67th Street;A Retail Plan For Broadway
Broadway between 66th and 68th Street, which has seen much development in recent years, may soon see more.
The Brandt Organization, owner of the four-story building at 1981 Broadway, at the northwest corner of 67th Street, is seeking to attract one retail tenant; the tenant would demolish the building and put up a structure it designed.
The new building would hold at least 34,000 square feet on four levels or more.


DIARY
MORTGAGES


No, Thanks
I have climbed to the top of the greasy pole!" proclaimed Benjamin Disraeli  when he became Prime Minister of Britain.
Some people, though, do not think success is worth the scramble.
So to general amazement, they decline a big promotion or skip the chance for a top job -- as no less a figure than Colin L. Powell just did.
Do you know someone who turned his back on ambition, and why?
Send your story to On the Job, Money and Business, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Or by E-mail to onthejob@nytimes.com.
Include your phone number.
All submissions become the property of The Times and may be republished in any medium.


Travel Advisory;Tours of Costa Rica Emphasize Jungle Life
The jungles and wildlife of Costa Rica are the focus of two educational trips in February.


A Labor-Intensive Work of Art to Savor
Some holiday treats really do get better every year.
The fruits for Park Pastries' stollen have been soaking in brandy, port and dark rum for four years  now, ever since Marc Haymon opened the bakery.
This weekend Mr.
Haymon will pluck the apricots, cherries, currants, figs and cranberries from their liquorish marinade and begin baking them into the butter-basted, cinnamon-sugar-dusted half-moon-shaped German confection that he  describes as "fruitcake for people who don't like fruitcake."


Sports of The Times;The Boxing Doctor Recalls 'Mr. Monsoon'
WHEN last we heard from Peter McNeeley, the so-called Irish Hurricane, he was surviving exactly 89 seconds last summer against Mike Tyson, who was fresh from  the slammer.
McNeeley's latest opponent has different credentials.
He's an orthopedic surgeon -- a middle-aged orthopedic surgeon, at that.


Former Chess-Shop Partners at War on Thompson St.
For more than 30 years, George Frohlinde has run the Village Chess Shop at 230 Thompson Street, thriving as a half-dozen local competitors came and went.
But this fall, Mr.
Frohlinde's decade-long monopoly was shattered when his former partner, Imad Khachchan, opened the Chess Forum, directly across the street.
Not since Bobby Fischer declared his last checkmate in 1972 has the downtown  chess world been so torn asunder.
Last month, Mr.
Frohlinde filed a lawsuit in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, charging Mr.
Khachchan with violating an agreement that Mr.
Frohlinde says barred him from opening his own store within 10 blocks of the Village Chess Shop.


Habitats: South Kensington;London: Some Different Rules in the Housing Game
THEY are expatriate Americans, or, as they call themselves, "expats," a young married couple who have lived all over the Middle East -- in Syria, Yemen and Jordan.
They have have now traded in their foreign-service postings for a small  but glossily elegant two-bedroom apartment in South Kensington, the section of London real estate agents here call "the American ghetto."
Two years ago, C. David Parker accepted an "offer that was too good to refuse" from Merrill Lynch, covering the Middle East for its private-banking division here.
Denise Parker found a job with a relocation service, finding housing for other expatriates.
These "expats," especially Americans, are numerous: A spokeswoman for Knight, Frank &amp; Rutley, an international real estate firm based in London, estimated that one-third of all apartment rentals in London go to Americans.


Final Days;What Thoughts Come at the Threshold of Death? The Last Week in the Long Struggle of Joan Aronowitz
IT is a slate-gray afternoon, and a light rain begins to fall.
The halls of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center are quiet.
In a room divided by a curtain, Joan Aronowitz lies in bed, clasping the hand of Rabbi Stephen Shulman, who is shaking his other fist at God.


Still to Come: Latino Wave In Movies
Nestor Miranda has tried to fill the walls of his third-floor walkup in Long  Island City with images of Latinos in the movies.
A poster of Darnell Martin's film about a young Puerto Rican woman, "I Like It Like That," takes up one corner; in another, Jimmy Smits's face beams from a poster of "My Family: Mi Familia."
What's more telling is that most of Mr.
Miranda's walls remain bare.
But if he gets his wish, he'll be able to add a poster from his own film.


U.S. Plea for French Pilots
The top American envoy in the Balkans appealed today to the Serbian President to arrange the release of two French pilots who were shot down by Bosnian Serbs  in August.
"We attach the highest importance to this issue," Assistant Secretary of State Richard C. Holbrooke said after meeting with President Slobodan Milosevic, who has helped win freedom for hostages held by Bosnian Serbs in the past.
Mr.
Milosevic did not comment.


Trouble Spots on the Roads To Steer Clear Of, If You Can
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.
1.
INTERSTATE 80 , Saddle Brook.
Westbound Exit 62 closed until Monday at 7 A.M. 2.
ROUTE 3 Rutherford.
Various lanes closed at night for repaving until the end  of the year. 3.
WITTPENN BRIDGE/ROUTE 7 Jersey City and Kearny.
Various lanes closed in each  direction: weekdays, 9 A.M. to 3 P.M.; Saturdays and Sundays, 7 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Through Dec. 31. 4.
ROUTES 1-9 Essex County.
Southbound traffic has been shifted to new northbound express lanes between the Pulaski Skyway and Interstate 78.
Wilson Avenue exit is closed. 5.
INTERSTATE 287 Piscataway, Possum Town Road.
One lane closed in each direction, Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 3 P.M., through December. 6.
INTERSTATE 287 Bridgewater, between Route 22 and Foothill Road.
Work zone setup.
Various lanes closed until further notice. 7.
EAST DUKES PARKWAY Hillsborough.
Road closed for bridge replacement through December. 8.
ROUTE 35/VICTORY BRIDGE , between Perth Amboy and Sayreville.
All lanes closed in both directions until Monday at 7 A.M. 9.
PLAINSBORO ROAD Plainsboro.
The bridge over Amtrak is closed. 10.
ROUTE 1 West Windsor.
Northbound shoulder is closed between Nassau Park Boulevard and Alexander Road until 1996.
The northbound Duck Pond Run jughandle  is closed.


Hearing Held On Gay Issues In the Schools
After years of local skirmishes between religious conservatives and gay advocates, the battle over how school curriculums deal with homosexuality moved  to Capitol Hill this week.
A two-day hearing before a House Economic and Educational Opportunities subcommittee was seen by both sides as a significant national forum, but the circumstances of the hearing proved more controversial than the testimony itself.


American Hotels Report Big Upswing in Business
UNTIL the partial shutdown of the Government last month, causing furloughed employees and many others to tighten or eliminate their travel budgets, the nation's hotel industry was headed toward its strongest year in more than a decade.
But even with that shutdown, and the possibility of another this month,  analysts say the industry's vital signs look healthy for at least the rest of the decade.
As a result, travelers would be wise to prepare for some changes, not all of them desirable.
While a strong hotel industry is in every traveler's long-range interest, to  insure that lodging is available when and where needed, the short term may be another matter.
Higher occupancy rates will likely mean that your favorite hotel may be sold out more often.
When you do succeed in making a reservation, room rates will be higher.
Checkout times are likely to be earlier and check-ins later.
And you can expect more hotels to join Hyatt and Westin in imposing penalties if you check out one or more days ahead of schedule.


A Labor-Intensive Work of Art to Savor
Some holiday treats really do get better every year.
The fruits for Park Pastries' stollen have been soaking in brandy, port and dark rum for four years  now, ever since Marc Haymon opened the bakery.
This weekend Mr.
Haymon will pluck the apricots, cherries, currants, figs and cranberries from their liquorish marinade and begin baking them into the butter-basted, cinnamon-sugar-dusted half-moon-shaped German confection that he  describes as "fruitcake for people who don't like fruitcake."


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate


Death in Rome
THE ALDO MORO MURDER CASE By Richard Drake.
Illustrated. 318 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. $45.
ON the morning of March 16, 1978, Aldo Moro, the leader of the Christian Democratic Party, headed off to Parliament for the inauguration of the first Italian Government to be actively supported by the Communist Party.
It was the beginning of the "historic compromise" between left and right of which Moro himself was the chief architect.
But before he could reach Parliament, a squad of Red Brigades terrorists blocked his motorcade, murdered his five bodyguards and spirited him off to a so-called people's prison in a Rome apartment.
Fifty-five days later, after the Italian Government refused to negotiate for Moro's release, the Red Brigades executed him and placed his dead body in the trunk of a car abandoned halfway between the headquarters of the Christian Democratic and Communist parties.


A Mother's 'First-Choice' Children
The interpretation of my statement in "Single and Following the Urge to Adopt" [Nov. 19] that a first placement in Paraguay "fell through" became in print, "After she could not adopt her first child of choice in Paraguay, Ms. Sofia adopted her daughter Alana, 3, and son Joel, 2." Many people called me to  say it sounded as if the adoptions were "second-choice" efforts.
Parents in adoption circles always say you get the child you are meant to have.
For the record, I love Elana and Joel deeply.
They were, are and always will be my "first-choice" children.
CAROLYN SOFIA East Setauket


Hopper's Intimate Life
To the Editor:
Responding to Michael Kammen's review of my book "Edward Hopper: An Intimate  Biography," Barbara Novak and Brian O'Doherty write that they will "set the record straight" on the basis of having known Edward and his wife, Jo, "during the last six years or so of their lives" (Letters, Oct. 29).


The Fall of the Mighty and the Rise of the Game
College soccer has reached the age of parity.
That development became evident after the dynasties in both the men's and women's game toppled in the space of a week in National Collegiate Athletic Association post-season tournament play.
North Carolina's string of consecutive women's national championships ended at nine when Notre Dame downed the Tar Heels last week, while Virginia's dreams  of a fifth consecutive men's title disappeared in a 3-2 Cavalier loss to Duke in the men's semifinals here Friday.


HOW MUCH INEQUALITY CAN A DEMOCRACY TAKE?
Congratulations on a provocative and entertaining issue.
It was well done.
Best of all was Lester Thurow's insightful article "How Much Inequality Can a Democracy Take?" (Nov. 19).
It should be distributed on Main Streets all across  America.


Guilty in Mother's Slaying
A 17-year-old skinhead pleaded guilty on Thursday to killing his mother, in an agreement with prosecutors under which they will not pursue charges against him of killing his father and youngest brother.
The agreement spared the teen-ager the possibility of execution.
The youth, Bryan Freeman, was immediately sentenced to life in prison by Judge Lawrence J. Brenner.
The sentence carries no parole.


Sunday, December 10, 1996: DRESS CODES;Do Clothes Make the Student?
Keeping up with appearances at school these days is a bit bewildering.
At prep schools, blazers and button-downs are giving way to sneakers and jeans, while at public schools, sneakers and jeans are giving way to blazers and button-downs.
Coats and ties used to be de rigueur at Andover, for example, but now the dean of students can come up with only two requirements.
"You have to wear shoes and you have to be dressed," says Stephen Carter.
Miss Porter's, where skirts, knee socks and sturdy brown shoes were once mandatory, has a similar nonpolicy for its girls.
Says Sara Lapuk, dean of students: "At one point you weren't supposed to wear short-shorts into the dining room. We're pretty relaxed."


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
GEORGE STRAIT: 'STRAIT OUT OF THE BOX' MCA; four CD's ($50)


Times Square Subway Station: Putting a There There
The Times Square subway station, which handles more lines and passengers than any other in the system, is about to get something it has never had: a main entrance.
Construction will begin next month as the first phase of the first major renovation of the entire station.
The entrance, on the southeast corner of 42d Street and Seventh Avenue, will  be unlike any other in the city, with a glitzy exterior of glass and bright lights and colored discs and strips.
The token booth, turnstiles and entries to  new elevators and escalators will be at street level.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about changing Arab perceptions of Israel referred incorrectly to Henry Siegman, a senior fellow at  the Council on Foreign Relations.
He was not a participant in a recent meeting of a Saudi prince with the presidents of major American Jewish organizations; he described the meeting after reading a transcript.


WHAT A LOT OF MONEY CAN BUY
I sure missed your "Sunday" page.
However, Passell's article made up for it.
Every item was interesting.


Jennifer LiPuma, Todd Monti
Jennifer LiPuma, a daughter of Tommy and Gill LiPuma of New York, was married yesterday to Todd Monti, the son of Tom Monti of New York and the late Constance R. Monti.
The Rev.
Walter Modrys performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
The couple, both 25, are graduates of Boston University.


Finding the Fireside
Like moths, travelers are drawn to flames -- in this case, restaurants and inns with fireplaces.
In New England, a roaring fire can be especially cozy, and "The Fireside Guide to New England Inns and Restaurants" (Wood Pond Press, $14.95) tells where to curl up.
The authors, Betsy and Ross Wittemann, list nearly 300 inns, hotels and restaurants that have dining rooms or guest rooms with fireplaces -- wood-burning, gas-powered or fueled by prefabricated firelogs.
To order, call (203) 521-0389 or fax (203) 313-0185 and add $2 for shipping and handling.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
'AS LONG AS I'M SINGING: THE BOBBY DARIN COLLECTION' Rhino; four CD's ($60)


Lynn Siegel, Steve Mendelsohn
Dr.
Lynn Siegel, a psychologist, and Steve Mendelsohn, a lawyer, were married last evening in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Rabbi Andre Ungar performed the ceremony at Tarrytown House, a corporate conference center.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 A web site launch with a cause: Cafe Los Negroes seeks to fill a void and put black and Latino artists on the Web.


Nature's Battle with AIDS
For years, researchers have been puzzled by why some people infected with the AIDS virus remain healthy for 15 or 20 years, while others fall ill within a few years?
The surprising answer may lie in newly discovered immune responses, reported Wednesday by scientists in Germany and the United States.
The researchers found, in laboratory experiments, that white blood cells make substances that can prevent the virus from growing.
The hypothesis is that different people, at  different times during an H.I.V. infection, make different amounts of these chemicals.The great hope is that these chemicals may lead to a new type of treatment.
GINA KOLATA


NUMBER THEORY
In his discussion of "the Number," John Tierney has hit a raw nerve and comes close to what really makes the rich different from you and me (The Big City: "Number Theory," Nov. 19).
You can be certain that if Bill Gates, Ronald Perelman, Michael Milken and Henry Kravis ever got together at a cocktail party, the one thing they would definitely not be discussing would be "the Number."


A Surfeit of Charm
To the Editor: Susan Spano's Trastevere apartment ("Living, Briefly, Like a Roman," Nov. 12) sounds very much like the one we rented in late May -- right down to the furnishings, laundryscape, local shops and characters.
The reason we took our three-week rental was doubtless, in part, because of articles like hers that sentimentalize the district.
If you're young, haven't seen many quaint squares, like the idea that "artists"  populate the narrow streets, and don't mind mediocre food in cute settings, then Trastevere is a great place for a day trip.
But we advise other readers, especially those above 45 or so, never to rent there unless they also like dirt, traffic that makes the charming streets unwalkable, and excessive noise that runs till 3 or 4 in the morning on weekends.
Everything from normal conversation to abnormal rock music to the acceleration of motor bikes makes its way through those cute little cantaloupe-colored shutters.
If you happen to find a place high above the several broad boulevards, you may be able to explore Trastevere on your own terms.
But the great buys (ours was about $100 a day) are likely to be at Ground Zero.
Our landlady's homemade brochure contained a phrase that helped us laugh through our stay in Trastevere  and a few other places in Italy -- "13th-century villa lovingly restored." She did love the building and the neighborhood -- to which she drove daily from her  air-conditioned high-rise in the Parioli district.


Patricia A. Curry, John S. Glass
Patricia Anne Curry, a daughter of Carol and Robert Curry of Hamilton, Mass., was married yesterday to John Stephenson Glass, the son of Sally Poynter of St.
Petersburg, Fla., and John S. Glass of Boxford, Mass.
The Rev.
Dr.
Jeanne Marechal performed the ceremony at the Second Congregational Church in West Boxford.
The couple, both 31, graduated from Colby College.


A CHICKEN IN EVERY BOWL
MIMI SHERATON IS THE SORT OF person who needs to know everything there is to  know on any given subject.
In nearly four decades as a food writer, restaurant critic and cookbook author, she has traveled the world over researching such minutiae as the shelf life of bay leaves, the texture of caviar.
If on her latest quest she logged half a million miles in pursuit of a humble bowl of chicken soup, no one would be surprised.


In This Buyback, the Stock Is Your Frequent-Flier Mileage
IF employees were asked to chisel Ten Commandments for their chief executives, many lists would probably include, "Thou shalt not covet thy workers' frequent-flier mileage."
But a small but growing band of companies, concerned about travel costs, are  breaking that commandment by cutting employees a deal: If you use your frequent-flier miles to get a ticket for a business trip, the company will pay you a percentage of what that ticket would have cost.


Senator Wins Party Tussle In Virginia
Stalling an effort by conservatives to punish Senator John W. Warner for helping to defeat two fellow Republicans, Virginia Republicans today yielded to  his demand that he be allowed to seek renomination in a state primary, which will be open to voters of both parties.
The party's governing board, the State Central Committee, voted to hold the primary on June 11.
The party's most conservative wing had wanted a convention to select a nominee, since conservatives dominate party offices and would have been expected to control such an event.


ON THE TOWNS
MUSIC


Man Held in Theft of Mail
A postal employee who has said he has a gambling problem has been accused of  taking thousands of dollars worth of registered mail, including silver bars, plane tickets and cash.
The employee, Larry Leroy Hart, 43, was charged on Tuesday in Federal court with theft of mail.


A Token Booth Is Set on Fire
In the third attack of its kind in the last month, a man sprayed a flammable  liquid into a subway token booth in Queens yesterday, setting the booth on fire.
The token clerk managed to escape unharmed, the police said, and the perpetrator fled.
Page 52.


FRAN LEBOWITZ, ANANTHROPOLOGIST AMONG THE AFFLUENT
James Atlas quotes Fran Lebowitz as saying that the rich are happier ("Fran Lebowitz, an Anthropologist Among the Affluent" Nov. 19).
Not so.
In the highflying late 1980's, when money was no object, I worked in a bookstore on Lexington Avenue and 71st Street frequented by pampered ladies who appeared to make shopping and lunching their life's work.
Why, then, were they so frequently disagreeable, irritable and generally difficult to deal with?
And because we had store charges and knew their addresses, we could see that the women who lived on Park Avenue were the snottiest of all.
No, alas, money does not seem to make people happier.
What, then?


The Personality Lingers On
IN ONE OF HER MORDANT autopsies of the 1960's, Joan Didion wrote this cruelly elegant sentence: "Joan Baez was a personality before she was entirely a person." The imputation of personality has become an intellectual insult.
In matters of culture, it suggests the fast-fading aura of show-business fame.
"Personality" evokes the paper-thinness of people on a television screen.
Nevertheless, the word has residual strength.
Despite long overuse, dating back at least to the Romantic period, it points to something essential.
When we  meet someone who makes a vivid impression, we still say, "What an interesting personality," or, on occasion, "What an extraordinary personality." When Thomas  Mann met Gustav Mahler, he said, "For the first time in my life I had the impression of encountering a truly great man."


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
JOHN COLTRANE: 'THE HEAVYWEIGHT CHAMPION' Atlantic; seven CD's ($180)


A Tribute To Ruin Irks Detroit
Camilo Jose Vergara called his idea an "immodest proposal," but around here they have much nastier terms for it.
In national magazine articles published in recent months, Mr.
Vergara, a New  York author and photographer, suggested a novel use for the boarded-up skyscrapers in the core of Detroit's downtown: a ruins park.


25 Players Demand Their Say
FREEING fictitious characters from their incarcerating pages is not a new literary device, be it Pirandellian fallout or a favored exercise of high school teachers.
In "I Ain't Yo' Uncle," being produced by the Hartford Stage Company, the inhabitants of "Uncle Tom's Cabin" these past 143 years act out an artificial insurrection by the ruse of the playwright, Robert Alexander.


Cultivating Color and Form in Winter
HOLLY berries, the holiday show-offs, take center stage at this time of year.
Yet hollies are but one of many shrubs that present a colorful December show, a fact now being taken advantage of by many landscape professionals who realize  that it is quite possible to have a four-season garden even in the Northeast.


Books in Brief: NONFICTION;An Artist, Not a Wife
As an art student in Greenwich Village in the 1930's, Lee Krasner (1908-1984) was notable for both the sophistication with which she absorbed the achievements of the early Modernists and her ferocious ambition as a painter.
But throughout  a stormy marriage to Jackson Pollock, she repeatedly set aside her own work to foster and promote his, a course that can be ascribed to either female masochism or a rational recognition that his brilliance exceeded her own.
Only in the 70's, long after Pollock's death in 1956, did Krasner receive serious recognition.
Ellen G. Landau, who has written an impressive book on Pollock, has lovingly catalogued Krasner's entire output in LEE KRASNER: A Catalogue Raisonne (Abrams, $95; $125 after Jan. 1) -- some 600 paintings, drawings and collages.
Like Krasner herself -- a fiercely honest, formidable woman -- many of these works have an authoritative presence, yet for all their skill, and the astute visual intelligence on display, they never quite achieve that unmistakable originality that finally distinguishes the good artist from the great one.
Ms.
Sadly, some of Krasner's earlier work -- done before she met Pollock -- has more immediacy and power than anything she did later, which makes one sense, all over again, what she may have sacrificed.
Krasner once called her paintings "biographical," but the narrative they evoke seems different from the  one she had in mind; above all, her work tells the story of someone eternally paying homage to the genius of others.
EVELYN TOYNTON


Nets Ride Late Childs Spurt to Road Victory
When the Nets have won this season, the contributions have come from different places: sometimes Armon Gilliam, sometimes Kenny Anderson, sometimes Jayson Williams.
Tonight it was Chris Childs, the reserve guard, who stole the show with his late-game heroics.
Childs came off the bench to score 14 of his career-high 17 points in the fourth quarter to lead the Nets to an energizing 85-73 victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers before 16,251 at Gund Arena.


Underappreciated, Sure, Yet Flying Above It All
TIRED of flashy funds that soar one year and tank the next?
Morningstar Inc., the mutual fund tracking service in Chicago, has a gift for you: a list of five  underappreciated funds that have turned in superior returns year after year.
The managers of these funds have been around too long to let today's frothy market unnerve them.
Just because stocks shot past the Dow's 5,000-point level with nary a pause is no reason to wait for prices to fall again before investing, most of these managers said last week.
If you balk, you'll miss some  terrific opportunities, their argument goes.
"I think inflation is whipped, and the stock market looks very attractive
over the next 5 to 10 years," said Chuck Albers, whose Guardian Park Avenue, with $961 million, makes the Morningstar list. The other four are Baron Asset, Clipper, Northeast Investors and Ivy International.


Amnesty Picks Up Millions
SOME 17,000 taxpayers stepped forward during the state's most recent tax amnesty program, promising to fork over as much as $40 million in back taxes, state officials said last week.
The amount of money pledged or already delivered exceeded the state's goal of rounding up $31 million through the program, which ended Nov. 30.


The Bride Isn't the Only One He Has Fathered
Wild Bill Jeff Bridges, Ellen Barkin, John Hurt, Diane Lane, David Arquette, Bruce Dern, James Gammon, Keith Carradine Directed by Walter Hill R 98 minutes


Examiners Are Picked To Oversee Plumbers
THE County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, has announced the appointment of an eight-member Board of Plumbing Examiners, following passage last month of the county's first plumbing licensing law.
The board -- which consists of licensed master plumbers, journeyman-level plumbers, plumbing inspectors and the county's Commissioner of Public Works, Anthony Landi -- will design qualifying examinations, set standards for licensing and investigate violations of the new law.


Advance on AIDS Eye Disease
An advisory panel to the Food and Drug Administration on Friday recommended approval of a capsule implanted in the eyes of AIDS patients to help them fight  off blindness.
The committee, by a vote of 6 to 1, agreed that Chiron Vision's Vitrasert implant should be approved for sale.
The agency is not bound by advisory committee decisions but usually follows them.


Merchants Keep Hoping, Despite Slow Start
IT may be the season for glad tidings, but not so far this year for anxious retailers.
In Westchester as elsewhere, shopkeepers are reporting brisk foot traffic in their stores in the weeks before Christmas -- but disappointing sales.
"The bottom line is not how crowded the stores are, but how many shoppers are leaving with bags," said Harold E. Vogt, president and chief executive officer of the Westchester Chamber of Commerce.
"The consumers may be out there, but whether they're buying is another question."


Color and Form in Winter
HOLLY berries, the holiday showoffs, take center stage at this time of year.
Yet the holly is but one of many shrubs that present a colorful December show, a fact now recognized by many landscape professionals who realize that it is quite possible to have a four-season garden even in the Northeast.
Winter gardening has even become something of a crusade, a widening exercise  in not only berries, but also ornamental grasses and plants with dramatic forms  to catch the eye.
One of the crusaders is Ken Twombly of Twombly's Nursery in Monroe, Conn., who features winter gardens and, of course, accents many berried  shrubs.


Beware Technology Bears
To the Editor:
The writers of all the doom-and-gloom articles about high-technology stocks ("Yes, Virginia, Microsoft and Intel Can Be Disappointing," Investing It, Oct. 15, and "Beware the Rosy Reasoning of Tech Bulls," July 23) that I have read in  The New York Times probably missed a tremendous opportunity by being bearish on  these issues.
I mean tremendous.
One well-known high-tech stock that I own has grown over 2,000 percent in the last five years.


James Reston Dies
James Reston was hailed as the most influential journalist of his generation.
During his 50 years with The New York Times, he won two Pulitzer Prizes for reporting, wrote his Washington column for more than three decades and served as executive editor.
Mr.
Reston, who retired from The Times in 1989, died Wednesday in Washington.
He was 86.


Books in Brief: NONFICTION
BETWEEN GOD AND GANGSTA RAP Bearing Witness to Black Culture.
By Michael Eric Dyson.
Oxford University, $23.


Shellfish Take Honors in Grecian Setting
ALTHOUGH Fish Kebab sounds like a simple Greek storefront where fish is the dish to order, neither is true.
Fish Kebab, an offspring of the 16-year-old Shish-Kebab, across the street in Port Washington, is in a former bank.
The intact lofty look makes it a stunning  restaurant.
There are white columns outside, metal grills at the windows, soaring brick walls and a beautiful skylight.
The balconied dining room is studded with paintings of fishing boats and flower-filled doorways that echo sun-swept Mediterranean islands.


A Lesson. This Time We've Got It on Tape.
Think back to late 1969.
Technology had just put men on the moon.
New methods of storing, retrieving and manipulating seas of data in minutes or seconds were  changing the business world.
As the stock market's high-tech sector boomed, investors fawned on Telex and Memorex, makers of computer tape drives and magnetic tapes.


Coleman's Run Spurs Charger Victory
Chargers 28, Cardinals 25


There's More to New Jersey Than Just the Pinelands
To the Editor:
I must respond to Neva Moore's statement in the Nov. 19 article "Berries in the Blood": "This is New Jersey, not the north. That's not New Jersey." Wrong!


WHAT A LOT OF MONEY CAN BUY
I was interested to read, in Peter Passell's "A-Z: What a Lot of Money Can Buy" (Nov. 19), that "the days of the old-fashioned trophy wife -- long on glamour, short on resume -- are on the wane." Judging from the examples in your  article, though, it looks as if the old-fashioned trophy wife is being traded in for the newfangled trophy wife, long on both glamour and resume.
Isn't progress wonderful? FELICIA ACKERMAN Providence, R. I.


Black London'
To the Editor:
In his review of Gretchen Gerzina's "Black London" (Nov. 5), Roy Porter says that "in 1861 the American nurse and former slave Harriet Jacobs moved from New  York to London." He then quotes Jacobs: "I was treated according to my deportment, without reference to my complexion." The latter quotation is correct, but Jacobs went to London in 1845, and she went not as a medical nurse  -- Mr.
Porter implies the modern definition of that term -- but as a nursemaid to the orphaned daughter of her New York employer.
In 1861, the year the Civil War began, Jacobs was not in London; she was darting between Boston and Philadelphia trying to sell her self-published autobiography, "Incidents in the  Life of a Slave Girl," the book from which the quotation about racism is taken.


A Christmas Classic Goes Afro-American
FOR many, the Christmas season is not complete without a performance of "The  Nutcracker," the Tchaikovsky ballet that tells of a little girl at a holiday party who dreams she is battling mice and visiting the Sugar Plum Fairy.
"The Harlem Nutcracker," choreographed by Donald Byrd, tells the story a bit differently, from the point of view of an African-American grandmother nostalgic for her childhood.
Mr.
Byrd's interpretation, a work in progress premiering this weekend at Aaron Davis Hall, the performing arts center at City College, highlights traditional holiday values like joy and peace.
It is set to Duke Ellington's famous orchestration of "The Nutcracker," which combines elements of jazz and gospel.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 19 about the Cotswolds misstated the date and place of founding of the Guild of Handicrafts.
It was established in London, not Chipping Campden, in 1888.
It moved to Chipping Campden in 1902.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
'GLOBAL DIVAS' Rounder; three CD's ($30)


MICHAEL EISNER IS WORTH $200 MILLION A YEAR
The rich deserve their wealth, writes Michael M. Weinstein, because they make their companies richer ("Michael Eisner Is Worth $200 Million a Year," Nov. 19).
But what have they done for society?
When they lay off 30,000 workers, their stock soars.
When they slash wages, cut benefits, bust unions and lengthen hours, Wall Street applauds and their wealth doubles.
For what the rich have done to America, they surely do not deserve their wealth.
Rather, they deserve to be stripped of what they have stolen from the rest of us. (An 80 percent tax on incomes over $1 million would halve the Federal deficit in a single year.)


I'M BACK
Your author -- using the nom de plume Donald J. Trump -- was spot on: he set  the tone for an issue on the rich by highlighting precisely those qualities (self-centeredness, sanctimoniousness, petulance and vindictiveness) that we, the unwashed masses, have come to associate with the vulgarly wealthy in general, and with the real Donald J. Trump in particular.


THE RICH
I can't wait for the sequel -- an entire issue devoted to the poor.
Who are the poorest women? (Since the richest among us are male, the poorest are likely  to be female.) Just how do the poor amuse themselves?
What foods do they eat?
Finally, wouldn't it be great to know how the poor manage to remain poor?
If we knew that, then maybe the rich would do something about it.


Subway Clerk Forced to Flee by Fire Attack
In the third attack of its kind in a month, a man sprayed a flammable liquid  into a subway token booth in Queens yesterday, setting the booth on fire.
The token clerk managed to escape unharmed, the police said, and the attacker fled.
The attack occurred about 8:45 P.M. at the Hunters Point Avenue station on the No. 7 line in Long Island City.
It damaged the booth so severely that officials determined last night that it would have to be replaced, said Termaine Garden, a spokesman for the Transit Authority.
He said the clerk had been about to leave the booth "when she heard a pop and turned around and realized the booth was on fire."


Bible Is No Basis for Creating Mideast Peace;Bought and Paid For
To the Editor:
Forget about "promised land" (Op-Ed, Dec. 6)! Let's talk business!


Works Apart These May Be, but They're Not Atypical
AT THIS TIME OF YEAR, IT IS NO surprise to encounter "L'Enfance du Christ," Hector Berlioz's "sacred trilogy," and Sir Charles Mackerras and the Orchestra of St.
Luke's will oblige on Saturday evening at Carnegie Hall.
But it is a surprise at any time to encounter the composer's lone comic opera, "Beatrice et  Benedict," which Yale Opera, of the Yale University School of Music, will present at Alice Tully Hall in semistaged form on Wednesday evening.
In different ways, these relatively late works, both with texts by the composer, have always been considered somehow apart from the rest of Berlioz's output.
"L'Enfance du Christ" (1854), which tells of the holy family's flight to Egypt to avoid Herod's slaughter of infants, was one of the rare works of Berlioz to be received with considerable enthusiasm in his native France during  his lifetime, and it has never lost its popularity.
It is generally regarded as  a product of a kinder and gentler Berlioz.


THE RICH
The Rich" (Nov. 19) may be the most influential single issue you've ever published. For several years I've been telling my richest friends how dangerous  and divisive the growing gap between rich and poor is, but did they listen? Not  until they read it in The New York Times Magazine. And now several of them say they'll vote for President Clinton in the next election -- as a result of the portrait you paint of our have/have-not society.


INSIDE
INVESTING IT /Page 4/ When employees exercise stock options, they sometimes all sell the stock at the  same time, which can depress the price.
One strategy that can help.
By Patrice Duggan Samuels.


A Catalogue Surprise
THE pajamas on sale are modeled by two men embracing.
The centerfold, which features casual wear, shows three men on a park bench with their arms around each other, seated next to two women who are holding each other.
"I thought I was getting the guy downstairs' mail again," said Scott Miller,  24, an executive at a manufacturing company who lives on Central Park West in Manhattan.
"I was definitely a little startled."


I'M BACK
Most people think of Trump as a wheeler-dealer -- some even consider him brash.
I know the real Trump, the man who loves this city and country.
He respects intelligence and cares about people who are committed to him.
Above all, he is a man who has a love affair with New York.
The great buildings he creates, his many Taj Mahals (if not his writings) will endure as evidence of his success for generations.
NORMA I. FOERDERER New York


F.Y.I.
The Missing Newsstand


Pathfinder Delayed
Nissan North America Inc. has postponed the introduction of the 1996 Nissan Pathfinder until mid-February because of two problems with the redesigned vehicle.
The problems are a vibrating shield for the catalytic converter and imprecise spacing between the pistons and cylinder walls of the V6 engine, which was enlarged to 3.3 liters for 1996, from 3 liters.
Nissan will add an additional shield to the converter, and will either add sleeves to the engine cylinders or  replace the engines outright.
The problems, which were not apparent on pre-production vehicles, surfaced in quality-control inspections of early production models.


Elizabeth Mazzella, John Diefenbach
Elizabeth Anne Mazzella, a daughter of Eileen and David G. Mazzella Jr. of Mahwah, N.J., was married yesterday to John Demarest Diefenbach, a son of Missy  Egan Wey of Larchmont, N.Y., and Richard P. Diefenbach of Bel Marin, Calif.
Msgr.
Joseph J. Boyd performed the ceremony at St.
Elizabeth's Roman Catholic Church in Wyckoff, N.J.
Mrs.
Diefenbach, 29, is an account executive at Wunderman, Cato, Johnson Advertising in New York.
She is a graduate of Denison University.
Her father is the executive vice president and chief operating officer of Montech International Inc., a manufacturer of microprocessor controllers in Fort Myers,  Fla.


HOW MUCH INEQUALITY CAN A DEMOCRACY TAKE?
Thurow surprisingly fails to mention the vital role that unions played in distributing wealth, by helping to develop the middle class in this country.
It's not just coincidence that the gap between rich and poor is growing greater  today precisely at a time when unions are getting weaker.


How We Have Abandoned The Homeless Mentally Ill
To the Editor:
Elisa DeCarlo's poignant Nov. 26 Soapbox essay "Encounters With 'Dirty Louie' " highlights our growing crisis.
Louie is not just a homeless crack addict but a mentally ill homeless crack addict.


Churning Whitewater
The Senate Whitewater hearings entered a higher orbit last week.
On Friday, the Republicans on the Whitewater committee decided to confront the White House with a subpoena for information about a 1993 meeting of President Clinton's senior lawyers and aides concerning Whitewater.


HEALTH LOBBYISTS WIN ADJUSTMENTS TO MEDICARE PLAN
Out of the spotlight of the Medicare debate, the nation's private health plans have obtained a series of technical changes in the overhaul approved by Congress that stand to reap them billions of dollars.
One adjustment would raise the rate by which Government reimbursements would  increase next year by several percentage points more than would have been done in previous versions of the legislation, resulting in billions of dollars more for the health-care companies.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
FRANK SINATRA: 'THE COMPLETE REPRISE STUDIO RECORDINGS' Reprise; 20 CD's ($500) The conventional view of Frank Sinatra's recording career is that his singing was the prettiest during the Columbia years (1943-52), the swingiest during the  Capitol years (1953-60) and in decline thereafter, except for isolated moments.


Union Made
GASTONIA 1929 The Story of the Loray Mill Strike.
By John A. Salmond.
Illustrated. 226 pp.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. $24.95.
THE 1920's were grim years for organized labor -- with the possible exception of the 1980's, the worst in this century.
Saddled with inept leaders, helpless in the face of a sophisticated antiunion campaign by employers, divided internally along racial, ethnic and political lines, the American Federation of  Labor (A.F.L.) dithered and floundered, all the while hemorrhaging members.


Deciding That Ladylike Doesn't Work
I'LL never say that cancer is a good thing," Carol Hochberg said, "but I will say it's given me a direction.
I was waiting for something to be committed  and enthusiastic about.
I guess I took the cancer as a sign."
It has been only nine months since Ms.
Hochberg, runner, weight-trainer, almost vegetarian, first had her breast cancer diagnosed, at 37.
But she already calls herself a "self-employed activist" as she carves out a volunteer career at Share, the free citywide self-help group for women with breast and ovarian cancer.
She studies, speaks, lobbies and answers hot-line calls with the same power-lunch intensity she once poured into investment banking.
This is how  one woman battles the beast.


Mauna Kea Beach Resort to Reopen
After an 18-month, $30 million restoration, the Mauna Kea Beach Hotel, conceived as the cornerstone of the resort built by Laurance S. Rockefeller more than 30 years ago on the Big Island of Hawaii, is scheduled to reopen Dec. 20.
Situated on 60 oceanfront acres overlooking one of the finest natural white-sand beaches in Hawaii, the hotel has 310 guest rooms, including 10 suites with private lanais, or verandas.
All the rooms, as well as the five restaurants, will be completely refurbished, design elements and bringing the hotel up to the standards of the Americans With Disabilities Act.


Russia, Vexing Partners, Asks For Changes in Space Station
Russia is proposing changing the planned international space station by incorporating all or part of the Russians' existing Mir orbiting outpost into the design.
The move is causing concern among other nations that are partners in the project, including the United States, which oppose any change that might add to the program's costs or delay its completion.
Officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration say that they  do not know exactly what changes in the international station the Russians want.
They are to get details in the coming week, when a delegation of Russian space agency and industry officials arrives in Houston to outline the proposal.


WHATEVER HAPPENED TO THE LEISURE CLASS?
In "Whatever Happened to the Leisure Class?" (Nov. 19), Michael Lewis forgets to mention that the capital-gains tax, for most people, hits illusory gains that arise from inflation rather than from real wealth increases.
Thus, it is a wealth tax as much as an income tax.
Hence, a favorable rate is justified.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
'THE 1940'S MERCURY SESSIONS' Verve; seven CD's ($98)


Cultivating Color and Form in Winter
HOLLY berries, the holiday showoffs, take center stage at this time of year.
Yet the holly is but one of many shrubs that present a colorful December show, a fact now recognized by many landscape professionals who realize that it is quite possible to have a four-season garden even in the Northeast.
Winter gardening has even become something of a crusade, a widening exercise  in not only berries, but also ornamental grasses and plants with dramatic forms  to catch the eye.
One of the crusaders is Ken Twombly of Twombly's Nursery in Monroe, Conn., who features winter gardens and, of course, accents many berried  shrubs.


Whitman Plans to Back Dole for the Presidency
To the surprise of hardly anyone, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman has decided to  join Sen.
Bob Dole's campaign for President.
Mrs.
Whitman's popularity and reputation as a tax-cutter and government-streamliner has caused several Republicans in the race to seek her support, but her backing of Mr.
Dole, the Senate Majority Leader, was long expected.
She will endorse Mr.
Dole at a new distribution warehouse in Edison on Monday.
And she will assume an active role in the Dole campaign organization, said Carl Golden, Mrs.
Whitman's chief of communications.


Meghan Boody, James C. Ayer Jr.
Margaret Liscomb Boody, the daughter of Claire Siegbert Boody of Bridgehampton, L.I., and the late David A. Boody, was married last evening to James Cook Ayer Jr., a son of Jutta Ayer of Bradford, Mass., and James C. Ayer of Salem, Mass.
The Rev.
Dr.
John Knight performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in New York.


NOT SO DIFFERENT, PERHAPS, AFTER ALL
What a wickedly delicious writer and observer Charles McGrath is.
And how perfect an Endpaper for your mind-boggling issue devoted to the poor working super-rich.


Flute Club Is Invited To the White House
THE members of the Hoff-Barthelson Flute Club here have played at nursing homes, book stores and private parties.
The conductor and founder, Eleanor Ball, approaches each engagement in a business-like manner.
On Friday at 1 P.M., 11 members of the club will give a 40-minute recital at  the White House for invited guests.
The White House will be closed to the public.
"We're part of the holiday festivities," Ms.
Ball said recently, after the select group of musicians, who range in age from 10 to 17, finished a rehearsal.


NEWS AND TOPICS


Susan Stickells, Albert Holman 3d
Susan Pamela Stickells, the daughter of Henrietta Tapper Stickells of Boston  and the late Austin Thomas Stickells, was married last evening to Albert A. Holman 3d, the son of Virginia and Albert A. Holman 2d of Farmington Hills, Mich.
The Rev.
Andrew C. Mead performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of  the Advent in Boston.
Miss Stickells, who is keeping her name, is a vice president of the Essex Investment Management Company in Boston.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father was a law professor at Boston University and was dean of its law school from 1976 to 1977.
He also was a distinguished professor of law at Suffolk University in Boston.


At the Casinos
What's happening onstage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.


THE RICH
The Rich" (Nov. 19) may be the most influential single issue you've ever published. For several years I've been telling my richest friends how dangerous  and divisive the growing gap between rich and poor is, but did they listen? Not  until they read it in The New York Times Magazine. And now several of them say they'll vote for President Clinton in the next election -- as a result of the portrait you paint of our have/have-not society.


SCENES FROM A SYNERGETIC WEDDING
How inappropriate to place, in your pictorial of a wedding, photographs of the father's new wife and her family, when the mother of the bride was there ("Scenes From a Synergetic Wedding," photographs by Larry Fink; text by Alex Williams, Nov. 19).
So the wife from the moneymaking, hard-working years is missing from the photo essay, replaced by the father's new (three years) wife and her parents.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
CARLY SIMON: 'CLOUDS IN MY COFFEE 1965-1995' Arista; three CD's ($50)


Doomsday Gets Closer
The hands of the so-called doomsday clock, measuring the danger of nuclear disaster, have been moved three minutes closer to midnight.
The last time the clock was re-set was in 1991, when The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, the clock's keeper, optimistic at the end of the cold war, pushed back the hands to  17 minutes to midnight.
But on Friday, after a dozen panelists debated the dangers of nuclear stockpiles and the threat of nuclear terrorism, the Bulletin  re-set the clock to 11:46 P.M.


Bay Scallop Season Offers A Rich Briny Sweetness
THE local bay scallop season has started.
Supplies of the briny-sweet nuggets have not been particularly abundant in recent years, driving prices skyward.
But still, fresh bay scallops are hard to resist.
And because the meat is so rich, a little can go a long way, especially if the scallops are intermingled with pasta, rice or even seaweed.
Marinated Bay Scallops With Seaweed


Doors Open to China's Remote West
To the Editor:
Karl E. Meyer's "Asia's Lost World" (Editorial Notebook, Dec. 4) raises some  interesting points about the Xinjiang-Uighur Autonomous Region in western China.


Why the Librarian Stays Right in Style
IN the age of the Internet and the World Wide Web, when terms like the information superhighway are almost as passe as information explosion, one venerable source of information just keeps going and going: the public library.
And reference librarians at some of the state's biggest institutions report that despite the new marvels of the electronic age, they have not detected any decrease in calls from people seeking out information on a variety of topics ranging from the mundane to . . . well, the the weird.


At the Corcoran, A Renaissance After a Dark Age
WHEN DAVID C. LEVY, A native New Yorker with a reputation as a bit of an institution fixer, arrived here five years ago as the new director of the Corcoran Gallery of Art, he discovered that even he was unprepared for the mess  that awaited him.
"I was stunned," Mr.
Levy recalled as he reminisced the other day in his oak-paneled office.
"Problems were coming out of the woodwork like cockroaches,  and some were so fundamental you couldn't anticipate them."


In Japan, Blacks as Outsiders
FOR many black Americans, Japan is less the great economic power or serene synthesizer of the arts and more a country of offensive remarks about blacks and other minorities by prominent government officials, including former Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone.
When a black film maker, Reggie Life, headed to Japan on a National Endowment for the Arts fellowship three years ago, friends warned him that racism was rampant in Japan.
On the eve of his trip a Japanese Government official publicly compared prostitutes in Tokyo's notorious red-light district to blacks who move  into white neighborhoods and "ruin the atmosphere."


THE RICH
Thank you for your peek into the lives of the wealthy.
The cybernetic age is  creating enormous quantities of wealth, goods and services with little labor content.
Perhaps we are entering a new phase of socialism.
The middle class (in the form of the institutional investor) now rules Wall Street.
In the aggregate, it  is more wealthy than the wealthy.
Perhaps we are returning to a slave society where computer chips do the work, without going on strike to demand better working conditions.
HERBERT JAFFE Freeport, L.I.


Peres to Rally Jews Today In New York
After a whirlwind month in office, Prime Minister Shimon Peres heads for the  United States this weekend to rally American Jews and to meet with President Clinton to explore new avenues toward peace with Syria.


Ms. Clarke, Mr. Rettaliata
Sabrina Louise Clarke, the daughter of Anne R. Clarke of Wilton, Conn., and Frederick G. E. Clarke of Essex, Conn., was married yesterday to Thomas Andrew Rettaliata, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald A. Rettaliata of Bayport, L.I.
Msgr.
Charles Swiger performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Peace Roman Catholic Church in New York.
Mrs.
Rettaliata, 28, is a senior marketing analyst at the American Express Company in New York.
She graduated from Drew University.
Her mother is a senior researcher at Millward Brown International, a marketing research company  in Fairfield, Conn.


Lobbying Bill Being Delayed By Lobbying
A Senate effort to protect Blue Cross and Blue Shield from new lobbying restrictions has stalled final action on landmark legislation requiring thousands of lobbyists to report who pays them to lobby on what issues.
Even though both houses of Congress have passed the identical lobbying bill,  it has not been enrolled -- legislative terminology for given a fancy printing -- and sent to President Clinton, who has praised the bill and said he would sign it.


On Language;Default, Dear Brutus
WHEN Republican budget-balancers balked at automatically raising the Federal  debt ceiling, many commentators warned direly that this inaction "raised the possibility of default."


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
'THE COMPLETE CAPITOL RECORDINGS OF DUKE ELLINGTON' Mosaic Records, 35 Melrose Place, Stamford, Conn. 06902; five CD's ($80)


DEATH ON 125th STREET: The Dispute;From a Quiet Beginning, a Volatile Brew Explodes in Harlem
It was three years ago that Freddy's clothing store settled into a former meat market on 125th Street in Harlem, and began selling discounted men's and boys' wear.
Its immediate neighbor was the Record Shack, which had been in place for 17 years offering used 45's and old gospel albums, and whose lease was encased within Freddy's lease.
Almost the very first conversation between Fred Harari, the clothing store owner, and Sikhulu Shange, the proprietor of the record shop, placed the men in  opposing camps.
According to Mr.
Shange, Mr.
Harari told him that he would have  to leave when his lease expired at the end of 1995, unless he paid more rent.


For Knicks, Three Tough Periods and A Super One
It is one of the most committed relationships in New York sports.
Patrick Ewing wants the ball.
The Knicks give it to him.
Through turmoil and hard times, together, they always seem to find a way to make it work.
Their resolve was tested again in the fourth quarter tonight, with the Atlanta Hawks about to seize their second game from the Knicks in 12 days.
The Hawks led by 10 points.
They had the ball.
They had Ewing 20 feet from the basket, guarded by Andrew Lang.


Money Trees: Fine in 'Arborcide' Case Totals $34,500
A retired city firefighter charged with what Parks Commissioner Henry J. Stern described as "premeditated arborcide" was ordered last week to pay a hefty fine after pleading guilty to illegally chopping down nine trees last summer.
Andrew Campanile, 55, a contractor from Selden, L.I., who retired on a disability pension from the Fire Department, admitted forging a city work permit in order to chop down eight honey locusts and a plane tree on city sidewalks in Astoria along a three-block stretch of Broadway and at the corner of 31st Street and Ditmars Boulevard.


Death On 125th Street: Reaction;Neighbors Play Down Race, Seeing 'Act of a Crazy Man'
Ominous dreams disturbed Terry Quider's sleep early yesterday morning as she  woke again and again to the television's blaring repetitions of the fiery massacre at Freddy's clothing store.
And with each awakening, she wondered anew  whether the killings really stemmed from a racial dispute, hoping against hope it wasn't so.
"There's still no clarity as to what happened," said Ms.
Quider, a social worker who was born in Harlem.
"I just hope this doesn't really boil over."


Debunking the Old Myth That Blacks Are Monolithic
To the Editor:


The Culture of Poverty
THE WAR AGAINST THE POOR The Underclass and Antipoverty Policy.
By Herbert J. Gans. 195 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $22.
IF YOU CAME THIS WAY A Journey Through the Lives of the Underclass.
By Peter Davis. 202 pp.
New York: John Wiley &amp; Sons. $22.95.


Mostly Protestant Christian Coalition Gains Catholic Alliance
Reaching across denominations to bolster its membership at the onset of the 1996 Presidential campaign, the predominantly Protestant Christian Coalition inaugurated a Catholic auxiliary today with a series of speeches that played down theological differences in favor of a political unity for American Christians on core issues like abortion and family values.
On a morning of blustering snow in this New England stronghold of Irish and Italian Catholics, more than 400 people gathered at a downtown hotel for the opening meeting of the Catholic Alliance, the new arm of Christian Coalition, the conservative political group founded by the religious broadcaster Pat Robertson.


Shifting Rates of Hotel Rooms
IT should be a simple matter to determine the least expensive room rate at a  specific hotel on a particular date: merely call the hotel and inquire.
For hotels that are part of a chain, how ever, or for independent hotels linked through a central reservations system, the determining factor is often how a customer contacts the hotel: directly or through the central 800 number.
To explore the potential discrepancies, I called 13 hotels in 11 cities on Nov. 10, requesting the least expensive double room for two people, with private bath and without breakfast (although in some cases it came with the room), for the night of Tuesday, Nov. 14.
For each hotel, I first called the central 800 number, then immediately called the hotel's own reservation desk.
Whenever I was offered a choice -- for example, a smoking room versus a nonsmoking room --  I responded "whichever is least expensive." To achieve a level playing field, if I was asked whether I was a member of a convention, or eligible for any other special discount, I said "no." To make things more interesting, I visited three  Seattle hotels on Nov. 14 to find out whether a better rate was available in person.


Islanders Suffer A Beating, And a Loss
Looking for indoor holiday fun on these wintry weekend afternoons?
Why not load up the car and take the kids to a National Hockey League game at a nearby arena?
You might see an inspirational display of grace, skill and effort.
Then again, you might see a vicious, degrading spectacle like the one between the Devils and the Islanders that had the 18,412 fans roaring this afternoon at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Built-In Obstructed Views
To the Editor:
In his essay "Going for the Gold on Columbus Circle" [Nov. 19], Herbert Muschamp hit the nail on the head when he called Donald Trump's International Hotel and Tower on Central Park West "a display of kitsch." And it's going to be far worse than anyone could have imagined.


Piano Men
STEINWAY &amp; SONS By Richard K. Lieberman.
Illustrated. 374 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press. $35.
TO the countless aficionados who have relished its supple action and its rich, round tone, a Steinway piano may be a thing of beauty and a joy forever.
But an expensive instrument is an object existing at an intersection of culture  and commerce, and to those who produce it, it means mostly business.
In "Steinway &amp; Sons," Richard K. Lieberman brings a revealing, if not always uplifting, perspective to the story by looking at the company that for a century and a half made, marketed and sold Steinways.


Reston is Eulogized as a Pillar of the Times
James B. Reston, the New York Times reporter and columnist, was hailed today  as a man "who towered over the times in which he lived" -- "a hero to some of the most skeptical people in the world."
The words were those of Katharine Graham, the chairwoman of the executive committee of the Washington Post Company, a personal friend and professional rival of Scotty Reston's for more than four decades.
She delivered one of three  eulogies at his funeral this morning at St.
Alban's Church on the grounds of the National Cathedral, along with Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, chairman of The New York  Times Company, and Tom Wicker, a retired Times columnist, who succeeded Mr.
Reston as the paper's top Washington correspondent.


His Life and Hard Times
JAMES THURBER His Life and Times.
By Harrison Kinney.
Illustrated. 1,238 pp.
New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company. $40.


I'M BACK
I cannot fathom your decision to print Trump's ramblings about loyalty.
I am  even more amazed that no one in Trump's army of publicists and other assorted henchmen managed to kill the piece.
Surely, someone in the Trump camp realized how bizarre he sounded -- like some combination of medieval king and Mafia don,  doling out rewards and punishment to his subjects.
Although it is heartwarming to know that Trump had no trouble getting dinner reservations even during "the tough times," isn't there a more appropriate venue for his exercise in narcissism?
Like the offices of a good psychiatrist?
JONATHAN HORN New York


For Yet Another City, U.S. Budget Cuts to the Quick
Two or three times a day, Union Pacific freight trains, some a mile long, snake through the center of this table-flat city in the Central Valley.
Rolling  along at barely 10 miles an hour, the trains regularly tie up traffic across a 15-block stretch of downtown.
"The joke around here is, 'I was late to a meeting because I was stopped by the Ninth Street train,' " said the city manager, J. Edward Tewes.


Mieko Take and Aaron Mendez
Mieko Take, the daughter of Miwako and Nobumasa Take of Yokohama, Japan, was  married on Thursday to Aaron Miguel Mendez, the son of Dianne and Louis Mendez of New York.
Justice Simeon Golar of State Supreme Court in Jamaica, Queens, performed the ceremony at the home of the bridegroom's parents.
Mrs.
Mendez, 22, and her husband, 26, graduated from the New England Conservatory of Music.
She plays the clarinet in the Dharmaband, a new music group in New York.
The bridegroom, a composer, is the group's founder and artistic director.


Open Door, Open Books, Packed Shop
This place is like 'Cheers,' " said a customer, surveying not a neighborhood bar but a neighborhood bookstore -- Twinkleberry &amp; Nutkin, a sliver at 311 East  81st Street.
Children's books line wooden shelves, and patrons fill its narrow aisle, some dropping in just to chat.
The place is impenetrable during puppet shows.
"It felt like a studio apartment with a family of 30," said the owner, Brenda Parush, after a recent storytelling hour.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Some Bulking Up For a West Side Site


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
'SOUL TRAIN: 25th ANNIVERSARY HALL OF FAME' MCA; three CD's ($50)


Co-op Eviction Fight, Year 16
In the last 16 years, Charles Ferreira has received enough eviction notices to cover the walls of his studio apartment -- including nine that arrived last week ordering him out by Dec. 31.
Along with 11 neighbors, Mr.
Ferreira, 65, has faced eviction from Gramercy Park Towers, at 205 Third Avenue, since 1979.
That was the year his building's co-op conversion plan became effective: 35 percent of the 320 tenants agreed to  buy their apartments, and those who did not lost the rights to their apartments. (Today, 51 percent of tenants in a rental building must agree to buy for a co-op plan to go into effect.)


Deciding That Ladylike Doesn't Work
I'LL never say that cancer is a good thing," Carol Hochberg said, "but I will say it's given me a direction.
I was waiting for something to be committed  and enthusiastic about.
I guess I took the cancer as a sign."
It has been only nine months since Ms.
Hochberg, runner, weight-trainer, almost vegetarian, first had her breast cancer diagnosed, at 37.
But she already calls herself a "self-employed activist" as she carves out a volunteer career at Share, the free citywide self-help group for women with breast and ovarian cancer.
She studies, speaks, lobbies and answers hot-line calls with the same power-lunch intensity she once poured into investment banking.
This is how  one woman battles the beast.


A Rise in Students Moves Up to Middle Schools
RISING student populations across the county that only a few years ago set off a scramble in kindergarten and first-grade classrooms have created a space squeeze in many school districts as those students are poised to move past elementary school.
Whether it is a question of redistricting neighborhood schools, moving around grades or financing major expansion of existing buildings, few districts have been spared these often emotionally fueled issues.
And as boards of education and district superintendents struggle to find ways to fit in these additional students, the proposed remedies often create conflict in the community.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: A Coaching Legend Comes Home;Personal Loss Spurs Stringer's Move to Help Rutgers Rebuild
C.
Vivian Stringer does not seek adversity.
Nor does she invite confrontation.
Seldom does she raise her voice, even after a stinging defeat.
But defeats are bound to happen with a rebuilding program like the one at Rutgers, where Stringer arrived last summer as coach and legend in women's college basketball.
An inspired upset over nationally ranked Penn State in Stringer's first game was followed by losses at Notre Dame and at Maryland.


Retail Incident Incenses Washington
An incident last fall in which two police officers, moonlighting as security  guards in a clothing store, forced a black teen-ager to strip off his shirt because he could not prove ownership has heightened racial tensions in the Washington area.
The episode has also brought threats of a lawsuit and has given the retailer -- Eddie Bauer -- a major public relations headache during the holiday shopping season.
Parents of the youths involved as well as black civil rights leaders say they are incensed at the way the retail company based in Redmond, Wash., initially handled the matter, first ignoring complaints and then dismissing it as a "minor" incident.
But after recent newspaper reports, the company issued a general apology and promised, as an act of contrition, to donate clothing to a homeless shelter in the area.


DIARY
MORTGAGES


A Chronicler Of Time's Slow March
HOW COULD SUCH A SMALL TREE BEAR SO much fruit, someone asks in "The Quince Tree Sun," a film by the Spanish director Victor Erice about an artist painting  the quince tree in his backyard in Madrid.
The question might be asked about all of Mr.
Erice's films, for they create large landscapes out of the smallest worlds.
Mr.
Erice (pronounced a-REE-thay), who, at 55, is considered by many to be Spain's foremost auteur, is surprisingly little known in the United States.
But  "Spain on Film: Spanish Cinema Now IV," a two-week festival that opened on Friday at the Walter Reade Theater, may help remedy the situation.
It includes a retrospective of Mr.
Erice's three movies, starting Wednesday, which the director is expected to attend.


Missing Boy's Body Found
A ranch hand today led the police to the remains of a 9-year-old boy who had  been missing for nearly three months, and he told them he had kidnapped, sexually molested and killed the child, the authorities said.
The suspect, Juan Carlos Chavez, 28, was charged with kidnapping, aggravated  sexual battery, first-degree murder and various firearms offenses.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
MILES DAVIS: 'THE COMPLETE LIVE AT THE PLUGGED NICKEL 1965' Columbia; five CD's ($130)


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
'THE COMPLETE BLUE NOTE ANDREW HILL SESSIONS (1963-66)' Mosaic; seven CD's ($112)


Japan's Leaders Were Also Tried
To the Editor:
In his essay on the Nuremberg war-crimes trial that followed World War II ["Watching for a Judgment of Real Evil," Nov. 12], Alex Ross states that "no subsequent international tribunal addressed the further atrocities that accumulated in the 20th century."


PJ Day
It started with Vincent (the Chin).
For about a year now, I have been reading that Vincent (the Chin) Gigante, the reported boss of the Genovese crime family, walks around his neighborhood, Greenwich Village, wearing only his pajamas. (Mr. Gigante, it seems, may be feigning dementia in order to avoid standing trial in  Federal court.) Then I came across the book "Duplex Planet," a collection of interviews of nursing-home residents, one of whom attests, "If you are an old man, and you go into a bar in pajamas, people will buy you drinks."
On linking these two incidents in my mind, I experienced a vague sense of reassurance -- after all, I have always imagined that my own sunset years will be spent in an emotional state best described as unglued.
But then I started to  notice that wearing pajamas in public was not an activity exclusive to older folk: K. D. Lang has sported hers both onstage and off.
Barry White's band members wore silk ones during the singer's tour this summer.
Madonna promoted her album "Bedtime Stories" by wearing hers on MTV during a public pajama party  she gave at the club Webster Hall.
Sassy magazine is the veritable house organ  of the practice, recently exhorting, "If your wardrobe's a bore, slack into some PJ's and snore no more!"


Mostly Protestant Christian Coalition Gains Catholic Alliance
Reaching across denominations to bolster its membership at the onset of the 1996 Presidential campaign, the predominantly Protestant Christian Coalition inaugurated a Catholic auxiliary today with a series of speeches that played down theological differences in favor of a political unity for American Christians on core issues like abortion and family values.
On a morning of blustering snow in this New England stronghold of Irish and Italian Catholics, more than 400 people gathered at a downtown hotel for the opening meeting of the Catholic Alliance, the new arm of Christian Coalition, the conservative political group founded by the religious broadcaster Pat Robertson.


Cultivating Color and Form in Winter
HOLLY berries, the holiday show-offs, take center stage at this time of year.
Yet hollies are but one of many shrubs that present a colorful December show, a fact now being taken advantage of by many landscape professionals who realize  that it is quite possible to have a four-season garden even in the Northeast.


Rites of Assimilation
SAFE IN AMERICA By Marcie Hershman. 285 pp. New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $24.
FOR Vera and Evan Eichenbaum, Jewish immigrants from Eastern Europe, and for  their American-born children growing up in Cleveland during the late 1930's and  40's, Wednesday night at the movies is one of the rites of assimilation.
While the feature films wrap them in a web of communal fantasy, the newsreels purport  to present facts -- a connection with the wider world and the war overseas -- styled in bright glimpses for American consumption.


Q and A
Carnival Time in Rio Q.  A friend and I will be in Rio de Janeiro next February for Carnival.
What are the principal events, what places near Rio would make worthwhile day trips and are the main beaches safe for swimming? -- Bruce Lalor, Sanibel, Fla.
A.
Carnival has three main ingredients: samba school parades, samba balls and the street carnival.
Next year the carnival will run from Friday, Feb. 17 to Feb. 20.


Liberte, Egalite And Utter Gridlock
WHY are the French in such a stew?
One explanation is that they, like everyone else, have been using credit to pay for the good life for a long time,  and suddenly the bills are all coming due, leaving them to stare at tax increases and rollbacks in welfare-state benefits.
In rebellion at that, French public-sector unions have thrown the country into chaos in France's worst labor unrest in a decade.


Co-op Eviction Fight, Year 16
In the last 16 years, Charles Ferreira has received enough eviction notices to cover the walls of his studio apartment -- including nine that arrived last week ordering him out by Dec. 31.
Along with 11 neighbors, Mr.
Ferreira, 65, has faced eviction from Gramercy Park Towers, at 205 Third Avenue, since 1979.
That was the year his building's co-op conversion plan became effective: 35 percent of the 320 tenants agreed to  buy their apartments, and those who did not lost the rights to their apartments. (Today, 51 percent of tenants in a rental building must agree to buy for a co-op plan to go into effect.)


Maura Gallagher, Thomas C. Wilson
Maura Gallagher, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Gallagher of New York, was married yesterday to Thomas Clay Wilson, a son of Monica F. Wilson of Gig Harbor, Wash., and the late Thomas M. Wilson.
The Rev.
John Bucki performed the  ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Francis Xavier in New York.
Mrs.
Wilson, 31, is the manager of retail communications at Mercedes-Benz of  North America in Montvale, N.J.
She graduated from George Washington University.
Her father is the owner of the Gallagher Group Inc., an advertising agency in New York.


Eye Motions That Limit Trauma
Weeks after a Westchester woman was raped by her date at an upstate New York  college, she started having panic attacks.
They continued for five years until,  she said, she found relief through a new psychotherapeutic technique: Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing.
Her therapist, Bonnie R. Cohen, a clinical social worker in private practice in Mount Kisco and Millwood, said she believes that with the therapy, she has acquired a powerful new tool in her practice of psychotherapy.


Books in Brief: NONFICTION
SINS OF THE SON By Carlton Stowers. Hyperion, $22.95.


WHAT A LOT OF MONEY CAN BUY
I was interested to read, in Peter Passell's "A-Z: What a Lot of Money Can Buy" (Nov. 19), that "the days of the old-fashioned trophy wife -- long on glamour, short on resume -- are on the wane." Judging from the examples in your  article, though, it looks as if the old-fashioned trophy wife is being traded in for the newfangled trophy wife, long on both glamour and resume.
Isn't progress wonderful? FELICIA ACKERMAN Providence, R. I.


POSTINGS: 18,000 Square Feet at Avenue of the Americas and SpringStreet; God's Love We Deliver Gets a New Home
God's Love We Deliver, a charity that supplies food to apartment-bound men and women with AIDS, has kicked off the holiday season by moving to its own building, with a kitchen three times bigger than the old one it rented at Amsterdam Avenue and 103d Street.
The 18,000-square-foot red brick building at 166 Avenue of the Americas, at Spring Street -- built in 1952 as a machine shop for the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and used recently as a library for the blind -- was bought at an auction of city-owned properties in the fall of 1993 for $570,000.
A year later, God's Love We Deliver embarked on a capital fund-raising campaign  to renovate it, according to Kathy Spahn, the executive director, so far raising $6.2 million of its $7.1 million goal.


L.I. Vines
Vintner's Pride Chardonnay Pellegrini Vineyards, Cutchogue, 1993. About $20.


Woeful '95 Leads U.S. Charities to Introspection
This year has been a tough one for charities and other nonprofit organizations, from arts enterprises to antipoverty groups to universities.
Many face sharp budget cuts.
They have been battling Congressional efforts to limit their lobbying.
And they have suffered collective embarrassment over the Foundation for New Era Philanthropy, a Ponzi scheme that fooled even some sophisticated financial executives, and over the conviction of William Aramony, former chief executive of United Way of America, for fraudulent use of  charitable funds.


Bells and Whistles In the Bathroom
THE once-modest bathroom is now an arena for one-upmanship in the ruthlessly  competitive hotel field.
Any day, I expect the official luxury hotel postcard to feature, instead of a glamorous lobby, a low-slung, silent-flushing toilet or a  sunken whirlpool for two.
As it stands now, the Four Seasons in Washington has installed heated fog-free mirrors, the Miyako Hotel in San Francisco boasts redwood saunas and the Peninsula in Hong Kong has not only telephones in the bathroom but also hand-free phones with special digital processing circuits that minimize the sound of running water and automatically lower the volume of the radio or TV when a call comes in.
Meanwhile, guests checking in to the American  Club, the Wisconsin resort owned by Kohler, the plumbing manufacturer, are offered their choice of water wonders, including a shower tower with a multiple  showerhead unit controlled by 10 push buttons or an environmental bathtub enclosure that allows you to program cycles of summer "rain" and dry heat.
"Hotels have become more than a home away from home -- they're a place to be  pampered," said Howard J. Wolff, vice president of the architectural firm Wimberly Alison Tong &amp; Goo in Honolulu, which has designed several Four Seasons  properties.
"The importance of a hotel bathroom is evidenced by the attention to detail going into them as well as the amount of space. In some resort destinations, it's now approaching 50 percent of the space being given over to the bathroom."


Sunday, December 10, 1996;A QUESTION FOR: Norm Abram
Q: What is the most frivolous tool you have in the workshop?
A: A power miter box.
A miter box is for cutting moldings and making miters for  frames or for cutting rails and stiles for the face frame of a cabinet or the perimeter of a door.
It doesn't cut really large wood; it can't rip it to length.
A while back, one of the manufacturers came up with one that actually projects a laser line showing exactly where the edge of the blade is.
I have that.
And I remember when one of our national underwriters said to me: "I almost died when you went over to your miter box and said, 'And now I'm going to use my laser-guided miter box to make this cut.' You're completely insane." You know, we could do without it -- we did without it for years and years and years.
It's a pretty wild tool.


Happy Mail
The rule is clear: prizes in a McDonald's game called Monopoly are not transferable.
But last week the company gleefully waived that rule.
Small wonder, considering the great publicity for McDonald's.
Last week an envelope was mailed in Dallas -- with no note, no return address, but with a winning game card worth $1 million.
It was addressed to St.
Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis.
There, amid of sea of junk mail, this anonymous gift was nearly thrown out until a clerk noticed the words "instant winner."


Is It Insensitive to Complain When Noise Is Unbearable?
To the Editor:
It was with regret and amusement that I read the comments of a member of the  United Tenants Association regarding tenant noise and disturbances in the city-owned apartments at 87th Street and Columbus Avenue ("Drug Raid Highlights  Divide on 87th Street," Nov. 26).
In those comments, neighbors' complaints about noise were dismissed as the whinings of a few insensitive souls over the loss of their beauty sleep, while tenants of the building had to worry about inadequate  heat and leaking roofs.


These Doctors Make House Calls (on Leaky Faucets)
For the blue-uniformed men of the senior fix-it circuit, unsolicited tips (always refused) are frequent.
Requests for dates are a little more rare, though they come, too.
"Remember that lady in Paramus?" 78-year-old Leonard Berman reminded his fellow Chore workers as they drove to their first job of the morning Monday.
"We replaced her garage door and she asked if I knew any eligible bachelors."


Stalin-Mao Alliance Was Uneasy, Newly Released Papers Show
Scholars have unearthed official records of the two meetings between Stalin and Mao.
Along with Mao's commentaries on the meetings, they suggest that the Chinese-Soviet alliance that the two men made in Moscow 45 winters ago was founded on shaky ground.
The transcripts of the December 1949 and January 1950 sessions, obtained from Soviet archives, had long been sought by historians of the cold war.
The documents, to be published by the Cold War International History Project of the  Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington, contain no great revelations, only the give and take between the leading Communist titans, and tyrants, of the cold war.
Stalin gives more than he takes.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: December 10, 1995
Weeks This
On Week  List Fiction


INSIDE
Stronger Students at CUNY


FUNDS WATCH
Gauging the Cost Of 401(k) Plans


Cross-Border Traffic Fuels Effort to Change Bar Closings to 2 A.M.
THE longstanding debate on what time Westchester's bars should close is simmering again, this time with a real possibility that last call will be rolled back to 2 from 4 A.M.
Proponents of the earlier closing say their reasons are simple: the move will reduce drunken driving and save lives.
Supporters want to put an end to the migration of drinkers from Connecticut -- where bars close at 2 -- into such border communities as Port Chester and Lewisboro, where the police say they have problems with vandalism, rowdiness and traffic accidents.


'Cause It's Witchcraft
Frank Sinatra was born in Hoboken 80 years ago Dec. 12.
What memories do you  associate with his music?
Songs That Made Everything All Right


Corrections
A brief article last Sunday about an appearance by the drummer Chico Hamilton at Flushing Town Hall misstated the time of Mr.
Hamilton's appearance with Charles Mingus and Dexter Gordon at Los Angeles High School.
It was about 58 years ago; 74 is Mr.
Hamilton's age.


Busy Week Of Advent Programs
THE St.
Andrews Singers and the Hitchcock Chancel Choir are wasting no time putting a seasonal spin on the day.
David Ralph conducts the St.
Andrews Singers in the Advent portion of Handel's "Messiah" at 10 this morning in the Presbyterian Church of White Plains.
At 10:30 A.M. today, John King leads the Hitchcock singers in Saint-Saens' rarely performed "Christmas Oratorio," as a prelude to the Advent service at the Presbyterian Church in Scarsdale.
Maybe the Saint-Saens isn't as rarely performed as all that: the oratorio will be given again next Sunday at 8 P.M. in Reisinger Hall at Sarah Lawrence College in Yonkers at a free concert under George Tsontakis.


Girl at Heart of Debate Dies
Corey Brown, an ill and mentally retarded girl whose family's "do-not-resuscitate" request ignited a national debate, has died, a hospital said on Friday.
Corey, 14, died on Thursday of breathing difficulties related to severe scoliosis, a curvature of the spine, according to St.
Mary's Regional Medical Center.


MICHAEL EISNER IS WORTH $200 MILLION A YEAR
Weinstein's article is charmingly seductive, but lacking moral foundation.
His main arguments seem to be that 1) the numbers of super-rich C.E.O.'s are too few to affect the economy, so why worry, and 2) they make good business decisions, so are worth their worth.
As to their numbers, the super-rich do matter, in spite of their supposed limited cumulative impact on the economy.
I cannot believe that some of their money isn't used to affect the political process to foster their continued wealth.
PETER M. GLICK St.
Paul


Sunday, December 10, 1996;A QUESTION FOR: Norm Abram
Q: What is the most frivolous tool you have in the workshop?
A: A power miter box.
A miter box is for cutting moldings and making miters for  frames or for cutting rails and stiles for the face frame of a cabinet or the perimeter of a door.
It doesn't cut really large wood; it can't rip it to length.
A while back, one of the manufacturers came up with one that actually projects a laser line showing exactly where the edge of the blade is.
I have that.
And I remember when one of our national underwriters said to me: "I almost died when you went over to your miter box and said, 'And now I'm going to use my laser-guided miter box to make this cut.' You're completely insane." You know, we could do without it -- we did without it for years and years and years.
It's a pretty wild tool.


MICHAEL EISNER IS WORTH $200 MILLION A YEAR
The rich deserve their wealth, writes Michael M. Weinstein, because they make their companies richer ("Michael Eisner Is Worth $200 Million a Year," Nov. 19).
But what have they done for society?
When they lay off 30,000 workers, their stock soars.
When they slash wages, cut benefits, bust unions and lengthen hours, Wall Street applauds and their wealth doubles.
For what the rich have done to America, they surely do not deserve their wealth.
Rather, they deserve to be stripped of what they have stolen from the rest of us. (An 80 percent tax on incomes over $1 million would halve the Federal deficit in a single year.)


Italian Adventure
To the Editor: On our first Elderhostel encounter, my wife, Alice, and I approached the trip with some trepidation ("Fitting In With the Over 60's," Oct. 22)..


I'M BACK
I cannot fathom your decision to print Trump's ramblings about loyalty.
I am  even more amazed that no one in Trump's army of publicists and other assorted henchmen managed to kill the piece.
Surely, someone in the Trump camp realized how bizarre he sounded -- like some combination of medieval king and Mafia don,  doling out rewards and punishment to his subjects.
Although it is heartwarming to know that Trump had no trouble getting dinner reservations even during "the tough times," isn't there a more appropriate venue for his exercise in narcissism?
Like the offices of a good psychiatrist?
JONATHAN HORN New York


Walking Tours
To the Editor: A highlight of a recent trip to San Francisco for my wife and  me was Rachel Heller's Flower Power Haight-Ashbury Walking Tour mentioned by Mr.
Hall.
It was more because of Ms.
Heller's intelligence, information and passion, perhaps, than the actual geography.
SAM BROWNSTEIN Albuquerque, N.M.


Books in Brief: NONFICTION
BETWEEN GOD AND GANGSTA RAP Bearing Witness to Black Culture.
By Michael Eric Dyson.
Oxford University, $23.


Transactions
Hockey


The New Attack on Human Rights
Today is International Human Rights Day, so designated to remind an often uncaring world that there is a Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
It was adopted 47 years ago by the United Nations to establish some clear standards for the treatment of citizens by their governments.
There has been progress on human rights in recent years.
The demise of the Soviet Union and its empire ended a terrible tyranny for millions of people, as  did the end of apartheid in South Africa and the advance of democracy in Latin America and Korea.
But too many governments retain repressive practices.


Bay Scallop Season Offers A Rich Briny Sweetness
THE local bay scallop season has started.
Supplies of the briny-sweet nuggets have not been particularly abundant in recent years, driving prices skyward.
But still, fresh bay scallops are hard to resist.
And because the meat is so rich, a little can go a long way, especially if the scallops are intermingled with pasta, rice or even seaweed.
Marinated Bay Scallops With Seaweed


Heady Times for McDonnell Douglas
CAN the McDonnell Douglas Corporation make it on its own?
Now, what kind of question is that for a company that is enjoying the best of times?
True, the cold war is over, which is tough for a company that had been the country's largest producer of the instruments of war, from missiles to Apache helicopters to F-15 jet fighters.
True, the company's long-struggling commercial airline division has seen its share of the world market slip to about 10 percent.


Of Giants' Off-Season Decisions, the Biggest Is Wheatley
As good a player as running back Tyrone Wheatley may be some day, he has struggled to adjust to the high level of competition and rigid rules of the National Football League.
And as his struggles have unfolded, they could make the Giants' off-season decision-making process more difficult.
If Wheatley has adapted slowly to the N.F.L., can the Giants afford to let Rodney Hampton go?
And if they decide they need two high-priced running backs on their roster, how much money will they have available for other free agents?
The domino effect will be played out a number of times as the Giants decide what to  do with their 12 unrestricted free agents -- 11 of whom are starters.


WHATEVER HAPPENED TO THE LEISURE CLASS?
In "Whatever Happened to the Leisure Class?" (Nov. 19), Michael Lewis forgets to mention that the capital-gains tax, for most people, hits illusory gains that arise from inflation rather than from real wealth increases.
Thus, it is a wealth tax as much as an income tax.
Hence, a favorable rate is justified.


Walking Tours
To the Editor: Christopher Hall's article on walking in San Francisco ("In Sam Spade's Footsteps," Oct. 15) contained many wonderful descriptions and useful resources.
Your readers may also like to know about a collection of longer walks that highlight special features of the city.
They are listed in only one place -- the "Sierra Club Activities Schedule."
The Bay Chapter leads free urban hikes.
One of them, "The Movies Hike," is a  guided tour from the Ferry Building to the Golden Gate Bridge, visiting most of  the filming sights between.
The "Murals of the Mission" spends a day looking at public art, stopping at a few museums and shops as well.


Local Poles: Walesa Loyalists
Voters in Poland turned Lech Walesa out of office on Nov. 19, electing Aleksandr Kwasniewski, a former Communist and ex-newspaper editor, to the presidency with 52 percent of the vote.
But if the election had been held in Greenpoint, north Brooklyn's Polish enclave, Mr.
Walesa would have won easily.
Some 5,000 Greenpoint residents did vote.
Polish citizens who live there cast absentee ballots, preferring Mr.
Walesa to Mr.
Kwasniewski (pronounced kvash-NYEF-skee) by more than 4 to 1.
The result underscores the starkly different views that Poles and Polish-Americans have of Mr.
Walesa.


Extreme Dangers
To the Sports Editor:
I am writing in response to Ira Berkow's column ("Better Than a Stick in the  Eye," The Times, Nov. 14) on the extreme fighting event initially scheduled to occur in New York on Nov. 18.


NATO Needs to Shed Old Notion of Alliance
To the Editor:
William E. Odom (Op-Ed, Dec. 5) makes an important contribution to the debate over peacemaking in Bosnia by noting that the mission offers NATO the "strategic opportunity" to revitalize itself by refocusing from defending against a Soviet  invasion to maintaining stability in Europe.


CUNY Gives High Marks To Freshmen
This fall's class of entering freshmen at the City University of New York, the first group subject to tougher high school standards, is academically the best prepared in two decades, according to their school transcripts and the results of entrance examinations.
As a result, 2,300 fewer students are taking remedial courses this fall -- 26 percent of the freshman class, down from 36 percent last year -- according to university officials.


Bible Is No Basis for Creating Mideast Peace
To the Editor:
The argument behind Jack Miles's "Promised Land?" (Op-Ed, Dec. 6) could elude even the most ardent Bible student in the struggle that is transpiring in Israel over the peace process.


Condors, Anacondas and Bats From Peru
Don't let Jim Fowler get started on telling animal stories unless you're ready for some hair-raising adventures.
He's been in enough tight scrapes to last several lifetimes.
There was the time in an Amazonian rain forest when a 22-foot anaconda swallowed his arm up to his shoulder, loosening its grip only after Mr.
Fowler managed to relax.
Or the time he spent a night in a makeshift blind surrounded by vampire bats on a desolate island off the coast of Peru that as he puts it, "hadn't changed in 20,000 years."


Jordan Arrests Opponent Of Ties With Israel
Jordanian officials today arrested the leading opponent of King Hussein's drive for close ties with Israel on charges of creating civil strife, a crime that could carry a death sentence.
The man arrested, Laith Shubailat, head of a 35,000-member labor union, was questioned at the Amman police headquarters, security officials said.


Corrections
Because of a production error, an incorrect version of page 12 appeared last  Sunday in copies distributed in Westchester and Connecticut.
The page should have carried the continuation of the Your Home column and a letter; instead, it  repeated material from another page.
Readers wishing copies of the correct page  may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or telephone (212) 556-1992.


Prodigy and Prejudice
COMPOSITION IN BLACK AND WHITE The Life of Philippa Schuyler.
By Kathryn Talalay.
Illustrated. 317 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $30.


Having Fun In a Good Cause
Children, homebound AIDS patients and preservation were all aided by benefits held from Dec. 1 to 6.


I'M BACK
Was that piece attributed to Donald Trump actually written by Christopher Buckley?


Well, Somebody Likes It
To the Editor:
Do I get the impression that Herbert Muschamp doesn't like Trump International very much?
Somebody does: we have sold $52 million worth of apartments in a very, very, very short period of time.
Mr.
Muschamp's taste, fortunately, does not coincide with that of lots of very smart (and rich) people.


Head in the Stars
HUBBLE VISION Astronomy With the Hubble Space Telescope.
By Carolyn Collins Petersen and John C. Brandt.
Illustrated. 252 pp.
New York: Cambridge University Press. $39.95.


E.D. Campbell, 96, Champion Of Integration
Edmund D. Campbell, a lawyer in Washington and Virginia who argued cases involving the desegregation of schools and the representation of counties in state legislatures, died on Thursday at his home in Arlington, Va.
He was 96.
Mr.
Campbell was formerly a partner of and, in later years, counsel to the Washington-based law firm now known as Jackson &amp; Campbell.


Philip Morris Responds To Memo
Philip Morris USA, the nation's largest tobacco company, moved quickly on Friday to limit fallout from the disclosure of a company memorandum that accepts without question the claim that the main reason people smoke is to get nicotine  into their bodies.
The issue of whether cigarettes are essentially a delivery system for nicotine is at the heart of the Food and Drug Administration's current proposal to regulate nicotine as a drug.
Philip Morris and other tobacco companies have long maintained that a yen for nicotine is just one of the reasons people smoke, the others including taste, social habits and oral satisfaction.


Correction
A picture caption on Nov. 12 with the Frugal Traveler column about the Trastevere section of Rome misidentified the street shown.
It was the Vicolo Moroni, not the Via Natale del Grande.


Canceling the New World Mine
A United Nations committee has now designated Yellowstone National Park as a  "world heritage site in danger" largely because a Canadian conglomerate wants to build a huge gold, silver and copper mine less than three miles from the park's  borders.
The designation carries no legal weight, but it adds an international voice to the virtually unanimous chorus of opposition to the mine, which includes President Clinton.
Nobody seems to want this mine except Noranda, the Canadian company, and its American subsidiary, Crown Butte, which has title to the mine site and has so far invested about $35 million in this project.
After listening patiently to the company's safety pitch, this page is convinced that the proposed New World Mine is a disaster-in-waiting that could ruin one of America's leading ecosystems.
Reputable geologists say the company's proposed reservoir for storing buried liquid wastes in perpetuity is bound to crack someday, given the region's weather patterns and history of earthquakes.
That would send tons of toxic material directly into the irreplaceable Clark's Fork of the Yellowstone River.
Meanwhile, the mining operations would stir up underground wastes that would then seep into Yellowstone National Park itself.


The Bride Isn't the Only One He Has Fathered
Money Train Wesley Snipes, Woody Harrelson Directed by Joseph Ruben R 103 minutes


Landscapers' Work Pattern Helps Keep Them Around
To the Editor:
Leaf blower noise may not last long in Fair Lawn, but it does in Montclair and other high-income communities where as many as one out of seven homes use a  landscaping services ("The Noise of the Blowers Doesn't Last Very Long," Letters, Dec. 3).
What the writer fails to take into account is the work pattern of landscaping companies.


Books in Brief: NONFICTION
ECCENTRICS A Study of Sanity and Strangeness.
By David Weeks and Jamie James.
Villard, $23.


Last of the Big-Time Rockefellers
IT has been a rough year for the standard-bearer of one of the most fabled families in American history.
Just as David Rockefeller was solidifying his role as the business dynasty's  third-generation patriarch, two of the proudest symbols of the Rockefeller name  suffered embarrassing blows to their prestige.


Alyson Goldstein, Kenneth Lane
Alyson Michelle Goldstein, the business manager of Scientific American magazine in New York, was married last evening to Kenneth Howard Lane, an associate at Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher, the New York law firm.
Rabbi Howard R. Buechler performed the ceremony at Temple Beth El in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Mrs.
Lane, 25, is a certified public accountant and a graduate of the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a daughter of Susan and Howard Goldstein of Dix Hills, L.I.
The bride's father is a co-owner of CXI Designs, a wholesaler of women's sportswear in New York.
Her mother is a mortgage loan consultant at Great Western Bank in Mineola, L.I.


In Defense of John Madden And His Heartfelt Intensity
To the Editor:
In your Nov. 26 article "At the Mike With the Guru of Glib," Marty Glickman comments that John Madden talks too much, adding that he is "terrific -- but I can take him for only one quarter."


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
VARIOUS ARTISTS: 'PLANET SQUEEZEBOX' Ellipsis Arts, 20 Lumber Road, Roslyn, N.Y. 11576; three CD's ($50)


Victoria Nelson, Jose Gordo
Victoria Leandra Nelson, the daughter of Marilyn Morgan Fields of New York and Gene Nelson of Sherman Oaks, Calif., was married last evening to Jose Maria  Gordo, a son of Maria Elena Cordero Alvarez and Jose Maria Gordo Garcia, both of Caracas, Venezuela.
The Rev.
Frederick D. Hoesli officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New York.
The bride, 29, is an executive assistant at Warner Brothers in New York.
She  graduated from the University of Southern California.
Her mother retired as an executive vice president at Stan Herman/Stephen Shapiro Associates, a real estate brokerage in Beverly Hills, Calif.
The bride's father, a former actor and dancer on Broadway and in Hollywood, is a film director.


Warning: Too Much Safety May Be Hazardous
IT was about four years ago that Federal highway safety officials realized that air bags could kill children.
In 1991, researchers at the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration ran tests in which sleds equipped with air bags were rammed into barriers at high speeds.
The bags deployed with explosive force, slamming into the rear-facing infant seats strapped on the passenger side and damaging the infant-sized dummies placed inside.


Kate Winslet: No 'Period Babe'
WITH HER SLEEK hair, tailored leather jacket and a prepossessing mixture of candor and cool, Kate Winslet is, in the words of her director, a very sparkling, very modern, very attractive person.
On the job, however, she is typically swathed in silk, linen and lace, playing a series of self-destructive romantic heroines in period films.
Her interpretations of Sue Bridehead, a Thomas Hardy heroine, and Shakespeare's Ophelia will arrive on screen sometime next year.
And in "Sense and Sensibility," opening on Wednesday, film audiences will see her play Marianne Dashwood, perhaps the most reckless young woman Jane Austen ever created.
"But I'm not that period babe, not at all," said Ms.
Winslet, who is 20 and looks like Julie Christie circa "Darling." "I haven't really sat back and addressed the fact I have done all these period films. Some people say, 'Don't you want to do something modern?' I suppose I do. But I don't think it's necessarily a bad thing at all. I do feel very comfortable in the clothing."


Beware Technology Bears
To the Editor:
The writers of all the doom-and-gloom articles about high-technology stocks ("Yes, Virginia, Microsoft and Intel Can Be Disappointing," Investing It, Oct. 15, and "Beware the Rosy Reasoning of Tech Bulls," July 23) that I have read in  The New York Times probably missed a tremendous opportunity by being bearish on  these issues.
I mean tremendous.
One well-known high-tech stock that I own has grown over 2,000 percent in the last five years.


What's Iran Doing In Bosnia, Anyway?
AT a ceremony in Sarajevo 10 days after he initialed the Balkan peace agreement in Dayton, Ohio, President Alija Izetbegovic of Bosnia inaugurated Iran's enormous new embassy and expressed hope that the two countries would become much closer.
Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Velayati of Iran, who dropped into the Bosnian capital for the occasion, thanked the President with a pledge to help reconstruct his devastated country.
The warmth was not surprising.
Throughout nearly four years of war, Iran has  been one of Bosnia's closest allies.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
STEVE WINWOOD: 'THE FINER THINGS' Island; four CD's ($60)


Bosnia Highlights A Republican Split
WILLIAM KRISTOL has pretty impeccable Republican credentials.
He was Vice President Dan Quayle's chief of staff, scourge of the Clinton health plan, and founder of a think tank called the Project for the Republican Future.
But when the new magazine he edits, The Weekly Standard, came out last week in favor of President Clinton's plans to send American troops to Bosnia, the brickbats flew.
Some Republicans began sarcastically referring to his avowedly conservative journal as "Mother Jones," after the counterculture magazine.
The letters, Mr.
Kristol said, are running 20-to-1 against the magazine's stinging lead editorial, which assailed Republicans for "flunking" what it termed "a yea-or-nay question concerning America's continued engagement with the rest of the world."


THE RICH
Thank you for your peek into the lives of the wealthy.
The cybernetic age is  creating enormous quantities of wealth, goods and services with little labor content.
Perhaps we are entering a new phase of socialism.
The middle class (in the form of the institutional investor) now rules Wall Street.
In the aggregate, it  is more wealthy than the wealthy.
Perhaps we are returning to a slave society where computer chips do the work, without going on strike to demand better working conditions.
HERBERT JAFFE Freeport, L.I.


Bay Scallop Season Offers A Rich Briny Sweetness
THE local bay scallop season has started.
Supplies of the briny-sweet nuggets have not been particularly abundant in recent years, driving prices skyward.
But still, fresh bay scallops are hard to resist.
And because the meat is so rich, a little can go a long way, especially if the scallops are intermingled with pasta, rice or even seaweed.
Marinated Bay Scallops With Seaweed


Take the Money and Walk? How to Decide
A buyout offer is a bribe to leave.
Compared with outright dismissal or a companywide pay cut, it is more humane, but more expensive for the company.
Still, a buyout helps insure that workers who stay are not so demoralized by  the exodus that productivity is harmed.
Shabby treatment of those who leave guarantees poor morale, benefits consultants say.


Times Square Subway Station: Putting a There There
The Times Square subway station, which handles more lines and passengers than any other in the system, is about to get something it has never had: a main entrance.
Construction will begin next month as the first phase of the first major renovation of the entire station.
The entrance, on the southeast corner of 42d Street and Seventh Avenue, will  be unlike any other in the city, with a glitzy exterior of glass and bright lights and colored discs and strips.
The token booth, turnstiles and entries to  new elevators and escalators will be at street level.


I'M BACK
Trump's misguided vendetta, spewing forth vindictive rhetoric in an attempt to decimate "disloyal" detractors, is priceless irony in view of his own history of conduct.
As a former public relations consultant for many of Trump's casinos, I can say that on the subject of loyalty, Trump is a one-way street and public advocate for one person only -- Donald J. Trump.
CHUCK JONES New York


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
'HI TIMES: THE HI RECORDS RHYTHM-AND-BLUES YEARS' The Right Stuff; three CD's ($25)


A Lesson. This Time We've Got It on Tape.
Think back to late 1969.
Technology had just put men on the moon.
New methods of storing, retrieving and manipulating seas of data in minutes or seconds were  changing the business world.
As the stock market's high-tech sector boomed, investors fawned on Telex and Memorex, makers of computer tape drives and magnetic tapes.
Few people believed that any company could overtake the pair, which had built an early lead in an even newer method of data storage, disk drives.
And investors heartily scoffed at the notion that the pair had anything to fear from a late entry into the field, a stodgy old company called I.B.M.
Wall Street professed that Telex or Memorex would be the next I.B.M., putting Big Blue out of the data storage business.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
HENRY MANCINI: 'THE DAYS OF WINE AND ROSES' RCA; three CD's ($40)


82-Year-Old Adventurer, Lost at Sea, Is Rescued
An 82-year-old man trying to sail from San Diego to Honolulu was brought back to shore today after spending days unconscious and adrift in the Pacific Ocean.
Kirk Lightbourne, a piano tuner and former big-band trumpeter from Scottsdale, Ariz., was rescued on Friday by two fishermen and the Coast Guard.
After landing at Morro Bay, he was taken to Sierra Vista Hospital, where his condition was listed as stable.


Assault-Gun Ban Faces New and Capable Nemesis
At some quiet legislative moment before Christmas, a freshman Congressman who is considered the new point man for the National Rifle Association will have a chance to demonstrate whether he is as tough and determined as colleagues and critics estimate.
"Bob Barr is smart, relentless and very extreme," said Representative Charles E. Schumer, the New York Democrat who last year championed the passage of the Federal assault-weapons ban that Mr.
Barr, Republican of Georgia, has made a target for repeal in his role as chairman of the House's new Firearms Legislation Task Force.


Croatian Forces Razing Serb Villages as They Withdraw
As the day approaches for certain towns and villages in this region to pass to Serbian control, Bosnian Croat forces are withdrawing, as called for under the peace accords.
But as they do so, they have been engaging in systematic and wide-scale arson and looting, and may also be laying land mines in some villages, United Nations  officials say.


Corrections
A picture caption on Nov. 26 with an article about storm damage to the Caribbean misidentified the beach shown on St.
Thomas.
It was Magens Bay, not Sapphire Beach.


Open Door, Open Books, Packed Shop
This place is like 'Cheers,' " said a customer, surveying not a neighborhood bar but a neighborhood bookstore -- Twinkleberry &amp; Nutkin, a sliver at 311 East  81st Street.
Children's books line wooden shelves, and patrons fill its narrow aisle, some dropping in just to chat.
The place is impenetrable during puppet shows.
"It felt like a studio apartment with a family of 30," said the owner, Brenda Parush, after a recent storytelling hour.


The $2,000 Vacancy Rent as a Key to Deregulation
THERE is a magic to the figure 2,000 under the rent laws in New York City.
The law says that from April 1, 1994, onward, any rent-regulated apartment that  becomes vacant is deregulated if the legal vacancy rent is at least $2,000 a month.
This so-called luxury vacancy decontrol law, enacted in 1993, has cleared the way for the deregulation of vacated apartments that were renting well below $2,000 when they were occupied.
In many cases a normal vacancy allowance and rent-guidelines increase will be enough to put the legal rent at $2,000.
But the renovation of a vacant apartment may also be the key to its decontrol.


Genealogical Records Refute Ramapoughs' Indian Claims
To the Editor:
At least one researcher has traced the genealogies of the Van Dunks, De Freeses and others comprising the so-called Mountain People of Mahwah, Hillburn  and Ringwood and has found little or no evidence of Indian origin ("Laying Claim to a Tribe's History," Nov. 26).


Temporary Layoffs at Northrop Grumman
The Northrop Grumman Corporation says it will lay off about 6,000 workers for as long as two weeks after their annual weeklong Christmas vacation.
The aerospace company, which is based in Los Angeles, said the temporary layoffs had been prompted by its desire to avoid accumulating excess inventory of aircraft fuselages in the face of weakening demand caused by the machinists'  union strike at the Boeing Company.


Streetscapes: The Bishop's Crook Lamppost;Some Light on a West Side Preservation Endeavor
WHEN the Landmark West! preservationists put back the old-style streetlights  on West 67th Street, a neighbor gave Arlene Simon, the group's president, just the compliment she had hoped for: "They look as if they've always been there."


Pope Renews Vatican Stand Backing Religious Freedom
Government measures to insure the separation of church and state should not be viewed as barring religion and religious convictions from any role in public  life, Pope John Paul II said last week in a statement that also reaffirmed the Roman Catholic Church's commitment to religious freedom.
The statement, synthesizing a number of the Pope's favorite themes, was issued on Thursday to mark the 30th anniversary of "Dignitatis Humanae," the Second Vatican Council's declaration on religious freedom.


THE RICH
Among the many irritating aspects of your Nov. 19 Magazine, the disingenuousness of distinguishing one issue from the rest of the year's issues  by dedicating it to the rich rates highest: as if every other issue is not for and about the rich.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
VARIOUS ARTISTS: 'THE REAL MUSIC BOX -- 25 YEARS OF MUSIC ON ROUNDER RECORDS' Rounder; nine CD's ($40)


When Husbands Rape: Cases of 'Soul Murder'
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 6 news article on the conviction of a husband for raping his wife may prove unnecessarily discouraging to victims.
Convictions are not rare if the cases are prosecuted.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Some Bulking Up For a West Side Site


Unwelcome in Chinatown
WHEN I go to Chinatown for breakfast with my parents or my relatives from Hong Kong, we are ushered to the best table, offered a variety of special dishes and treated to warm smiles and solicitous service by the dim sum ladies.
When I go to a Chinatown restaurant on my own, I arrive first and end up being the last person to be seated.
I have to wave for 10 minutes before someone comes to fill my teapot; the dim sum ladies roll right past me as if I were invisible; my change is thrown instead of handed to me.


Sources of Amazement About Gourds and More
There's something about a newsletter that takes me back to the excitement of  waiting at the mailbox for my Weekly Reader, when I subscribed in the third grade.
I still remember being shocked that people in the Soviet Union had to drink bottled water (or so my Weekly Reader said, but then, it was the Cold War).
Little did I know that I'd be sitting in an office in Manhattan years later, drinking bottled water.
A newsletter will tell you things you've never dreamed of, in the chatty voice of one friend writing to another (or more to the point, of one fanatic writing to another).


Local Poles: Walesa Loyalists
Voters in Poland turned Lech Walesa out of office on Nov. 19, electing Aleksandr Kwasniewski, a former Communist and ex-newspaper editor, to the presidency with 52 percent of the vote.
But if the election had been held in Greenpoint, north Brooklyn's Polish enclave, Mr.
Walesa would have won easily.
Some 5,000 Greenpoint residents did vote.
Polish citizens who live there cast absentee ballots, preferring Mr.
Walesa to Mr.
Kwasniewski (pronounced kvash-NYEF-skee) by more than 4 to 1.
The result underscores the starkly different views that Poles and Polish-Americans have of Mr.
Walesa.


Susan Hills, Michael Walzak
Susan Eldridge Hills, a daughter of the late Dorothy Mansfield Hills Shumaker, was married yesterday to Michael Francis Walzak, a son of Estelle Walzak of Burlington, Ontario, and the late B. Leo Walzak.
The Rev.
Robert Harp  performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Lodge at Koele on Lanai, Hawaii.
Ms.
Hills, who changed her name, was until recently an associate in the international treasury department at the Compaq Computer Corporation in Houston.
She graduated from the University of Vermont and received an M.B.A. degree from Columbia University.
The bride is a descendant of Joseph Hills, the first Episcopal bishop in the United States.


BIG BOYS WILL BE COWBOYS
Mark Stevens's article "Big Boys Will Be Cowboys" (Nov. 19) should have been  titled "How the Locals View Well-to-Do Outsiders Who Are Buying Ranches in the West." His view of us is superficial and selective.
Some of us have been here for 20 or 30 years.
I have been here 8.
We are not just playing cowboy.
We do the work, just like those born into it.
The difference is that we have chosen to do it.


Crime
With its paltry population (13,000) and low number of homicides (one per year), Brattleboro, Vt., doesn't seem the most promising venue for tough police  procedurals.
It takes a visionary perspective like Archer Mayor's in THE DARK ROOT (Mysterious Press/Warner, $19.95) to make Brat tleboro the microcosmic setting for larger, more lethal criminal trends abroad in the land.
Lieut.
Joe Gunther, the square-jawed hero of this solid series, sees an alarming connection between the torture-killing of a local mobster and a vicious home invasion that traumatized a Chinese restaurateur and his family.
"We get lulled into a false sense of security in this town. We think all that big-city crime is far away," says Gunther, who suspects that Brattleboro is being "market-tested" by two rival Asian gangs who think it would make a nice pit stop on their trade route to Canada.


Of Mondrian, Street Grids And Cities Transcendent
UPTOWN, DOWNTOWN, crosstown, our town: long before reaching the painting "Broadway Boogie Woogie," visitors to the Museum of Modern Art's magnificent Mondrian show may find themselves drawn into a New York state of mind.
Mondrian's painted grids, of course, fit almost too neatly into the city with the 90-degree soul.
And for an architecture critic, the show casts a revealing light on the city itself.
It may be entirely coincidental that Mondrian's grids recall the street plan of Manhattan.
Even so, the paintings and the city both stand at the intersection of material reality and metaphysical thought.
At the Modern, wall plaques help viewers grasp the idea that Mondrian's abstract forms are not simply a matter of composition or design.
For Mondrian, and for those susceptible to the creative process he pursued with such passion,  the departure from representation holds a spiritual dimension.
Perhaps the show  itself can help us perceive the transcendent city outside from a similar point of view.
The engineers who designed New York's grid did more than carve out identical plots of land from a bumpy little island.
They also defined a metaphysical space, a test ground for the aspirations that the skyline came to symbolize.


I'M BACK
I have read Trump's article three times, and I am still uncertain if this is  satire.
It seems impossible that Trump would really submit it.
He's the man who  simultaneously had a mistress and a wife -- a "total loyalist (perhaps to a fault)." Can you help me out here?


Glue and the Bottom Line
To the Editor:
As a member of an organization working on the problem of street children and  inhalant abuse, I was pleased to see your article on H. B.  Fuller.
Organizations that work with the increasing numbers of Latin American street children attest that nearly all of them use drugs, most commonly shoe glue, to ease hunger pangs, provide a false sense of security and help them escape, at least psychologically, their miserable conditions.


THE RICH
Great issue, "The Rich." A common thread run-ning through your profiles is the unflagging enthusiasm of the rich for their respective careers.
The absolute joy of Carrey, Winfrey, Stallone, Milken, Turner, Kluge, Gates, Buffett etc., tells it all.
These people play at what they do all day, in the most literal sense of the word.
Anyone watching a child at play can see that this is serious  stuff indeed, but work it is not.
Work tires one out.
Play is an energy feedback.
I noticed many of the recent fortunes have been made in amusement and entertainment businesses or in investments in the audio-visual field.
This money comes from the rest of us who pay for the privilege of observing -- of being amused and entertained.
My hat is off to those lucky few who make things happen.


Once Again, Armory Shelters Homeless and Stirs Dispute
For the 14 years that the Flushing Armory was used by the city's Department of Homeless Services as a women's shelter, it was a source of controversy.
Neighborhood residents said the homeless women at the shelter loitered on the streets, used drugs and alcohol and solicited male students at nearby Flushing High School.
Now, with the armory reopened as an emergency shelter for homeless men, residents are again up in arms, and local elected officials said the city was circumventing regulations by operating the shelter without a permit from the state.


Listening to Both the Shareholders and One's Conscience
JUST because your job is to make money doesn't mean you should check your conscience at the door on your way to work.
Sounds obvious, right?
But if you are a professional money manager, where to draw the line is anything but clear cut.
Some managers say they avoid investing in certain companies because of moral or  ethical concerns.
Mind you, these are not managers of so-called socially responsible mutual funds, which buy stocks only if they meet guidelines outlined in the prospectus -- excluding, for example, companies that are involved in nuclear weapons or gambling.
These are managers who make moral or ethical choices on a case-by-case basis  for their clients.
Foster Friess, who manages the $4 billion Brandywine Fund, says he sometimes takes his beliefs into consideration when making investment decisions.
Acutely aware of his responsibility to deliver superior returns to investors, Mr.
Friess also wants to avoid investing in companies that, he says,  "rip off people, treat employees badly or are irresponsible corporate citizens." Mr.
Friess has certainly not sacrificed performance: Brandywine has returned an  average of 22 percent annually over the last three years.


Homey Settings On the East Side
AL BUSTAN @ (212) 759-5933; 827 Third Avenue, near 51st Street; (c) all major credit cards


Preservation Vs. Commercialization
To the Editor:
In his article "Who Owns the Blues?" [Nov. 26], Phil Patton once again brings to light a cultural/commercial phenomenon that has been present in American history for at least two centuries: the white co-opting of black culture for commercial purposes.
Isaac Tigrett and Dan Aykroyd may defend their creation of  the House of Blues by saying they were "on a mission from God." In fact, they are perpetuating a long tradition of white commerce latching onto black art as a means of making the money that black artists so richly deserve and have been denied.


Probing Mr. Gingrich And His Gopac
The House ethics committee finally acted against Speaker Newt Gingrich, 15 months after receiving its first complaints about him, his political action committee (Gopac) and a political course he taught at Kennesaw State College that was financed with tax-exempt money.
But the committee's request for special counsel raised a question as big as the ones it set out to answer.


Correction
The Business Best Sellers listing last Sunday misspelled the surname of a co-author of "It's Better to Laugh," ranked No. 8 among hard covers.
She is Jane Scovell, not Seovell.


Shaw Warmed Over Before a Tour
IS this the B group?" a member of the audience wondered out loud after the Acting Company's opening night at the George Street Playhouse. The question could have been ingenuous or incisive.
Whatever, it was understandable but unsettling, given the evening's lumbering display of George Bernard Shaw's "Arms and the Man." And the question was, alas, answerable.
No, this was not the B group.
The Acting Company has 12 members; 7 are in the play at George Street.
One is a playhouse intern.


In Hard Times, Helping Hands
The cold is filling up New York's shelters early this year.
The drop-in center on Bond Street in Brooklyn, run by Catholic Charities, Diocese of Brooklyn and Queens, is one of nine private refuges in the city.
Catholic Charities is one of seven charities aided by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, which is making its 84th annual appeal for donations.
At the center, the homeless find food, warmth and counseling.
And when overnight shelters are full, the overflow crowd sleeps on the center's chairs.
Article, page 57.


They Did It His Way
Frank Sinatra, who turns 80 Tuesday, has earned more nicknames and had more theme songs than any other entertainer in American history.
"The Voice," became  "The Chairman of the Board" who became "Ol' Blue Eyes." "Put Your Dreams Away,"  gave way to "My Way," and eventually to "New York, New York." Each of those names and songs conjures up images of a different Sinatra: the skinny, starry-eyed Romeo, swinging king of show business, the hard-boiled superstar survivor.
They also attest to the special status Mr.
Sinatra has accumulated over the  last five and a half decades.
America's first superstar singer became its first  entertainer to grow old and still fill large arenas.
Three years ago, his "Duets" album achieved the astonishing feat of outselling any of his previous recordings.
He was 77.
In becoming the first popular singer to have been idolized for his entire adult life, outlasting Elvis Presley and the Beatles, Mr.
Sinatra can be credited with making old age safe for pop.
And, as much as he has been an icon of hedonistic self-expression, the dark side of his stardom has been just as visible.


Books in Brief: NONFICTION;An Artist, Not a Wife
As an art student in Greenwich Village in the 1930's, Lee Krasner (1908-1984) was notable for both the sophistication with which she absorbed the achievements of the early Modernists and her ferocious ambition as a painter.
But throughout  a stormy marriage to Jackson Pollock, she repeatedly set aside her own work to foster and promote his, a course that can be ascribed to either female masochism or a rational recognition that his brilliance exceeded her own.
Only in the 70's, long after Pollock's death in 1956, did Krasner receive serious recognition.
Ellen G. Landau, who has written an impressive book on Pollock, has lovingly catalogued Krasner's entire output in LEE KRASNER: A Catalogue Raisonne (Abrams, $95; $125 after Jan. 1) -- some 600 paintings, drawings and collages.
Like Krasner herself -- a fiercely honest, formidable woman -- many of these works have an authoritative presence, yet for all their skill, and the astute visual intelligence on display, they never quite achieve that unmistakable originality that finally distinguishes the good artist from the great one.
Ms.
Sadly, some of Krasner's earlier work -- done before she met Pollock -- has more immediacy and power than anything she did later, which makes one sense, all over again, what she may have sacrificed.
Krasner once called her paintings "biographical," but the narrative they evoke seems different from the  one she had in mind; above all, her work tells the story of someone eternally paying homage to the genius of others.
EVELYN TOYNTON


Sweater Girl
WHEN I WAS living in Australia, I had a friend named Libby who was having troubles with her life.
She called her mum in Tasmania to complain, and her mum  told her, "Lib, you should be knitting."
So she bought some yarn and needles and started on an outfit for the baby I was expecting.
She felt better right away, and I understood.


Death on 125th Street: The Prelude;Officials Tell of Efforts to Stave Off Trouble
Elected officials and civic leaders in Harlem said yesterday that they had begun making efforts in the last few weeks to mediate the real estate dispute on 125th Street that apparently lay behind the arson attack on a white-owned clothing store Friday that left a gunman and seven store workers dead.
Sikhulu Shange, whose small record store was being forced off the block, had  contacted, among others, the area's longtime Representative, Charles B. Rangel;  the state Assemblyman, Keith L. T. Wright, the City Councilwoman representing the district, C. Virginia Fields, and the local community board for help in his  dispute with Freddy's clothing store, which held his lease, and with the building's owner, the United House of Prayer for All People, a predominantly black church.


Mr. Pataki's Tax Giveaway
Gov.
George Pataki of New York came of age politically in the 1980's, and he  obviously remembers Ronald Reagan's intended lesson: cut taxes first, and everything else will follow.
If your goal is to unravel the social safety net, the rule is an excellent one.
But if Mr.
Pataki wants to govern responsibly, he  should rethink his strategy.
Mr.
Pataki's second state budget will be unveiled Dec. 15.
By all reports it  will include proposals for drastic cuts in welfare, Medicaid and other state programs.
Anyone who objects will be challenged to come up with another way to close what he now says is at least a $4 billion budget gap.


Books in Brief: NONFICTION
SINS OF THE SON By Carlton Stowers. Hyperion, $22.95.


Rowan Routed in Title Game
Craig Kusick passed for 281 yards and 4 touchdowns, as Wisconsin-La Crosse preserved its perfect season today with a 36-7 victory over Rowan of Glassboro,  N.J., in the Amos Alonzo Stagg Bowl, the N.C.A.A.
Division III championship game.
Wisconsin-La Crosse (14-0) gained 451 yards against Rowan (10-3-1) and the Profs turned the ball over six times.
Rowan, losing its second Stagg Bowl in three years, took a 7-0 lead in the first quarter on a 1-yard touchdown run by Aaron Bosco after the Eagles lost a fumble at their 7-yard line.


Safari
To the Editor: I would not like your readers to think that they have to spend as much as Eric Taub and his wife did to enjoy an African safari ("On Safari in  High Style, Nov. 5). In July, a group of us stayed at the Honeyguide Tented Safari Camp in the Manyeleti Game Reserve, which also borders the Kruger National Park.


Rutgers Star Now Learns to Field the Calls
Marco Battaglia is in the weight room -- 10 minutes away from his dormitory on the Rutgers campus in Piscataway, N.J. -- but he can still hear his phone ringing.
It rings late at night when he's trying to sleep, early in the morning  when he doesn't always feel like getting out of bed.
It rings.
And it rings.
And it rings.
"I can't get the ringing out of my ears," said Battaglia, a senior tight end  on the Scarlet Knights' football team who was recently chosen as a first-team all-America by The Associated Press.
"I'm getting bombarded with calls from people who want to represent me."


No, Thanks
I have climbed to the top of the greasy pole!" proclaimed Benjamin Disraeli  when he became Prime Minister of Britain.
Some people, though, do not think success is worth the scramble.
So to general amazement, they decline a big promotion or skip the chance for a top job -- as no less a figure than Colin L. Powell just did.
Do you know someone who turned his back on ambition, and why?
Send your story to On the Job, Money and Business, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Or by E-mail to onthejob@nytimes.com.
Include your phone number.
All submissions become the property of The Times and may be republished in any medium.


MICHAEL EISNER IS WORTH $200 MILLION A YEAR
Weinstein's article is charmingly seductive, but lacking moral foundation.
His main arguments seem to be that 1) the numbers of super-rich C.E.O.'s are too few to affect the economy, so why worry, and 2) they make good business decisions, so are worth their worth.
As to their numbers, the super-rich do matter, in spite of their supposed limited cumulative impact on the economy.
I cannot believe that some of their money isn't used to affect the political process to foster their continued wealth.
PETER M. GLICK St.
Paul


I'M BACK
Was that piece attributed to Donald Trump actually written by Christopher Buckley?


The C.I.A.'s most Important Mission: Itself
ON AN AUTUMN EVENING, IN A PRIVATE PLANE APPROACHING WASHINGTON, JOHN DEUTCH, THE NEW Director of Central Intelligence, sprawled wearily in an armchair and worried aloud about the nation's spies.
He compared them to a defeated force --  the United States Army after the fall of Saigon.
"What happened with the Army?" Deutch said.
"The young officers looked at each other and said: 'We're in trouble. We've got to change. We've got to figure out a way to do this differently. We're either leaving or we're going to change  the system.' And the people who stayed did change the system."


STATE OF THE ART GALLERY
ONLY A VERY INSULATED NEW YORKER WOULD CONSIDER Los Angeles a hick town when  it comes to art.
From the recent reopening of the Temporary Contemporary to the  edgy Bergamot Station, L.A. has striven mightily in recent years to achieve its  art-world credentials.
But the fact remains that until two of the biggest names  in New York came to town, there were no commercial venues for the big-ticket contemporary art -- Chuck Close, Louise Nevelson, Cy Twombly -- that is rarely seen here outside a movie mogul's home.
The Pace Wildenstein and Gagosian galleries are determined to change all that.
Both sites are calculated to impress.
Both have been designed by major-league architects, but while one encourages the reverent hush of the gallery as sanctuary, the other doesn't mind indulging in a little razzle-dazzle for the West Coast crowd.


Canadiens Reflect Turmoil in Quebec
The politics of language are never far from the surface here.
Anybody who doubts that need look no further than the Oct. 30 referendum in which the separatists, led by the Parti Quebecois, were thwarted by a razor-thin margin in their bid to create their own country by having the province of Quebec secede from Canada.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
BENEFIT WITH STARS


Books in Brief: NONFICTION
THE RIGHT TO PRIVACY By Ellen Alderman and Caroline Kennedy. Knopf, $26.95.


A Zillion Points of Light
CHARLES CAUCCI, a South Jersey designer of Christmas decor, says he misses "the good old days of Atlantic City, when the casinos were out to impress each other and the bottom line was on the bottom."
The good days for Mr.
Caucci (pronounced KOO-chee), 45, who, with his brother Robert, owns Tom's Christmas World in McKee City, were in the first decade of legalized gambling, when high rollers were packing the Boardwalk and casinos celebrated Christmas in high style.


A Killer May Loom In a 'Cure-All' Tea
Kombucha mushroom tea, which its proponents claim cures AIDS, insomnia and other ills, could pose a serious health risk, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention warned on Thursday.
The center said an Iowa woman died in April and another woman became seriously ill after they drank the tea every day for two months.
The beverage, which is made by fermenting yeasts and bacteria in black tea and sugar, is also  called "Kargasok tea," "tea fungus" and "Manchurian mushroom tea," even though it is not made from mushrooms.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.


Prostate Surgery for Mayor Barry
Doctors removed the cancerous prostate gland of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. of  Washington today in a two-hour operation described by the head surgeon as smooth, swift and successful.
"I feel very confident that he will be fine," said the surgeon, Dr.
Patrick Walsh, the director of the urology department at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.


Gay Rights Leaders Missing, Found Dead
Two gay rights advocates who had been missing for four days have been found dead in the back of a pickup truck.
The bodies of Roxanne Ellis and Michelle Abdill were found in Ms.
Ellis's canopied pickup on Thursday after a cable TV worker reported the vehicle to the authorities.
Residents had complained of a foul odor around the truck.


What's Up? Listen . . . A Reporter's Life in Politics
IN 1955, when Joseph F. Sullivan became a reporter, New Jersey was as much a  state of farms as of pharmaceuticals.
Hudson County was still, post-Hague, a Democratic machine.
Governors were still chosen by clubhouse politicians.
Each county sent only one senator to Trenton -- the 21 Club, it was called.
Statewide politics belonged to moderate Republicans.
Instead of Ross Perot, there was Henry Krajewski, a pig farmer from Secaucus who liked to run for President.
Bruce Springsteen was far off, and so was the income tax.


Dangerous Playthings? The State's Toy Police Are on Patrol
Peg Mullen cannot walk past a stuffed animal without attempting to yank out its eyes.
At a Rite-Aid store in the Livingston Mall, she picked up a brown-maned Galloping Pony and gave its left eye a sharp tug.
"See?" she said.
"You can't pull it off anymore. They use some kind of epoxy  now, and you couldn't get it off if you brought a pair of pliers."


Debunking the Old Myth That Blacks Are Monolithic
To the Editor:
Lisa Anderson need not feel guilty about her lack of journalistic interest in covering the crack and crime in Harlem ("Harlem on Her Mind," Nov. 19).
She just scooped most journalists in the country by covering another African-American story -- one not based on the myth that "blacks" are a monolithic group with a collective poverty experience.
Unfortunately, many people still believe that class and race are synonymous when speaking of "black" people.


Mall Aglow With New Stores and 'Real' Santa
BOGGED down with shopping bags from stores throughout the Roosevelt Field mall, Roy Cotignola and Mary-Jo Thompson were doing their holiday shopping at J. Crew.
"We've already been to Kay-Bee, Disney, Warner Brothers, Learningsmith and the Nature Company," said Ms.
Thompson, who traveled to the mall from Queens to  find the items on her holiday list.


Inspired Appetizers for Penny-Wise Diners
HOLIDAY celebrants with fat waists and bargain hunters with thin wallets will love the new weekday cafe menu at 107 Forest (674-3441).
The handsome Locust Valley spot is celebrating its second anniversary with a menu of 20 small plates or appetizers, priced at $4 to $10.
The often-innovative offerings give penny-wise diners an opportunity to order two courses for $15 or less.
That is quite a buy at this place of inspired cooking, white tablecloths, candles and mirrors, where the lowest-priced entree, a vegetarian dish, costs $16.
The small plate concept also enables diners who have succumbed to the temptations of this season's parties and dinners to eat lightly and well.


The Sadness of the Hunter
SO much has been written about the joy of hunting and so little about the sadness, the sadness that fills the silence after the echo of the shot has died  away.
If the hunter is skilled, or lucky, he has just killed something.
In a moment he may feel joy.
But first he must pass through another emotion, one akin to grief.
He must pull the trigger to get there.
Nothing could be more appropriate, for grief is supposed to be linked to death.


In This Buyback, the Stock Is Your Frequent-Flier Mileage
IF employees were asked to chisel Ten Commandments for their chief executives, many lists would probably include, "Thou shalt not covet thy workers' frequent-flier mileage."
But a small but growing band of companies, concerned about travel costs, are  breaking that commandment by cutting employees a deal: If you use your frequent-flier miles to get a ticket for a business trip, the company will pay you a percentage of what that ticket would have cost.


Talks on Rebuilding Bosnia Become Squabble Over Bill
The United States and more than 40 other countries completed a two-day meeting here today on planning the reconstruction of Bosnia, but progress was slowed by the sheer scale of the problems, from repatriating refugees and rebuilding houses to restarting the shattered economy.
The countries did not even try to address the critical question of who would  pay for a program that in the long run could cost $5 billion or more.
And while  they settled on Carl Bildt, the former Swedish Prime Minister and European envoy to the Bosnia peace talks, to lead the civilian reconstruction effort, they only touched on the complexities of specific issues, such as how to create a central  bank, or a police force that will be accepted by Muslims, Croats and Serbs.


Downsize, They Ordered. No Way, He Said.
THE FACT that those people lost their jobs, that was my responsibility," said Raymond E. McCreary, businessman.
Say what?
The Dow's been blazing a blue streak.
Corporate profits are up, and downsizing is why.
Last month, while the Moet corks popped on Wall Street, another batch of premier companies on this side of the Hudson got into fighting trim, laying off thousands of those cumbersome employees: Prudential in Newark, AT&amp;T in Basking Ridge, Midlantic in Edison and West Paterson.


Panel Backs a New Drug to Combat Glaucoma
A panel of scientific advisers recommended on Friday that the Food and Drug Administration approve a new type of drug to battle glaucoma.
Studies have shown that the drug, Latanoprost, works better than standard therapy, but has the startling side effect of permanently turning some blue or green eyes brown.
The panel said that the manufacturer, Pharmacia Upjohn Inc., should continue  to study the drug's long-term safety and clearly label that it can cause the eye color change.


New &amp; Noteworthy
CITY ON A HILL: Testing the American Dream at City College By James Traub.
Addison-Wesley, $14.
Once known as "the poor man's Harvard," the City College of New York earned a reputation for academic selectivity untainted by considerations of economic or social status.
This history shows how the open-admissions policy instituted in the 1960's has undermined that legacy.
It is "deeply reported, lucidly written and clearly thought-out," A. M. Rosenthal said here in 1994.


The Bride Isn't the Only One He Has Fathered
The American President Michael Douglas, Annette Bening, Martin Sheen, Michael J. Fox Directed by Rob Reiner PG-13 115 minutes


Marooned at a Shelter, Eking Out Life an Hour at a Time
New York City's homeless shelters are filling up.
Winter weather has been colder sooner than usual, and social service agencies' outreach efforts have been more intense, city officials and shelter workers say.
Other homeless people, meanwhile, have migrated to makeshift encampments scattered throughout the boroughs to escape what advocates for the homeless have charged is a campaign to make them less visible on midtown streets.
Surviving on the streets this year could be harder than ever.
There are refuges, like the drop-in center on Bond Street in downtown Brooklyn, which provides food, warmth and counseling.
The private center, one of nine in the city, accepts people who walk in from the street, are picked up by the center's outreach van or are referred from Catholic Charities, Diocese of Brooklyn and Queens.
The charity, which runs the center, is one of seven supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, whose 84th appeal for donations is now under way.


At the Casinos
What's happening onstage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.


Glue and the Bottom Line
To the Editor:
Seeing pictures of children in San Salvador sniffing glue ("Black Mark for a  'Good Citizen,' " Nov. 26) made me wonder if they would be in school or day-care centers instead of wandering the streets had the popular movements won in Central America.
Our Government spent billions to insure the rights of corporations and landlords to pay starvation wages, so let's not heap the sins of Washington on the head of one glue maker.


Books in Brief: NONFICTION;Hot Type
Many people already know everything there is to know about the contents of Howard Stern's MISS AMERICA (Regan Books, $27.50), the cover of which shows Mr.
Stern in drag on the front and in a tuxedo hobnobbing with O. J. Simpson on the  back.
Inside, the jacket tells us, you'll find details of Mr.
Stern's secret meeting with Michael Jackson and his pact with Adolf Hitler, as well as 40 pictures of naked breasts, so there is little point in discussing the literary merits here.
But what readers may take for granted is the book's design, a complex melange of typographic hierarchies.
It is a remarkable display of deconstructive, post-structural, post-modern experimentation -- or to put it simply for the layman, words explode across the page.
The text and binding were  designed by Chip Kidd and Nina Gaskin; the jacket and the inserted color section were designed by Jack Heller (no relation) and Ralph Cirella.
Each of the 482 pages is a distinct design experience.
But this kind of expressive typography is not new.
In 1918 Guillaume Apollinaire published an antiwar poem, "Il Pleut," with lines of type falling down the page simulating a rainstorm; in 1914 F. T. Marinetti wrote and designed the Futurist book "Zang Tumb Tuuuum," using discordant typefaces designed to visually approximate the sounds that he described in words; and in 1967 Quentin Fiore gave a visual voice to Marshall McLuhan's "Medium Is the Massage" through a rebuslike integration of word and image complemented by shifts in typographic size and weight.
In 1970 Mr.
Fiore brought the same kinetic type and page design to Jerry Rubin's book "Do It!," to which "Miss America" owes a distinct debt.
Unfortunately, "Miss America" really  doesn't go as far as some of these books.
While the design shouts and screams, by the standards of other 20th-century books it is actually pretty timid.
STEVEN HELLER


THE RICH
Great issue, "The Rich." A common thread run-ning through your profiles is the unflagging enthusiasm of the rich for their respective careers.
The absolute joy of Carrey, Winfrey, Stallone, Milken, Turner, Kluge, Gates, Buffett etc., tells it all.
These people play at what they do all day, in the most literal sense of the word.
Anyone watching a child at play can see that this is serious  stuff indeed, but work it is not.
Work tires one out.
Play is an energy feedback.
I noticed many of the recent fortunes have been made in amusement and entertainment businesses or in investments in the audio-visual field.
This money comes from the rest of us who pay for the privilege of observing -- of being amused and entertained.
My hat is off to those lucky few who make things happen.


Books in Brief: NONFICTION
ECCENTRICS A Study of Sanity and Strangeness.
By David Weeks and Jamie James.
Villard, $23.


Orlando
There's plenty of room for Christmas in Orlando, even though the holiday's trimmings must compete for attention with dozens of popular tourist attractions.
The city is decked to the nines with Christmas trees, holly and other symbols of the season.
Some theme parks even make ersatz snow.


Investigation Targets Tests For Abortions
The F.B.I. is investigating whether the state's largest chain of abortion clinics has rigged ultrasound tests to convince clients they need riskier -- and more expensive -- abortions, The Boston Globe reported today.
The F.B.I. and Brookline police searched the Brookline office of Repro Associates on Nov. 30, seizing medical records and documents as part of an ongoing criminal investigation of the clinic owner, Dr.
Howard J. Silverman, the newspaper said, citing people it did not identify.


U.S. Envoy's Comment on Disputed Islands Outrages Moscow
Stung by recent and unusually open criticism by American diplomats here, Russian officials today expressed public outrage and private bafflement over a comment made this week by Ambassador Thomas R. Pickering disputing Russia's claims to islands that were seized from Japan at the end of World War II.
Moscow's anger underscored the Russian Government's edgy mood before parliamentary elections on Dec. 17.
It also hinted at mounting ill feeling between the Kremlin and the United States Embassy.


Several Fulton Fish Workers Ousted in Background Checks
Three months after the Giuliani administration began background checks to eliminate Fulton Fish Market workers with criminal records, the only ones so far disqualified, officials say, were employed by a company the city brought in as part of its crackdown on corruption and mob influence at the market.
The company, Laro Maintenance of Bay Shore, L.I., won an exclusive license by the city in October to unload seafood in the lower Manhattan market.
The city simultaneously ousted six unloading firms that officials said were suspected of  being linked to organized-crime figures.


George Carries the Heisman Legacy for Ohio State
He was sitting at home in front of the television, a teen-ager with this implausible idea.
It was 1988, and Eddie George was watching Barry Sanders win a Heisman Trophy.
A long time before, when George was 8 years old, he had told his mother he would win that trophy.
So when Sanders heard his name called, George watched closely and headed for the first mirror he could find.
He quickly headed to the bathroom to rehearse his very own Heisman acceptance speech.
"It was silly," George said last night.
"It was a wild dream that I had. I just wanted to be mentioned. My goal was just to be mentioned this year. And I won it. Man. I can't believe it right now."


Quiet Tree-Lined Street Yearns for a Buzzsaw
It's not a problem you hear often in the city: too many trees.
It's not that the St.
James Ful-Gates Block Association has anything against  horticulture.
The gardeners in the group even placed planters along their street last year.
But some say that the many tall trees on the short block of St.
James Place from Fulton Street to Gates Avenue, cast the area in shadow and threaten safety.
The trees have not been pruned in more than three years.


Fur Center Sale: The Synagogue
In its glory days, the Fur Center Synagogue on West 29th Street was so crowded that some services had three seatings.
Today, the congregation, founded  in 1935, has fallen to 27 members from a peak of 700.
Struggling to pay its bills, it is negotiating to sell the one-story synagogue it built in 1965 to a meditation group.
Last month it stopped holding services.
"We're all heartsick," said Abby Thomas, the synagogue's administrator.
"But  the fur district isn't what it used to be."


I'M BACK
Most people think of Trump as a wheeler-dealer -- some even consider him brash.
I know the real Trump, the man who loves this city and country.
He respects intelligence and cares about people who are committed to him.
Above all, he is a man who has a love affair with New York.
The great buildings he creates, his many Taj Mahals (if not his writings) will endure as evidence of his success for generations.
NORMA I. FOERDERER New York


Listening to Both the Shareholders and One's Conscience
JUST because your job is to make money doesn't mean you should check your conscience at the door on your way to work.
Sounds obvious, right?
But if you are a professional money manager, where to draw the line is anything but clear cut.
Some managers say they avoid investing in certain companies because of moral or  ethical concerns.
Mind you, these are not managers of so-called socially responsible mutual funds, which buy stocks only if they meet guidelines outlined in the prospectus -- excluding, for example, companies that are involved in nuclear weapons or gambling.
These are managers who make moral or ethical choices on a case-by-case basis  for their clients.
Foster Friess, who manages the $4 billion Brandywine Fund, says he sometimes takes his beliefs into consideration when making investment decisions.
Acutely aware of his responsibility to deliver superior returns to investors, Mr.
Friess also wants to avoid investing in companies that, he says,  "rip off people, treat employees badly or are irresponsible corporate citizens." Mr.
Friess has certainly not sacrificed performance: Brandywine has returned an  average of 22 percent annually over the last three years.


Heady Times for McDonnell Douglas
CAN the McDonnell Douglas Corporation make it on its own?
Now, what kind of question is that for a company that is enjoying the best of times?
True, the cold war is over, which is tough for a company that had been the country's largest producer of the instruments of war, from missiles to Apache helicopters to F-15 jet fighters.
True, the company's long-struggling commercial airline division has seen its share of the world market slip to about 10 percent.


I'M BACK
Trump's misguided vendetta, spewing forth vindictive rhetoric in an attempt to decimate "disloyal" detractors, is priceless irony in view of his own history of conduct.
As a former public relations consultant for many of Trump's casinos, I can say that on the subject of loyalty, Trump is a one-way street and public advocate for one person only -- Donald J. Trump.
CHUCK JONES New York


Facing His Biggest Risk Of All, Romantic Comedy
HOLLYWOOD'S MOST FAMOUS FORMER carpenter would rather be spending the winter  on his 800 Wyoming acres, but instead he is homesteading on Central Park West in Manhattan.
His latest movie, "Sabrina," was made in New York, and his next one will be, too, so it seemed logical to Harrison Ford to relocate for a year to an apartment with a view of the tops of Macy's Thanksgiving Day parade balloons.
Still, there are plenty of days with no filming, and he finds himself at loose ends, without purpose.
He does not do New York City lunches, premieres or  fashion shows.
Out West, he could walk his land or putter in an elaborate woodworking shop he created.


Books in Brief: FICTION
FAULT LINES By Anne Rivers Siddons. HarperCollins, $24.


Winter Wonderland Weather? Only for Optimists
A tour guide, John Curran, stood on the Circle Line pier off 42d Street, gazing into the soggy confection of snow and rain and fog, a mixture robbing the New York City skyline of its major landmarks without being thick enough to render an equal measure of holiday cheer.
"You can sort of see the Empire State Building behind the shroud," said Mr.
Curran, gearing up for his running commentary to the 140 souls who would brave sloppy skies for whatever views were available from the boat as it hugged the Manhattan shoreline.
"Some days you have to get them to imagine the Empire State Building."


THE RICH
Among the many irritating aspects of your Nov. 19 Magazine, the disingenuousness of distinguishing one issue from the rest of the year's issues  by dedicating it to the rich rates highest: as if every other issue is not for and about the rich.


Balancing Profits And Principles In South Africa
IT'S HARD TO pigeonhole Anant Singh, the producer of "Cry the Beloved Country," in the terms one uses to discuss his counterparts in America and Europe.
Major film maker?
Not yet, although Miramax, his American distributor, has high hopes for "Cry, the Beloved Country," which opens in New York and Los Angeles on Friday.
Here in South Africa, the hope is that it will be the country's break-out film, the one that does for the local movie industry what "Breaker Morant" did for Australia's in 1980.


Jane Austen Meets Mr. Right
WHAT would Jane Austen have made of all the fuss?
Her characters, who were so circumspect about their visits to each other, their hesitant confessions of feeling and their delicately nuanced courtships, are now being thrust into a brash contemporary culture that cares for circumspection not at all.
This Wednesday, a filmed version of "Sense and Sensibility" will open in theaters, with a screenplay by its star, Emma Thompson, that has already been published as a book to rival Austen's own.
The film, for all its lustrous intelligence, is being plugged on talk shows where issues of romance and marriage generally have little connection with the manners of English landed gentry in the early 19th century.
It also comes close on the heels of other filmed incarnations of Austen's books: a limpid version of "Persuasion," released this fall, and last summer's updating of "Emma" with ditzy Beverly Hills teen-agers in "Clueless." More Austen adaptations are imminent.


FUNDS WATCH
Gauging the Cost Of 401(k) Plans


TOYS ON THE SIDE
When Dad does the shopping, it's a major bonding experience.


2 Companies To Repay U.S. In Fraud Case
In the largest case of fraud involving the main Federal program that steers research money to small businesses, the Government has settled complaints against two companies accused of misusing $1.7 million in grants to develop laser technology.
The companies were accused primarily of two types of wrongdoing: First, that  they illegally accepted money from several Federal agencies for the same research proposals.
Second, that they submitted as their own work research that  had already been completed at universities, all in an effort to look successful.


There's More to New Jersey Than Just the Pinelands
To the Editor:
I must respond to Neva Moore's statement in the Nov. 19 article "Berries in the Blood": "This is New Jersey, not the north. That's not New Jersey." Wrong!


Hear the Beat of a Subway Feat on 42d Street


Q. &amp; A.
Renters And Rules In a Condo


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
SANTANA: 'DANCE OF THE RAINBOW SERPENT' Columbia/Legacy; three CD's ($50)


Warning: Too Much Safety May Be Hazardous
IT was about four years ago that Federal highway safety officials realized that air bags could kill children.
In 1991, researchers at the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration ran tests in which sleds equipped with air bags were rammed into barriers at high speeds.
The bags deployed with explosive force, slamming into the rear-facing infant seats strapped on the passenger side and damaging the infant-sized dummies placed inside.


HOW MUCH INEQUALITY CAN A DEMOCRACY TAKE?
Congratulations on a provocative and entertaining issue.
It was well done.
Best of all was Lester Thurow's insightful article "How Much Inequality Can a Democracy Take?" (Nov. 19).
It should be distributed on Main Streets all across  America.


A Senior Center's Search Is Foiled by Gentrification
To the Editor:
I found it strange that residents of the co-op on Centre Street would simply  love to welcome a nonprofit cultural institution as a tenant but hope that Chinatown's largest senior center will go elsewhere ("Co-op's Basement Too Exclusive for Senior Center?" Nov. 26).
But after some thought, I understand.
After all, how would a resident feel about allowing hundreds of elderly, mostly  poor Chinese people to come and go from the building just so they could eat and  find companionship among other elderly Chinese people?
What further prestige would that bring to such a valuable property?


Corrections
An article on Nov. 19 about Steamtown National Historic Site, in Scranton, Pa., misstated the name of a railroad for which one seasonal ranger, Leo McLane, worked as a switchman.
It was the Delaware, Lackwanna &amp; Western -- not Delaware, Lackawanna &amp; Hudson.


China to Start Trial of Top Dissident This Week
China's Communist Party leadership has notified the family of the country's most prominent dissident, Wei Jingsheng, that his trial on charges of attempting to overthrow the Government will begin on Wednesday.
International human rights groups called on President Clinton today to condemn the criminal proceedings against the outspoken democracy campaigner, who has already spent 16 years in prison or detention for his essays and public statements.


Elisabeth Hughes, Charles Phillips
Elisabeth Dick Hughes, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank H. Hughes of Kingston, Pa., was married there yesterday to Charles Mackenzie Phillips, a son  of Mr. and Mrs.
John B. Phillips of Montclair, N.J.
The Rev.
Charles E. Johns performed the ceremony at the Church of Christ Uniting.
Mrs.
Phillips, 31, is an assistant vice president at J. P. Morgan Investment Management in New York.
She graduated from Lafayette College.
Mr.
Phillips, 33,  is a vice president at BankAmerica in New York.
He graduated from the University of Richmond and received an M.B.A. from New York University.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
WILLIE NELSON: 'REVOLUTIONS OF TIME . . .
THE JOURNEY, 1975-1993' Legacy/Columbia; three CD's ($50) 'A CLASSIC AND UNRELEASED COLLECTION' Rhino; three CD's ($50)


Freud May Be Dead, But His Critics Still Kick
THE postponement of an exhibit on Sigmund Freud by the Library of Congress following protests by scholars may demonstrate the growing politicization of museums or it may be an example of censorship.
But it is, if nothing else, one battle in a culture war that has been raging around Freud for nearly one hundred years.
And it goes a long way toward showing that despite what Freud's critics say, Freud is far from dead.
The Library said it had postponed the exhibit because of budgetary problems.
But critics of Freud and of the exhibit say the postponement was the result of a petition signed by 42 scholars, who wanted to make sure that the proposed exhibit, "Freud: Conflict and Culture," which was scheduled for next year, would, as they put it, "adequately reflect the full spectrum of informed opinion about the status of Freud's contributions."


BENEFITS


Union Made
GASTONIA 1929 The Story of the Loray Mill Strike.
By John A. Salmond.
Illustrated. 226 pp.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. $24.95.
THE 1920's were grim years for organized labor -- with the possible exception of the 1980's, the worst in this century.
Saddled with inept leaders, helpless in the face of a sophisticated antiunion campaign by employers, divided internally along racial, ethnic and political lines, the American Federation of  Labor (A.F.L.) dithered and floundered, all the while hemorrhaging members.


GUIDE
CUT-YOUR-OWN TREES


I'M BACK
I have read Trump's article three times, and I am still uncertain if this is  satire.
It seems impossible that Trump would really submit it.
He's the man who  simultaneously had a mistress and a wife -- a "total loyalist (perhaps to a fault)." Can you help me out here?


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
ELVIS PRESLEY: 'WALK A MILE IN MY SHOES: THE ESSENTIAL 70'S MASTERS' RCA; five CD's ($80)


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
UPPER EAST SIDE 'Schindler' to Gershwin By Klezmer Clarinetist


Deborah Yerman, Gregg Lobel
Deborah Beth Yerman, a daughter of Ann and Fredric Yerman of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Dr.
Gregg P. Lobel, a son of Bonita and Manfred Lobel of Trumbull, Conn.
Rabbi Peter J. Rubinstein performed the ceremony at the Harmonie Club in New York.
Mrs.
Lobel, 26, is an account supervisor at Edelman Public Relations Worldwide in New York.
She graduated from Northwestern University.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler and is the chairman of the Jewish Board of Family and Children's Services in New York.
Her mother is the director of resource development for Westchester Jewish Community Services in Hartsdale.


Final Days;What Thoughts Come at the Threshold of Death? The Last Week in the Long Struggle of Joan Aronowitz
IT is a slate-gray afternoon, and a light rain begins to fall.
The halls of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center are quiet.
In a room divided by a curtain, Joan Aronowitz lies in bed, clasping the hand of Rabbi Stephen Shulman, who is shaking his other fist at God.
Rabbi Shulman tells Ms.
Aronowitz she is entitled to be angry, that she has every right to rage against the illness that is robbing her of the rest of her life.
"Maybe God is crying along with us," he says.
"That may be cold comfort, but it's what I can offer."


Genealogical Records Refute Ramapoughs' Indian Claims
To the Editor:
At least one researcher has traced the genealogies of the Van Dunks, De Freeses and others comprising the so-called Mountain People of Mahwah, Hillburn  and Ringwood and has found little or no evidence of Indian origin ("Laying Claim to a Tribe's History," Nov. 26).


Rites of Assimilation
SAFE IN AMERICA By Marcie Hershman. 285 pp. New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $24.
FOR Vera and Evan Eichenbaum, Jewish immigrants from Eastern Europe, and for  their American-born children growing up in Cleveland during the late 1930's and  40's, Wednesday night at the movies is one of the rites of assimilation.
While the feature films wrap them in a web of communal fantasy, the newsreels purport  to present facts -- a connection with the wider world and the war overseas -- styled in bright glimpses for American consumption.


THE RICH
I can't wait for the sequel -- an entire issue devoted to the poor.
Who are the poorest women? (Since the richest among us are male, the poorest are likely  to be female.) Just how do the poor amuse themselves?
What foods do they eat?
Finally, wouldn't it be great to know how the poor manage to remain poor?
If we knew that, then maybe the rich would do something about it.


College President Discusses Arts Cuts
I read "Arts Cut at Old Westbury Revives a Battle" [Dec. 3] with interest.
The reporter had called me at least twice to respond to the allegations contained in the article.
As both our public relations staff and the academic vice president for academic affairs had discussed the allegations with her at length, there did not seem to be a reason for me to repeat the same concepts.
None of what the public relations officer said was printed, and very little of what the vice president for academic affairs said is printed.
Why?


Some Winnings for Farmers From Atlantic City Gambling
Money gambled in Atlantic City's casinos is helping buy a new tractor for Virgil Eachus's farm in Mullica Hill.
Mr.
Eachus recently received a check for $65,600, the first chunk of $3 million in loans that the Casino Revinvestment Development Authority is making to farmers in southern New Jersey.
Twenty-two farmers have already qualified for $2 million.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
'I GOT RHYTHM: THE MUSIC OF GEORGE GERSHWIN' The Smithsonian Collection; four CD's ($60)


Currier &amp; Ives, Nutley, N.J., 1995


NUMBER THEORY
Was Tierney trying to make New York taxpayers feel like suckers?
Most of us do not have the luxury of determining "the Number." Most of us try to figure out which bill to put off paying until next month.


Business Rising, Hotels Invest in Sprucing Up
THE Stouffer Renaissance Westchester Hotel in White Plains has already spent  $4 million on renovation, with an additional $3 million budgeted for work to be  completed in the spring.
Renovations to guest rooms and meeting rooms at Tarrytown House in Tarrytown  are estimated to cost $700,000, in addition to a $3.5 million expenditure for construction of a new ballroom.


Bribery Charge Stains Image Of Tatou
Tatou opened in 1990 at the old Versailles club, where Desi Arnaz once led the band, and soon won its own reputation as an elegant restaurant, nightspot and celebrity hangout.
During the 1992 Democratic convention, it showcased the internationally known saxophonist Bill Clinton.
But Tatou's reputation got an unexpected jolt shortly before dawn on Nov. 29.
A fight broke out, and the police said that the assault suspect they arrested told them he had been drinking in Tatou -- and was only 20.
They were issuing the club a summons for serving alcohol to a minor when, the officers said, a club manager, Michael Pappalardo of Queens, offered them money not to.
A captain from the 17th Precinct station house was called, ostensibly to seal the deal.
But he was wired with a tape recorder.
The police said Mr.
Pappalardo handed over $4,000, and was arrested on three counts of bribery.


Corrections
An article in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday about a dispute over whether a naked statue of Zeus at the Queens Museum of Art should be displayed during a memorial service for the slain Israeli Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, misstated the role of the Metropolitan Museum.
The Metropolitan lent the statue  to the Queens Museum, but was not involved in the decision to leave the statue undraped and move the memorial service to another part of the museum.


NOT SO DIFFERENT, PERHAPS, AFTER ALL
What a wickedly delicious writer and observer Charles McGrath is.
And how perfect an Endpaper for your mind-boggling issue devoted to the poor working super-rich.


Silver Bells, Gold Cards
IT is immaculate.
A hand-carved settee by an award-winning Canadian artisan,  it is the only one of its kind in New York.
The covering is of fine wool, dyed in subdued gold and scarlet stripes.
It's a perfect addition to your child's room.
She'll love it.
And at $290, shopkeepers say it's a steal.
One catch: it's four inches long.


AT&amp;T Offer: One Said No, One Said Yes
JIM BOWERS wraps the ham, roast beef and cheese left over from lunch and talks about why he is refusing the voluntary severance package AT&amp;T offered him  last month.
Even though he may be "involuntarily separated" from his middle-management job as early as next month, it doesn't make sense for him to take the risk, said Mr.
Bowers, who at 48 has spent 13 years at AT&amp;T.
For him, the buyout offer is not much higher than severance would be.
Besides, he and his wife, Judith, do not want to uproot their teen-age daughter, Alaire, a talented flutist and a member of the New Jersey Youth Orchestra.
Given the poor New Jersey job market,  a move would be likely.


So This Is How Dolls Feel


THE RICH
The last thing that we of the middle class (yes, the ones who need two incomes to stand still) need is another paean to Newt Gingrich and the rest of the current Congress.
I do not care that Bo Polk has a place in the mountains.
Michael Eisner may make good business decisions, but no one deserves $200 million a year, especially when we cannot find the political courage to raise the minimum wage to a livable level.
In the future, please spare us gold-plated, barrel-vaulted-ceilinged bathrooms.
I have seen the great churches of Europe, built to the glory of a higher power.
I do not care to see the temples of the wealthy, built to the glory of their own egos.


Mexico Woos U.S. Mexicans, Proposing Dual Nationality
The Government is campaigning hard for an amendment to the Mexican Consitution that would allow Mexicans living in the United States to retain Mexican nationality rights even when they adopt American citizenship.
The double nationality amendment, as it is known, aims to remove legal hindrances that have discouraged Mexicans living legally in the United States, estimated to number two million to three million, from naturalizing and registering as voters there, officials said.


Incendiary Doings


Stalwart in Defense Of His Shrinking Turf
PRESIDENT CLINTON blocked the Republicans' sweeping plans for reshaping three decades of American social and fiscal policy last week sitting squarely behind a symbol of the spirit he sought to project in the Oval Office: the burly, dark oak desk that Queen Victoria gave to Rutherford B. Hayes.
It is made of timber from a British ship whose name is this President's latest watchword: Resolute.
"I am using this pen to preserve our commitment to our parents, to protect opportunity for our children, to defend the public health and our natural resources and natural beauty, and to stop a tax increase that actually undercuts the value of work," Mr.
Clinton intoned, wielding the pen that Lyndon B. Johnson used 30 years ago to sign legislation creating Medicare and Medicaid.


Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap
IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving.
This year the  companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some of the last of the holdouts among their top artists.
There are also sets from lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed for a second or third time.
Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find noteworthy.
Prices are suggested retail.
CLIFFORD BROWN: 'THE COMPLETE BLUE NOTE AND PACIFIC JAZZ RECORDINGS' Blue Note; four CD's ($64)


Baboon Transplant Likely
A man with AIDS from Oakland, Calif., could receive a transplant of baboon bone marrow within two weeks.
The patient, Jeff Getty, 38, and his family in Waterford won Federal approval last summer for the procedure.
On Friday, doctors at San Francisco General Hospital approved the transplant, The Day of New London reported.


Anatomy of a Dispute on 125th Street
It was three years ago that Freddy's settled into a former meat market on 125th Street in Harlem, and began selling discounted men's and boys' clothing.
Its immediate neighbor was the Record Shack, a dusty store that had been in place for 17 years selling used 45's and old gospel albums.
Almost the first conversation between the clothing store owner and the proprietor of the record shop placed the men in opposing camps.
The owner of the clothing store, who held the lease for the record shop, wanted it to pay more rent or leave.


Pataki Proposes Legislative Plan To Curb Violent Crime by Youths
Gov.
George E. Pataki proposed new legislation today that would impose significantly tougher rules for prosecuting and sentencing juvenile offenders, in effect prodding the state's prosecutors and courts to treat more teen-agers like adult criminals.
Citing a steep rise in juvenile arrests over the past decade, Mr.
Pataki released a package of bills that would increase sentences for many juvenile felons, put more teen-age criminals in prison with adults and generally make it  easier for boys and girls as young as 13 to be prosecuted as adults.


The President's Analysts
VALUES MATTER MOST How Republicans or Democrats or a Third Party Can Win and Renew the American Way of Life.
By Ben J. Wattenberg. 426 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $25.


What's Up? Listen . . .
I WAS born and raised in Jersey City and I delivered Frank Hague's newspapers.
My boss collected the tips and kept them, which gave me my first lesson in following the money, the prime requisite for anyone interested in understanding politics.
Why?
Because where money comes from, where it goes and what gets done with it can tell you a lot about getting elected, staying in office and, sometimes, going to jail.


Fatal Attraction
THE STALKING OF KRISTIN A Father Investigates the Murder of His Daughter.
By George Lardner Jr. 340 pp.
New York: The Atlantic Monthly Press. $23.


Corrections
A brief article last Sunday about an appearance by the drummer Chico Hamilton at Flushing Town Hall misstated the time of Mr.
Hamilton's appearance with Charles Mingus and Dexter Gordon at Los Angeles High School.
It was about 58 years ago; 74 is Mr.
Hamilton's age.


RESULTS PLUS
BOXING


The Symbiosis of the City
THE fabric of New York has always been woven by its writers and its artists,  its politicians and its planners, its moguls and its builders.
And the city, in  turn, has nourished them.
Here are excerpts of three recent books that explore that symbiosis.
SHAPING THE CITY: NEW YORK AND THE MUNICIPAL ART SOCIETY By Gregory F. Gilmartin Clarkson Potter


New Commissioner Kills Plan To Let Insurers Test for H.I.V.
The New Jersey State Insurance Commissioner, Elizabeth Randall, has scrapped  a proposal that would have let group insurers use blood tests to screen for the  AIDS virus, then deny coverage for those who tested positive.
The proposed regulation was one of the last actions taken by the former Insurance Commissioner, Drew Karpinski, who resigned in October amid questions about his business dealings.
Killing the proposed regulation was one of Ms.
Randall's first actions after the State Senate confirmed her on Thursday.


Aguilera May Become a Twin
One season after leaving the Minnesota Twins, closer Rick Aguilera may be coming back.
Twins General Manager Terry Ryan confirmed that there is an understanding between the Twins and Aguilera's agent, Tom Selakovich, that an offer will be made soon.


Making a Joyful (if Somewhat Odd) Noise
A HAUNTING new-age sound of wood pipes and synthesized chords from cyberspace drifted over Trinity Episcopal Church in lower Manhattan one day recently.
From  the expressions on the faces of worshipers who looked around in dismay, it was clear they thought the sounds came from another planet.
But the sounds were relatively tame for Dr.
Owen Burdick, 40, the organist of the church and a leader in experimenting with new technology in an unlikely realm -- church music.
On Good Friday, for example, he included the sound of a hammer hitting a nail.
To set a calming mood during a service, he sometimes creates the sound of underwater echoes at the ocean's floor.


E-Mail
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review


Female Genital Mutilation by Immigrants Is Becoming Cause for Concern in the U.S.
A couple of years ago, Meserak Ramsey dropped in on a birthday party in California and saw a little girl huddled in a corner.
Ms.
Ramsey, an immigrant from Ethiopia and a nurse, wondered what was wrong.
She was stunned when the girl's Ethiopian-American mother said that her daughter, barely 18 months old, was recovering from the removal of her clitoris and that the painful procedure had been done in Washington, D.C.


French Fried


A Special Day Anywhere Else
THE date isn't marked on many calendars, but it is worth noting that today is Human Rights Day.
It is an annual event observed around the world to honor the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which was approved by the United Nations  General Assembly on Dec. 10, 1948, and which, as should be obvious from the name, sets forth the inherent rights of "all members of the human family."
Even before reaching this sentence, some New Yorkers will have felt their eyes glazing over.
For them, "human rights" conjures up distant despots with unpronounceable names, a cue to flip to another page.


Sports of The Times;A Clubhouse Without Any Real Yankees
IN other sports, it's called the locker room or the dressing room.
But in baseball it's always known as the clubhouse.
Maybe that's because baseball players, with the longest schedule in sports, spend so much time there that it might as well be their house, if not their home.
In every baseball clubhouse, some lockers are different than others.
Not by what is in them, but by who is in them.


Pelham Center Celebrates A Festival of Crafts
A PIONEERING vision that helped chart the course of American ceramics at mid-century is alive and well and worked by Edwin Scheier at the Pelham Art Center here.
A group of recent vessels by Mr.
Scheier are among close to 200 pieces in the center's annual Festival of Crafts.
Fourteen craftsmen and women, some from as far away as California, New Mexico and Colorado, produce the objects in clay, glass, metal, wood and fiber as well  as gold and silver jewelry.
Ellie and Red Conason of Yonkers, known as "the people who brought crafts to Westchester," organized the show for the center.


Fur Center Sale: The Synagogue
In its glory days, the Fur Center Synagogue on West 29th Street was so crowded that some services had three seatings.
Today, the congregation, founded  in 1935, has fallen to 27 members from a peak of 700.
Struggling to pay its bills, it is negotiating to sell the one-story synagogue it built in 1965 to a meditation group.
Last month it stopped holding services.
"We're all heartsick," said Abby Thomas, the synagogue's administrator.
"But  the fur district isn't what it used to be."


Giving the Gift of Time
The following is a list of some organizations around the five boroughs that can use your help.
THE MAYOR'S VOLUNTARY ACTION CENTER 61 Chambers Street, Manhattan.
The center is a volunteer clearinghouse, which uses a database that lists more than 2,000 volunteer jobs in the five boroughs to match people with agencies that could most use their help.
Call Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M., for an appointment. (212) 788-7550.
NEW YORK CARES 116 East 16th Street, Manhattan.
New York Cares requires a one-hour orientation at which volunteers receive a monthly calendar that lists 100 to 200 volunteer opportunities to help at 100 to 150 organizations.
No long-term commitment required.
Orientation is by appointment only.
Office hours: Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 228-5000.


It's Not Too Late to See 'The Nutcracker' in New Jersey
These are among the performances of "The Nutcracker" scheduled for New Jersey this holiday season:
AMERICAN REPERTORY BALLET Raritan Valley Community College, North Branch: today  at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $17.50; $15 for students and the elderly; $12.50 for children under 12. (908) 725-3420.


Dirty-Trick' Lawyer Running for Bench
A lawyer who was jailed for "dirty tricks" on behalf of President Richard M.  Nixon in his 1972 re-election campaign is running for election as a judge in Southern California, The Los Angeles Times reported on Friday.
The lawyer, Donald Segretti, who served four and a half months in a Federal prison in 1974, told the newspaper that friends had encouraged him to run for the seat on the Orange County Superior Court.


An Omission On West End Ave.
To the Editor:
Your fine Nov. 5 report on the charms of West End Avenue unfortunately left out one of the street's distinguished institutions: St.
Ignatius of Antioch Episcopal Church, at West End Avenue and 87th Street.


Negotiating A Hotel Room
THE next time I trot behind my sister while she checks out almost every room  in a hotel before accepting one, I will not feel so self-conscious.
I have a new mantra, from the top of the line: "It's no good being a mouse."
The counsel comes from Martine De Geus, spokeswoman for the upper-crust Hotel Dorchester on Park Lane in London.
Ms.
De Geus is a believer in making yourself and your tastes known as a way of getting a nicer room.


Problems in Dumping The Thames's Spoils
It is in the best interest of the United States that the Thames River dredging project be completed to facilitate the passage of the Seawolf submarines ("The Sound as a Toxic Dumping Ground," Nov. 19), but the residents of Fishers Island have a legitimate environmental concern.
The capping or encapsulating of the contaminated spoils from the Thames with  environmentally clean spoils, to protect the environment, is a concept that has  been proven effective when administered diligently.


MOVIES THIS WEEK
A classic tale and a ribald Elizabethan drama lead the cluster of top films this week.
The latest treatment of BLACK BEAUTY (1994), Anna Sewell's novel about a Victorian horse that passes from owner to owner, is directed by Caroline Thompson.
The lovely backgrounds, the brooding music and the humans involved - Sean Bean, Jim Carter, Eleanor Bron and David Thewlis - all score.
But the star  is Beauty, who narrates the story - Monday at 10:30 A.M. on Cinemax.
Channel 31  has a pair of golden Gallic antiques.
Maurice Tourneur's VOLPONE (1939) is a juicy, superbly performed version of Ben Jonson's flavorsome costume farce about greed.
Harry Baur is perfectly cast as the rich Venetian who feigns dying to test the vultures; Louis Jouvet is Mosca, his even craftier steward.
The two great actors shake the old play with gusto - Thursday-Friday at 1 A.M.
In Rene Clement's FORBIDDEN GAMES (1952) the tender relationship of two farm children (Brigitte Fossey, Georges Poujouly) yields a series of innocent, playful games that are clearly warfare allegory.
This beautifully provocative drama is haunting - Tuesday at 8 P.M.
Set in the American Southwest, THE OUTRAGE (1964),  Martin Ritt's remake of "Rashomon," may not have the high-voltage originality of the Japanese thunderbolt, but trim and biting, it works.
Paul Newman, Claire Bloom, Laurence Harvey, Edward G. Robinson and the gritty Ritt keep it on track  - Tuesday at 4 P.M. on TNT (and colorized).
A battered, aging, small-time pugilist (Robert Ryan, pictured above) resists corruption and doggedly hangs in, flanked by a loyal wife (Audrey Totter) - that's the bleak gist of THE SET-UP (1949).
Directed by Robert Wise, it's also one of the best boxing dramas ever filmed - Thursday at 6 P.M. on American Movie Classics.
HOWARD THOMPSON


Rules of the Game
To the Sports Editor:


Misguided Perception
To the Editor:
Mr.
Patton's article describes the ownership of the artistic work of the blues musician Robert Johnson and the painter Bill Traylor as "subjects of tortuous litigation" and then states that Traylor's heirs "had little use for him before his death in 1947."


The Price of Bananas
In 1977, when the fumigant dibromo- chloropropane, or DBCP, was found to cause sterility in workers at an Occidental Petroleum plant in Lathrop, Cal., the major manufacturers quickly recalled the product for most uses in the United States.
But now some 25,000 farmworkers in a dozen developing countries -- Equador, Panama, Hondurus, Costa Rica, the Phillipines, Ivory Coast, Nicaragua, Guatemala, Burkino Faso, Dominica, St.
Lucia and St.
Vincent -- have brought suit against a group of American chemical  manufacturers and food growers, contending that the fumigant was used by American companies in the developing world for years afterward, without regard for the consequences.
The workers said they received little or no protective gear or warnings about the danger of DBCP, which the Environmental Protection Agency says may cause cancer and birth defects in humans.
The growers named in the suit included Del Monte Fruit, Chiquita Brands and Dole Fresh Fruit.
The manufacturers named -- Dow Chemical, Shell Oil and Occidental Chemical -- said that U.S. laws do not prohibit the export of pesticides banned in the United States, and that companies should not be judged by U.S. standards for their actions overseas.
DIANA JEAN SCHEMO


WHAT A FEW HUMMABLE TUNES WILL BUY
WHEN I FIRST HEARD THAT ANDREW LLOYD WEBBER had the finest collection of High Victorian paintings now in private hands, I had trouble believing it.
It was not that I had anything against Lloyd Webber in this context, or in any other.
Nor had I ever met him.
But collecting at a high level, unprompted by advisers, is obsessional.
It calls for time, study, travel and concentration.
Learned men and learned women have spent lifetimes with Victorian paintings and  not yet mastered the field.


Leslie A. Abrams, Neil H. Heilberg
Leslie Andrea Abrams, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Steven Abrams of East Williston, L.I., was married last evening to Neil Howard Heilberg, the son of Muriel Heilberg of North Woodmere, L.I., and the late Robert Heilberg.
Rabbi Morris Friedman performed the ceremony at Temple Beth Sholom in Roslyn Heights,  L.I.
Mrs.
Heilberg, 30, graduated magna cum laude from the State University at Albany and received a master's degree in organizational psychology from Columbia University.
She is a compensation specialist at Chemical Bank in New York.
Her father is a dentist in Manhattan and Bayside, Queens.
Her mother, Helen M. Abrams, is a vocational rehabilitation counselor at the Nassau County Department of Drug and Alcohol Addiction in Hempstead


Sunday, December 10, 1996: VIRTUAL NOSTALGIA;Retro Gems
Just as most of us are becoming computer comfortable, the nerds are pining for the good old days of Pong, Space Invaders and Galactica.
The new Generation X approach to nostalgia is to simulate it virtually.
Thus, Seattle Lab of Bothell, Wash., has developed an emulator for that classic  home-computer game machine, the Commodore C64.
This is a program that runs on standard PC's but imitates the C64 so that users can run old software. (Other companies are working on Mac emulators.) Just a click of the button, and $69.95, takes you back to playing with the low-grade graphics of childhood -- while enjoying the speed of the latest chips and the efficiency of hard disk drives.


Gordon Goes All Out And Finishes in Style
The advantages of being only 24 years old and stock car racing's richest champion are many.
But the one that Jeff Gordon talked about in New York last weekend, the day before he was handed the checks that would complete his $4.3 million season, perhaps said the most about him and what he brings to the sport.
Bill France, Nascar's president, had just announced plans to run an exhibition race next November at a track in Japan.
When Gordon reached the podium, he looked at Dale Earnhardt -- in an unaccustomed seat in the audience -- and allowed that he, Gordon, had the advantage over Earnhardt and all the other drivers because he had lapped that track so often while playing a video game.


In Flower District, Ground Is Sown For Housing
WHEN the Adell family began assembling property around the Flower District for residential redevelopment, the current chairman of the City Planning Commission had not yet begun his career in government.
Indeed, he was not yet out of fifth grade.
It has taken a long time -- a very long time -- for the Adells to acquire three large parcels on the Avenue of the Americas and win permission to build apartment towers there.
They recently secured a rezoning of the avenue from 24th to 31st Street, changing it from a manufacturing district to a residential and commercial zone.
And they were at last able to buy a key holdout parcel that had stymied their largest assemblage effort.


Books in Brief: NONFICTION
THE RIGHT TO PRIVACY By Ellen Alderman and Caroline Kennedy. Knopf, $26.95.


Metro Matters;Teachers Play Hardball Poker (No Bluffing)
AND the moral is: Never underestimate a New Yorker's talent for outpoliticking the politicians.
Why, for the first time in 35 years, did members of the United Federation of  Teachers reject a deal negotiated and defended by their leaders?
Because they figured they had nothing to lose.
And maybe a lot to gain.


Why Barbie's Show Lacks Substance
To the Editor:
As one of the curators of "Art, Design and Barbie," I can understand why M. G. Lord (Arts pages, Dec. 1) concludes that the World Financial Center exhibition is little more than an infomercial for the sponsor, Mattel Inc.
Mattel censored me and fiddled with the show's content.


UPBEAT ESTIMATES MAY GIVE LEEWAY FOR BUDGET DEAL
With a new deadline for Congressional action just five days away, lawmakers learned today that they would have more than $100 billion of extra money to help balance the budget because of new, more optimistic estimates by the Congressional Budget Office.
Congressional aides said the budget office had re-estimated the savings that  would result from the Republican plan to balance the budget, which President Clinton vetoed last week.
The original estimate showed savings of $1.13 trillion over seven years.


British Killing Brings Calls to Tighten Laws
British Interior Ministry officials said today that they were considering tougher penalties for carrying knives in public after the principal of a London  school was fatally stabbed when he tried to save a student from attack by a gang of youths.
The killing provoked a wave of public outrage and schoolchildren laid wreaths today at the spot where the principal, Philip Lawrence, a 48-year-old father of  four, was stabbed.


Czech Unit in Bosnia Is Not Just Symbolic
To the Editor:
In "Stirrings of a New NATO" (editorial, Dec. 7), you say: "Russia . . . will contribute 2,000 support troops to the Bosnia force. They will be joined by small but symbolically important contingents from other countries that in earlier incarnations were also Warsaw Pact members, including Poland, the Czech  Republic, Slovakia and Hungary."


Unseasonable Cold Snap Sticking Around
At a city homeless shelter on East 30th Street in Manhattan, the cold drove heavily bundled men inside.
They crowded the lobby of the old brick building and filled the plastic chairs that lined the hallways.
A few talked or slept, but most stared at the space of linoleum between their feet.
Outside, a small group leaned against the building in a rectangle of sunlight, the mist of their breath mixing with cigarette smoke.
A steady stream of men walked past them into the building.
The shelters fill quickly when the temperatures drop like this, they said.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about states' bans on sales of Crazy Horse beer in response to complaints by American Indian groups misspelled the name of the brewer.
It is the G. Heileman Brewing Company, not Heilman.


3 U.N. Troops Wounded By Israelis in Lebanon
Three United Nations peacekeepers were wounded early today when an Israeli tank opened fire on their night patrol in the Israeli occupation zone in southern Lebanon.
The Israelis apparently mistook the peacekeepers for Muslim guerrillas who are battling to oust the occupying army from the nine-mile wide zone.
Israel quickly expressed regret for the incident.


Condemned Criminal in Utah Seeks Death by Firing Squad
No condemned criminal has been put to death by firing squad in the United States since Gary Mark Gilmore faced a Utah squad almost 20 years ago with a terse "let's do it."
Now Utah's Department of Corrections is struggling to put together a plan for a firing squad to accommodate the wishes of a condemned convict, John Albert Taylor.


For Soldier of Fortune, Bosnia Is Latest Front
All year long, Soldier of Fortune magazine tried to lift its circulation with an increasingly stale gimmick: Each new subscriber got a chance to win a handgun.
Then, as if in answer to a circulation manager's prayer, along came news that 20,000 American troops were to ship out for Bosnia.


Sam Stoneburner, Theater Actor, 66
Sam Stoneburner, an actor in theater, film and televison, died on Nov. 29 at  his home in Manhattan.
He was 66.
The cause was esophageal cancer, said his companion, Kenneth Bennett.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
An Opera Transcribed Into a Symphony.
But Why?
Moscow Radio Symphony Orchestra Avery Fisher Hall Shostakovich left 15 major symphonies, several of which are repertory staples.
There would seem to be no lack of major orchestral statements from this Russian  master.
That's why the composer Veniamin Basner's attempt to fashion excerpts from a Shostakovich opera into a sprawling de facto symphony seems such a curious undertaking.


The Wages of Winning;Social Worker Turned Labor Leader Tries Conciliation
For Stanley W. Hill, executive director of New York City's largest and most powerful municipal employees union, this was supposed to be the year to shine.
With the retirement of the charismatic titans who had long dominated municipal labor, Mr.
Hill would have his star turn, a long-awaited chance to wrest a generous contract from City Hall and win the adulation of his union's 125,000 members.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL
A3-11


Speech vs. Music In a Janacek Rarity
The Makropulos Affair" is an elusive member of the standard operatic repertory, for most a familiar name but not a familiar face. So how odd it is that two of America's leading companies have taken it into their heads to offer  Janacek's 1926 stage piece in new productions separated by barely a month and only 750 miles.
The Lyric Opera of Chicago has gone first; the Metropolitan Opera in New York is about to follow.
The Lyric's production, which opened here on a subzero Saturday night, uses the original Czech text with English supertitles.
The Met plans an altogether English translation.


Nobel Winner Urges End to War 'Altogether'
As he accepted the Nobel Peace Prize today, Joseph Rotblat, an 87-year-old, Polish-born physicist who now lives in Britain, called upon the nuclear powers to "abandon the out-of-date thinking of the cold war" and work to "abolish war altogether."
Speaking at the awards ceremony here, Mr.
Rotblat told the audience, which included Norway's royalty, top leaders and foreign diplomats, that a heavy duty  rests upon scientists to spurn doomsday programs and even to expose plans for nuclear weaponry.


Accounts
Aerogroup International Inc., Edision, N.J., to Jerry &amp; Ketchum, New York, a joint venture of Jerry Della Femina and Ketchum Communications, to handle advertising for the maker of Aerosoles shoes, previously at Anda &amp; Scotti Advertising, New York.
The billings were estimated at more than $2.5 million.


Interpublic Units Get Assignments
Two marketers are expanding their relationships with agencies owned by the Interpublic Group of Companies.
The AT&amp;T Corporation has named McCann-Erickson Worldwide in New York as the first agency to handle advertising for its AT&amp;T Solutions division in Washington, which helps companies install and manage computer and communication networks.
The billings were estimated at $10 million.
McCann-Erickson, which handles AT&amp;T's business-to-business advertising, was awarded the additional assignment after a review in which the other participants were not disclosed.


At a Chinatown Restaurant, A New Trustee Is Welcomed
For the first time in seven months, dim sum carts rolled out of the kitchen at the Silver Palace Restaurant this weekend, signaling an end to a series of bitter labor and business disputes that had divided Chinatown's only unionized eating establishment.
The resumption of service at the 900-seat dim sum parlor and the rehiring of  5 of the 10 servers dismissed in May were among the first changes instituted by Henry C. S. Foong, a court-appointed trustee who took over the operations of  the restaurant on Friday.
Mr.
Foong's appointment was welcomed by the union representing Silver Palace workers and creditors trying to recoup $3 million from the restaurant.


Three 50-Yard Kicks Boost the Falcons
Falcons 19, Saints 14


Abroad at Home;Worrying Portents
NATO forces are going to Bosnia for a year to give peace a breathing space.
The hope is that, in a year of ordinary life, the divided people of Bosnia will  begin to value peace more than hatred or revenge.
If that hope is to have a chance, a crucial necessity is the re-establishment of respect for law and humanity.
And there the early signs are not encouraging.
The weeks since the Dayton peace agreement have seen worrying symptoms of disregard for its promises of justice.


In a Manger With the Proletariat
Remember Karl Marx?
He hasn't been getting much publicity lately, but the old philosopher who once called religion the opium of the people can be found these Advent nights at the Theater for the New City as the unlikely catalyst for an unusual retelling of the Christmas story.


Europeans Buy Home PC's At Record Pace
An avid keyboard player, Mario Tronco paid $2,100 six months ago for a personal computer that he hooks up to a 48-track digital recording system to produce mesmerizing music for his band, Avion Travel.
When Mr.
Tronco is not composing, his wife uses the computer, a simple I.B.M. clone, for her translation business.
Growing up two decades ago in Caserta, a workaday town outside Naples, the 32-year-old musician attended schools with no computers.


Bosnia May Enter World Cup Tourney
World Cup soccer organizers today proposed having Bosnia-Herzegovina in the 1998 tournament.
FIFA's executive committee meets Monday, the day before the qualifying draw,  and is expected to approve Bosnia-Herzegovina's entry.
Croatia, Slovenia, Macedonia and Serbian-led Yugoslavia are already among the 162 teams in the draw.
The United States will have a bye in the early stages of qualifying from the North and Central American and Caribbean region, along with Canada, Mexico and Costa Rica.


An Old Jewel of 42d Street Reopens, Seeking to Dazzle Families
When the big, glaring marquees and the sleazy, garish storefronts are taken down, the most astonishing thing turns out to exist on West 42d Street: architecture.
Tonight, the street's oldest theater, the Victory, reopens after an $11.4 million restoration, the first stage in the fulfillment of a promise to reclaim all of 42d Street's historic theaters that goes back to the announcement of a major urban renewal plan for the area in 1981.
And the effect is to transform the city's roughest street into one of its gentlest.
Renamed the New Victory, the 500-seat theater between Seventh and Eighth Avenues, an ornate, domed house that opened in 1900 as the Republic, will serve  as the city's first full-time performing-arts center for children.
It will be a  kind of Lincoln Center for families, bringing a mix of plays, dance events, operas and film to a street that until recently was the last part of the city that anyone would associate with children.


Walter Gellhorn, Law Scholar And Professor, Dies at 89
Walter Gellhorn, the longtime Columbia University law professor whose writings, teachings and periodic sallies into the public arena helped shape key  elements of modern American law, died on Saturday at his home in Morningside Heights.
He was 89.
Until a few days ago, Mr.
Gellhorn, known as a fierce champion of civil liberties and a father of both modern administrative law and of the ombudsman movement in the United States, had made daily visits to his Columbia office, where he maintained a flourishing retirement sideline as a labor mediator.


Assembly to Vote on Agency
The State Assembly is scheduled to vote today on whether to create an Urban Redevelopment Authority to finance major development projects in urban centers.
Unlike the existing Urban Development Corporation, the proposed authority would operate independently and have the power to issue bonds and coordinate urban development policy, which is now fragmented among various agencies, said Senator Richard LaRossa, Republican of Trenton, the bill's sponsor.
The measure  has already cleared the Senate.


Hwahyangeeli Journal;Shaman's Burden: Cold Baths and Cool Neighbors
As the gods entered her body, Paik Yang Bun quivered, and her hand trembled so that the bell she was holding sent a chime through the shrine in her home.
It was an evening when the spirits seemed to be afoot, for icy gusts blew across the barren rice paddies as darkness settled on this remote village.
Outside, there was the regular complaining bark of dogs, raised to be eaten on freezing winter nights like this, but Mrs.
Paik concentrated so the gods could speak through her and give her special powers.


Toni Cade Bambara, a Writer And Documentary Maker, 56
Toni Cade Bambara, a writer and documentary film maker who was celebrated for her intricate use of Black English in fiction, died on Saturday at a hospital in Philadelphia.
She was 56 and lived in Philadelphia.
The cause was cancer, said her daughter, Karma Bene Bambara of Philadelphia.


Killings Jolt Fort Bragg Area, Recalling Angry, Ugly Past
The Rev. C. R. Edwards had hoped such crimes were locked away in the basement of time.
He is 70, a survivor of long, cold civil rights confrontations and a leader in the reconciliation of the city's races.
He wanted to live out his days without hearing another story of white men who bolster their courage and prejudice with too many beers, then go looking for black people to harass, curse, kill.


CHRONICLE
REMY GILL and DANIEL A. LEHNER met at a performance of "Phantom of the Opera" on Dec. 12, 1988.
Four years to the day later, Mr.
Lehner proposed to Ms.
Gill during an intermission in the show.
On Dec. 12, 1993, they were married in a wedding with "Phantom of the Opera" themes, and they celebrated their first annniversary last year at the show.
But now the couple, who have seen "Phantom" more than 100 times, are about to outdo themselves.
A year ago they bought out the house, all 1,609 seats in the Majestic Theater, for tomorrow's show.
Then they distributed them to 45 charities, including the North Shore University Hospital, the Actors Fund and the Family Service League, for an evening called "Phantom: A Benefit of Love and Charity." The charities in turn gave the tickets to donors giving $250 or more.
The evening will include pre- and post-theater receptions at the Marriott Marquis Hotel.


Refugees Returning To Bosnia
Some were so afraid that they dared not even look at the road in front of them.
Still, the 750 refugees slowly began to cross into Bosnia, their homeland.
Behind them was a refugee camp in Croatia that they said was no longer tolerable; forward lay a country where they were hated rebels.


Special School for Ill Children
Many young patients at Voorhees Pediatric Facility cannot leave the hospital  because they depend on medical equipment for breathing and eating.
On Tuesday, Voorhees is to celebrate the opening of a new school -- the first of its type in New Jersey -- specifically designed for such children.
All five classrooms at the Bancroft School, which is adjacent to the hospital, are equipped with medical gas outlets, and each classroom is to have its own nurse.
The school will be able to accommodate 65 students, hospital officials said.


A Harlem Congregation Copes in Wake of Fire
Inside its makeshift sanctuary above a seafood carry-out business on West 116th Street in Harlem, the United House of Prayer for All People was loud and alive yesterday morning, its members clapping and swaying, tambourines clanging, and a full brass band thumping.
But the mood quickly turned somber as the church's pastor, H. M. Swaringer, stood up from his red velvet chair and spoke of the deaths of eight people who died on Friday in a fire deliberately set inside a nearby building owned by the  church.


Olympics Will Test Atlanta's Ice And Cuisine
It may be the Summer Olympics, but to the organizers of the 1996 Games that begin here in seven months, one of the most important elements is ice.
Planners are trying to determine how to churn out the more than 21 million pounds of ice they estimate will be required to cool drinks, athletes and horses in Georgia's withering mid-July weather.


Energy Chief's Travel Comes Under Scrutiny
Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary has spent millions of taxpayer dollars on overseas travel, staying in luxury hotels and flying on a charter jet frequently rented by rock stars and royal families, a newspaper reported today.
Records obtained under the Freedom of Information Act and other sources show  that Ms.
O'Leary has spent far more than other Cabinet members on overseas travel and often travels in grander style, the Los Angeles Times reported.


The Isles, Yes, the Isles, Make Mortals of Flyers
The score in itself was not a surprise.
What was astounding was that it was the Islanders who had six goals and the Flyers who had only two.


Most Residents See a Drop in Standard of Living, Study Finds
A large majority of Connecticut residents think the state's living standards  have worsened in the last five years and most expect them to continue declining, according to a survey conducted for a Fordham University research group.
The survey, part of a report on the state's social health commissioned by the General Assembly and the William Caspar Graustein Memorial Fund, found that 71 percent of the people polled thought the average Connecticut resident's chances  of finding a satisfying job were poor.


Between the dream and the reality lies the shadow. Or is it the interface?
ONE of the eerie aspects of Bill Gates's new book, "The Road Ahead," in which the founder of Microsoft maps out a path toward technological redemption, is that the hopes in it seem so familiar.
The book can often seem an old-fashioned  print version of those high-tech rides that were such big successes at the New York World's Fairs in 1939 and 1964.
Hop on to see the homes, schools and businesses of the future.
Those rides showed glimpses of moving sidewalks and staircases, self-steering electric automobiles, a city pulsing with personalized attention.
Now, the veering cart driven by Mr.
Gates -- hands inside, please -- rushes us by wallet-sized computers; houses like his own interactive manse-to-be -- the ultimate cocoon -- and schools where technological classrooms will massage each  student's brain.
Someday, Mr.
Gates suggests, without even a hint of irony, we may even plug our central nervous systems into the Internet, the way the cyber-cowboys did in William Gibson's "Neuromancer."


Latkes for Lamb Chop? Hanukkah for Puppets
Hanukkah, the Jewish Festival of Lights, begins at sundown on Sunday.
This week brings two television specials celebrating the holiday, both of them geared to young audiences.
Tonight at 8 on WNET, PBS has "Lamb Chop's Special Hanukkah," with the television veteran Shari Lewis using her hand puppets and ventriloquist wizardry to explain, somewhat laboriously, the roots and significance of the holiday.
Then on Thursday at 8, Nickelodeon presents "The Weinerville Hanukkah Special," a kind of Marx Brothers approach to the holiday,  whipped up by the gifted comic Marc Weiner.
As usual, Ms.
Lewis goes straight for the hearts of tots and toddlers.
She is determinedly nonthreatening, Unfortunately, in this ill-conceived exercise, she  is also exasperating.
With herself as executive producer, the program, earnestly pedantic, goes on far too long -- a full hour -- to keep her target audience's attention.
And the entire premise is overly cute.
It seems Ms.
Lewis is throwing a Hanukkah party at which her puppets Lamb Chop, Charlie Horse and Hush Puppy will illustrate a "rebirth of freedom" for an odd assortment of guests including Alan Thicke, Pat Morita and Lloyd Bochner.


Taking In the Sites;Celebrating Christmas With Latest Cybercards
For those who see cyberspace as the cold-blooded antithesis of a homey family Christmas, the idea of sending holiday cards through the Internet would surely be sacrilege.
But for those who spend their lives at a keyboard and hate the tedious process of scrawling out dozens of cards, the Web offers some help this  year.
Several sites will let you design and send a card to your closest wired friends.
So while you still may have to find a suitably sappy card for Aunt Gwen, at least the pain will be reduced.


Toni Morrison to Read At the Philharmonic
Toni Morrison is to read her poetry cycle "Honey and Rue" before the New York Philharmonic's performance of the work on Thursday at 8 P.M.
The soprano Kathleen Battle, who commissioned the cycle -- which has music by Andre Previn -- is to sing the work and two arias from Handel's "Alcina." Other performances, without the poetry reading, are on Saturday at 8 P.M. and on Dec. 19 at 7:30.
The program, conducted by Leonard Slatkin, also includes Hindemith's Symphonic Metamorphosis on Themes of Carl Maria von Weber and Gunther Schuller's Seven Studies on Themes of Paul Klee.
Tickets, at $12 to $60, are available at the Avery Fisher Hall box office or through Center Charge: (212) 721-6500.


Murky Prescriptions for the Motherland
With Russia's Parliamentary elections set for Sunday and Presidential elections promised in June, tomorrow night's look at four of President Boris N.  Yeltsin's opponents is timely if not blindly illuminating.
To the program's title question, "Russia Betrayed?," all four answer in the affirmative.
But once past a unanimous desire to replace the perceived betrayer, their policies cloud  up.
The "Voices of the Opposition" heard from are, in no particular order: Aleksandr V. Rutskoi, a former Vice President and air force general who was jailed for his part in the October 1993 Parliamentary clash with Mr.
Yeltsin; Aleksandr I. Lebed, a popular former general who leads a nationalist movement called the Congress of Russian Communities; Gennady A. Zyuganov, a sometime Soviet official who now runs the Russian Communist Party, and Grigory A. Yavlinsky, an economist and the liberal hope.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Taking On the 'Goldberg' Despite Its Recent Troubles James Richman, harpsichordist Merkin Concert Hall


After a positive article on a Fox show, TV Guide learns the other networks are watching.
JUST because TV Guide says Fox's "Party of Five" is "the best show you're not watching" does not mean that executives from NBC, ABC and CBS are going to agree.
Actually, because TV Guide is owned by the News Corporation, the same company that owns the Fox network, the decision to splash "Party of Five" on the magazine's cover this week, accompanied by a gushing story about the show's having "the cutest cast on TV," means that executives from the competing networks are going to disagree with a vengeance.
In the case of NBC, it also means throwing in a veiled threat to stop advertising in TV Guide.


Corrections
A chart last Monday with an article about New York University's Interactive Telecommunications Program misstated the year of graduation of John Heartfield,  a programmer.
It was 1995, not 1996.
The chart also misidentified the company he started.
It is Electric Curtain, not Electric Current.


Token Clerk In Fire Attack Dies of Burns
Harry P. Kaufman, the subway token clerk who suffered devastating burns and lung damage two weeks ago when two men turned his Brooklyn booth into an exploding inferno in a botched robbery that replayed scenes from the movie "Money Train," died yesterday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
His death -- the first of a city token clerk in a firebombing since 1988 -- came as two more fire attacks on token booths were reported, raising to seven the number of similar incidents since the Nov. 22 release of the film in which a pyromaniac sets token booths ablaze with flammable liquid.


Microsoft Quietly Puts Together Computer Research Laboratory
Bill Gates may have been out on a book tour lately hawking his vision of everyone else's information-highway future in "The Road Ahead." But back at headquarters he has quietly assembled some of the industry's best and brightest  computer researchers to help choose the paths that Microsoft itself should follow.
They are seasoned travelers all, including Butler Lampson, the computer scientist who helped design the first personal computer, the Xerox Alto, in 1973 and the first office computer network technology, Ethernet, in 1976; C. Gordon Bell, the former Digital Equipment Corporation researcher who in the late 1970's led the development of what would become the world's most successful minicomputer, and Jim Gray, a pioneer developer of modern computer data bases.


Special Counsel Law Doesn't Need Amending
To the Editor:
Joseph E. diGenova (Op-Ed, Dec. 5) argues that independent counsel are being  appointed with respect to matters too picayune.
There is nothing in the independent counsel statute preventing the Attorney General from reaching a similar conclusion.


Japanese Stocks Lower
Stock prices were lower here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 60.19 points, or 0.31 percent, at 19,226.78.
On Friday, the Nikkei fell 125.35 points, or seven-tenths of 1 percent.


Corrections
A listing in the New Jersey Weekly yesterday comparing the performance of public schools in the state omitted the schools from Hunterdon and Mercer counties.
Those listings appear today on Page B5 in New Jersey copies.


Family Sees Woman Suffocate
A terminally ill woman suffocated with a plastic bag over her head on Saturday in the presence of her husband and sons, a day after the couple celebrated their 50th wedding anniversary.
"They came to Joplin with the express purpose of her dying," said Chief David Niebur of the Joplin Police Department.
"They had the desk clerk call us. They admitted they watched her die."


Microsoft and G.E. Are Seen in Discussions
Top executives of the Microsoft Corporation and the General Electric Company  have reportedly been meeting to discuss ways in which the two companies might distribute news or other material together.
One executive close to the discussions, who insisted on anonymity, said last  night that the companies might announce a partnership this week involving an all-news cable television channel.


Israelis Leave Another City As Pullout Speeds Up
Israeli soldiers withdrew today from a third West Bank city under a self-rule accord with the Palestine Liberation Organization, turning over Tulkarm to a Palestinian police force and touching off daylong celebrations by thousands of jubilant residents.
The pullout from this city of 45,000 on the West Bank's border with Israel was the first of a quick succession of planned withdrawals this month that are expected to leave wide areas of the West Bank under Palestinian self-rule by January.


Misery in Bunches
The snow that quickly turned to a slushy mess was bad enough, but yesterday the region got more misery: a burst of cold air that sent temperatures dropping  to the teens.
The police in New York City were told to help homeless people in need of shelter, and forecasters expect the bad weather to stick around.
Article, page B5.


4th-and-1: Switzer Falls Flat
It's called load left, and Dallas guard Nate Newton calls it the Cowboys' bread-and-butter play.
The team's massive offensive line grinds the opposing defense into a pulp and running back Emmitt Smith runs over the residue.
"We know it's coming; they know it's coming," Newton said.
"The whole world knows it's coming."


Class-Action Suit Deadline Expired, Prudential Argues
After spending tens of thousands of dollars to bring fraud suits against Prudential Securities, investors and brokers across the country are being told by the company that their cases have ended for lack of a 20-cent postcard.
In the last two weeks, Prudential, a unit of the Prudential Insurance Company, has informed people who are suing that their cases have been settled in a class action that some plaintiffs said they had never heard of, lawyers and investors said yesterday.


Panel in Hawaii Recommends Legalizing Same-Sex Marriage
A state commission in Hawaii will recommend to the Legislature this week that it grant marriage rights and responsibilities to couples of the same sex.
Coming from a panel appointed by the Governor, the recommendation is another  step in a legal contest over marriage in Hawaii that began in 1993, when the State Supreme Court opened the door to same-sex unions.


Across Asia, an Entrepreneur Takes On the Western Press
Amid the global frenzy over Web pages, on-line interactivity and satellite broadcasting, Sondhi Limthongkul sauntered into town today with what some think  amounts to a tin lizzie.
He started a newspaper.
Brandishing a folded copy of issue No. 1 of The Asia Times like a rapier, the 48-year-old Thai businessman declared that the reign of Western-owned multinational media organizations in Asia was about to end and that he was leading the charge.


A Man Dead, a Man Jailed, a City Divided
Nobody denies that something awful happened last August when two men, one black and one white, got into a brawl over a traffic mishap.
The incident left one of them dead and the other in jail charged with first-degree murder.
The white man, Patrick Hourican, 32, a plasterer who had a gift for making friends and a weakness for drunken carousing, was riding his bicycle home from a bar one afternoon when a car driven by Louis Waldron struck him.
According to police records and reports by witnesses, Mr.
Hourican, uninjured but angered by  the incident, called Mr.
Waldron a "nigger."


32 Are Named Rhodes Scholars
The Rhodes Scholarship Trust at Pomona College in Claremont announced 32 Rhodes scholars today.
These are the winners, by region:


Samaritan's Last Selfless Act
When Ima Proctor tried to help a friend who was being assaulted on an Elizabeth street on Thanksgiving, officials said it was just one of many selfless acts she was known for.
It was her last.
Ms.
Proctor, 45, the sister of the disco diva Gloria Gaynor, died on Thursday after lapsing into a coma from injuries she herself received at the hands of Rasheed Wallace, 18, also of Elizabeth.
Mr.
Wallace is now a fugitive, and Superior Court Judge Ross Anzaldi has issued a warrant charging him with murder, said Edward M. Neafsey, acting prosecutor for Union County.


Task Force to Fight Crime
A task force of Federal, state and county agencies is being formed to address Camden's rising homicide and crime rates, The Associated Press reported yesterday.


Bomb Warning in Riyadh
The United States Embassy said today that it had received unconfirmed reports of renewed bomb threats against Western targets in Saudi Arabia, particularly sites frequented by Americans.
Last month a car bomb here killed seven people, including five Americans.


Clinton Returns to Arkansas To Pay Homage to a Mentor
President Clinton came back to his political hometown this weekend for parties marking something he rarely considers a reason to celebrate: the retirement of a Democratic Senator.
But he made an exception for Senator David Pryor, who has been an ally and mentor since Mr.
Clinton first held office here.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Prudential Tells Plaintiffs A Deadline Has Passed Prudential Securities has informed many investors and brokers suing it for fraud that their cases have been settled in a class action that some of the plaintiffs said they had never heard of.
The company said the plaintiffs failed to mail a note stating they did not want to be included in the settlement and that the deadline for opting out was Oct. 30.


Sports of The Times;In Their Early Years, Brown Is Ahead of Simms
EVER since Dave Brown was installed as the Giants' quarterback, he has performed in the long shadow that Phil Simms still casts.
But he's beginning to  creep to the edge of that shadow.
Brown isn't Joe Montana or Joe Namath, and he probably never will be.
But in  looking to the Giants' decision on Brown's future after the season ends, he should be judged on what he has done in two seasons as a starter, not on what Simms did in 15 seasons.


French Premier Signals Willingness to Talk With Strikers
Breaking with a stand of intransigent aloofness, the French Prime Minister, Alain Juppe, said today that he was ready to meet with union leaders on Monday to negotiate a settlement to the strikes that have paralyzed much of the country during the last 17 days.
"We must talk, we must discuss, we must negotiate," Prime Minister Juppe said.
"We must put ourselves around a table and find solutions. We cannot remain in the current situation."


Unicef Report Calls Children Major Victims of Recent Wars
Crippled by land mines, struck down by epidemic diseases, lost in refugee camps or caught in sniper fire, children have become major victims of a new era  of small ethnic wars and violent skirmishes, Unicef says in a report being issued today.
The report, "State of the World's Children 1996," says that in the last decade, two million children were killed in wars that have been statistically more devastating to civilians than to soldiers.


Tettleton Spurns Yanks and Returns to Texas
The Yankees' chaotic off-season strategy was forced to take another twist yesterday when designated hitter Mickey Tettleton decided to re-sign with the Texas Rangers for about $1 million less than New York was willing to pay him for the next two seasons.
A person familiar with the Rangers' plans said the agreement would be announced at a news conference today in Arlington, Tex.
In agreeing to a two-year, $2.5 million contract with Texas, Tettleton actually declined superior financial offers from three clubs, including a two-year proposal for about $3.5 million from the Yankees.
Tettleton's choice is obviously not as disastrous for the Yankees as Greg Maddux's refusal to accept $7 million more from them and sign with the Braves three years ago, but it is irksome to a team whose restructuring process has seemed disjointed.


Transactions
Basketball


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
A Fugitive, Perhaps a Ghost, An Oracle Who Can't Be Heard Wally Cardona St.
Mark's Danspace


Chilling With the Speaker
We are entering the second week of Newt Gingrich's chill-out.
The Speaker said he benched himself, but he had a right to be shaken by the enthusiasm with  which the Republican House members have now embraced the idea of a less Newtonian universe.
While he is resting, Mr.
Gingrich has time to think about a  potentially exquisite dilemma.
Should he bless a budget deal between Republican  and Democratic moderates, even if it risks a rupture with the flame-throwing freshman Republicans in the House?
For the past few days, the Republicans have been surprisingly outspoken about Mr.
Gingrich's excess.
You almost expected Christopher Shays and John Boehner to say, "Our long national brow-beating is over." Many of their colleagues were dismayed by Mr.
Gingrich's petulance about his treatment on Air Force One and by his comments linking a grotesque murder in Illinois to the modern welfare state.
A torrent of questions about possible financial irregularities and election law  violations has also undercut his authority with G.O.P. reformers.
Meanwhile, the polls have shown that the haranguing oratory that brought the Republican agenda  so far is now frightening the voters.


Lowery Strikes Ball Boy
Kicker Nick Lowery admitted after today's game that he slapped a 20-year-old  Patriots ball boy after becoming angered over the fact that the Jets were kicking footballs that had not been properly rubbed up to combat the cold.
In a statement the Patriots issued after the game, the team quoted the ball boy, David Foscaldo, of Foxboro, as saying that Lowery "struck him with an open  hand in the face" during the third quarter after he told Lowery he would not provide the rubbed-up footballs for him because it wasn't his job.
Ball boys at  times will rub up footballs as a courtesy to kickers in cold weather.
Lowery missed his only field goal of the game -- a 33-yarder in the first quarter.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
From Faure, Rhythmic Quirks And Rarely Heard Romances Benita Valente, soprano; Evelyne Crochet, pianist Miller Theater


A Hoop Dream That Ends With a Knicks Victory
If Madison Square Garden had been a playground, someone would have yelled "Deuce," because that is what you say when the game is tied and proceeding too well for anyone to lose by only one basket.
You had David Robinson's grace and muscle and the Knicks' improvisation and hustle.
You had equal parts unreal and implausible mixed in with two parts impossible.


It's Not the Poconos But . . .
Even in Mercer County, some people are not aware that their county operates a ski area.
From time to time, there is talk of closing down the ski area in Belle Mountain, a perennial money loser that cost the county $145,000 last year.
But when that happens, the public rises up in protest, said Frank Ragazzo, executive director of the Mercer County Park Commission.
Last week, the Board of Freeholders voted 5 to 2 to reopen Belle Mountain, 18 miles north of Trenton on  the Delaware River.
"This is not the Poconos," Mr.
Ragazzo said.
"But it's good  for kids and to learn on." The county hopes that weather conditions will allow snow-making by about Dec. 20.
TERRY PRISTIN


Corrections
Picture captions yesterday about a fire in a Harlem clothing store reversed the identities of two victims, Cynthia Martinez and Luz Ramos, in some copies.
Ms.
Ramos, wearing a tiara, was at the right.


Man in the News;N.A.A.C.P.'s New Hope: Kweisi Mfume
When Representative Kweisi Mfume walked into a hotel conference room here on  Saturday to interview with the board of directors of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, the group broke out into spontaneous applause.
It was perhaps the first time in more than two years that the full board had found anything to cheer about.
The organization is mired in debt and increasingly accused of being archaic and out of touch; Mr.
Mfume, who was named on Saturday as its president and chief executive officer, is viewed by many within the civil rights group as a savior.
So much so that the descriptions of him that flow from some quarters lapse effortlessly into hyperbole.


President Lobbies Florida


L'Oreal to Buy Maybelline in Cash Deal
In an attempt to gain a greater presence in the American mass market, L'Oreal S.A., the world's largest cosmetics company, announced yesterday that it had agreed to acquire Maybelline Inc. for $508 million in cash.
Maybelline, based in Memphis, makes inexpensive cosmetics that are sold through drugstores and discount stores.
The deal would give its shareholders $36.75 a share.
In addition, L'Oreal would assume $152 million in debt.


For Torricelli, It's Official
It is not exactly a secret that Representative Robert G. Torricelli of Englewood wants to run for the Senate seat to be vacated by Bill Bradley, a fellow Democrat.
But today, at the Woodside Elementary School in Franklin Lakes, Mr.
Torricelli is expected to make it official.
Mr.
Torricelli, a seven-term House veteran who represents parts of Bergen and Hudson counties, is to make stops along the shore at the Ocean Place Hilton  in Long Branch and in southern New Jersey at the Sheraton Hotel in Cherry Hill.


For One Play, Brown Warms To the Task
When wide receiver Chris Calloway looked for the ball, he couldn't see it.
The lights at Giants Stadium were like a bright sun, shielding the football, making it invisible.
And when it came out of the air, falling like it was dropped from a plane, he still did not see it.
Calloway simply reached out and grabbed for it.
And for once, when the Giants needed a big play, it didn't slip through their fingers.
They reached out, grabbed for it and took it.


Badly Needed: More Speakers Against Extremism
WORDS can kill.
Jews learned that lesson the hard way when Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel was assassinated last month while words of hate flew across his country.
Yesterday, thousands of New York Jews went to Madison Square Garden, still in pain.
They were searching for a way to disperse dark clouds that envelop them because of the young Jewish man who gunned down Mr.
Rabin, saying he had done God's work.
While they sang a lilting song of peace, other people were on West 125th Street, walking mostly in silence past the incinerated shell of Freddy's clothing store.
What more was there to say, they asked, about the still-confused events that had led to eight senseless deaths at Freddy's two days earlier?


McNair Does Well, But Not The Oilers
Should he start or shouldn't he?
Should he play now or later?
Other than the  issue of whether the Oilers would play here or in Nashville after this season, those had been the questions most asked about the Oilers.
The Steve McNair questions.
Protect him?


Keep It Simple on Bosnia
With only days to go before the formal signing of the Bosnian peace agreement, Congressional approval for the dispatch of American troops to supervise the peace is needlessly snagged over two issues.
Critics of the Administration's troop proposal, mainly conservative Republicans, question whether the Administration has a reasonable strategy for ending the mission and  withdrawing forces.
Beyond that, they ask whether Washington should supplement the peacekeeping operation, or even replace it, with a major American effort to  arm and train the Bosnian Army.
The best way to assure that the peacekeeping mission ends successfully and on time is to keep it simple, just as the Administration has proposed.
The Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, who has honorably set aside partisan interest to support the operation, should resist pressure to load up his authorizing resolution with all sorts of conditions, even if that means he has to depend on  Democratic votes for its passage.


Fidelity Funds Sell More Technology Shares
Mutual funds managed by Fidelity Investments sold large amounts of their holdings in several technology stocks in November, according to filings on Friday with the Securities and Exchange Commission by the FMR Corporation, Fidelity's parent.
Fidelity funds sold nearly all of their holdings in Micron Technology and substantially reduced their holdings in companies including Applied Materials, Sun Microsystems, National Semiconductor, KLA Instrument and VLSI Research, according to the filings.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:
MONDAY


Fate of Musicians Can Ride On Latest Shift in Industry
There used to be a section in some record contracts called the key man clause.
It specified that if the executive who brought a band to a record label  ever left the company, the band could be released from its contract.
That was in the old days; such clauses are now extinct.
Today, with record companies experiencing the biggest executive upheavals in the history of the business, bands are largely helpless to do anything but watch the bloodshed.


New York's Flawed Hospital Plan
The market-based reforms that Gov.
George Pataki's task force proposed last week for New York hospitals would squeeze fat out of a bloated system.
But the reforms would also squeeze out what is precious about New York hospitals: the care they provide indigent patients and high-quality education for doctors-in-training.
Since 1983, the state has regulated patient care by setting the rates that insurers must pay hospitals to treat patients.
Medicare, which is run from Washington, and managed-care plans are exempt from those rates.
The state fees are designed to produce enough revenue to cover some capital costs, the cost of  treating uninsured patients -- more than 2.5 million in New York -- and the cost of training residents at teaching hospitals.


Video Lottery in Contract
Video Lottery Technologies Inc. said last week that its Automated Wagering International Inc. unit would replace the Gtech Holdings Corporation as the provider of the central computer system and terminals for the Maryland state lottery.
Video Lottery, based here, said the contract was worth $52 million.
Gtech's contract expires in July.


Patents;A new device calibrates the lasers used to surgically correct nearsightedness.
WHEN Deborah K. Hall was 26, she left her job selling eye lens implants for 3M to strike out on her own.
Ophthalmic surgeons usually hone their skills by operating on pig or rabbit eyes.
But those often are not old enough to have cataracts, so Ms.
Hall, backed by a business partner, set out to approximate a human eyeball with cataracts that surgeons could practice extracting.


Pataki Offers Plan to Reshape Welfare
Gov.
George E. Pataki unveiled a wide-ranging plan yesterday to reshape the state's welfare programs by sharply cutting benefits and creating a new system for delivering them.
Monthly checks would be set by a simpler formula, localities could play a greater role and, in a potentially contentious proposal, drug testing for recipients might be mandatory.
In disclosing the measures, Mr.
Pataki was fleshing out a plan that has stirred fierce debate around the state in the days since its outlines first became known.
The Governor's aides have already said that as part of the administration's effort to close the state's $4 billion budget gap for the next  fiscal year, it will seek time limits for the first time on welfare benefits.


For Stanley Crouch, Democracy Is a Lot Like Jazz
THE ALL-AMERICAN SKIN GAME, OR, THE DECOY OF RACE The Long and the Short of It, 1990-1994 By Stanley Crouch 267 pages.
Pantheon Books. $24.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
Blues and Soul Ending Up As a Down-Home Party Bobby Rush Chicago Blues


Today's Music Men, Playing Old Acts For New Markets
It was 30 years ago today that Sgt.
Pepper taught the band to play.
But in 1995, the Beatles are still very much in style.
In fact, they're the hottest thing in the record business.
For an industry that caters to youth and thrives on fresh talent, that is no  reason to smile.
To some music executives, the runaway success of the new Beatles album, more than two decades after the band broke up, is a fitting coda to a year marked by creative ennui, lackluster sales and unprecedented management turmoil.


Metro Digest
NEW YORK CITY


Lancit Media Strategies
Lancit Media Productions Ltd. has hired Allen &amp; Company to explore alternative strategies, including the possible sale of a stake to a larger media-related company.
Lancit said another option was the formation of partnerships with other companies to finance programming efforts and distribution arrangements.
Lancit, based in New York, creates children's and family programming for television.


A Male Dancer Parodies What He Knows Best
Just a few months ago, Bart De Block was a principal dancer with the Berlin Opera Ballet, performing roles like Count Albrecht in "Giselle" and everyone's favorite partner in George Balanchine's "Who Cares?" Tomorrow night, however, he will make his debut with the exuberantly all-male Ballets Trockadero de Monte Carlo, dancing as the grand ballerina Tatiana Youbetyabootskaya at Kaye Playhouse, where the company performs through Sunday.
Why would a gifted and acclaimed young dancer, the winner of awards at international ballet competitions, decide to perform with a troupe known for its parodies of classical ballet?


Thousands Pay Tribute to Rabin And Listen to Appeals for Unity
Nearly 15,000 people crowded into Madison Square Garden yesterday to honor the memory of Yitzhak Rabin, braving a long, bone-chilling wait outside to accord the slain Israeli Prime Minister and his quest for peace the kind of unanimous mass tribute from American Jewry he never enjoyed while alive.
So many Jews streamed in from Long Island and New Jersey, from Brooklyn and the Upper West Side, that several thousand were turned away at the arena's doors and missed sorrowful speeches by Prime Minister Shimon Peres of Israel, Vice President Al Gore and the widowed Leah Rabin.


U.S. Dialysis Industry Serves All Patients
To the Editor:
"The Perils of Dialysis," your Dec. 4-6 front-page series, is not a representative snapshot of an industry that provides dialysis care for 187,000 patients and about 27 million dialysis treatments a year in more than 2,500 dialysis facilities.


DEATH ON 125th STREET: THE OVERVIEW;Police Say Killer in Harlem Fire Was a Laborer and a Protester
The gunman-arsonist who killed seven people and himself in a Harlem clothing  store on Friday was identified by the police yesterday as Roland James Smith Jr., a 51-year-old laborer with an arrest record going back 30 years for charges relating to gun possession, war protests and draft-dodging.
The police said Mr.
Smith lived in the Bronx and had been arrested in crimes  in New York City, Pennsylvania and Florida.


New Disney Venture With Burger King
In an expansion of the relationship between the Walt Disney Company and the Burger King Corporation, a co-sponsored interactive promotion will begin today.
The terms of the agreement, and the budget for the promotion, were not disclosed.
The promotion is being aimed at the millions of children whose names have been compiled on mailing lists as members of the Burger King Kids Club.
They will be offered CD-ROM samplers featuring titles from Disney's interactive unit  as well as storybooks and calendars.


U.S. Marine to Resume Testimony in Japan Case
A marine who says the United States military forced him to falsely confess to the rape of a 12-year-old girl is to resume his testimony Monday in a Japanese court on Okinawa.
Pfc.
Rodrico Harp, 21, testified in the last hearing on Dec. 4 that Navy investigators dragged him out of bed before dawn and made him say he raped the girl.


That Was No Whitewater Evasion
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 6 editorial "Whitewater Evasions, Cont." wrongly states that I "misled" the Senate Banking Committee by claiming that "the Office of Government Ethics, in an 'independent investigation,' had exonerated his White House associates."


Once Key Allies of Yeltsin, Miners Turn Against Him
There is no such thing as moderation in the Arctic.
Russia learned that lesson well enough a few years ago, when the coal miners of this former penal colony, which is closer to the North Pole than to Moscow, helped bring Communism to its knees.
Tired of cheap slogans and empty promises, the miners from this harsh outpost on the tundra led a national strike in 1989, and their undimmed fury two years later helped propel the reform leader, Boris N. Yeltsin, to the Russian presidency.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.


Foster's Brewing Bids for Mildara
Foster's Brewing Group Ltd., Australia's largest brewer, said it would offer  $482 million (Australian), or $355 million (United States), for the winemaker Mildara Blass Ltd.
Foster's said it would offer $7.75 (Australian) cash for each ordinary share, a 22 percent premium over Mildara's closing share price on Friday.


Change in the Canadian Coat of Arms Touches a Raw Nerve
Three Latin words are the focus of a fresh Canadian identity crisis five weeks after the Quebec independence referendum nearly caused the country's breakup.
In July 1994 the Government altered the Canadian coat of arms, adding the Latin inscription Desiderantes Meliorem Patriam -- Desiring a Better Country.
But it apparently failed to tell anyone until the matter came up last Tuesday in the House of Commons.


Boys to Men: Garnett Comes of Age
The lights were bright in the Target Center arena here, the crowd was cheering and the game had been stopped to let Kevin Garnett enter the contest last month for the Minnesota Timberwolves.
Garnett is the remarkable 19-year-old, 6-foot-11-inch rookie who, just a few  months ago, was in a tuxedo and size 13 1/2 black shoes and attending his high school prom in Chicago.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week:
Monday


Pataki Details Plan For Cutting Welfare
Gov.
George E. Pataki detailed his plan to reshape New York State's welfare programs by sharply cutting benefits and creating a new system for delivering them.
Under the proposal, monthly checks would be set by a simpler formula, localities could play a greater role and, in a potentially contentious proposal, drug testing for recipients might be mandatory.
In disclosing the measures, Mr.
Pataki fleshed out a plan that has stirred fierce debate around the state in the days since its outlines first became known.
And in promoting the changes, the Republican Governor invoked the spirit of one of his Democratic predecessors, Franklin D. Roosevelt, saying the  former President had called "unfettered welfare a 'narcotic' that destroyed the  human spirit."


Game of 'Jets Moments' Turns on One Odd Play
This was more than just another Jet loss to the Patriots today.
It crystallized the slew of odd happenings that infect a losing team, and the way some players react to it.
And for quarterback Boomer Esiason, the season cannot end soon enough.


Secure Digital Transactions Just Got a Little Less Secure
The discovery of a vulnerability has shaken the computer security world's faith in the safe use of the data-security technologies on which most current and planned electronic banking, shopping and "digital cash" systems are based.
The vulnerability has been found in a class of technologies known as public-key encryption -- designed to protect electronic transactions by scrambling data so they can be read only by people with the proper mathematical  keys to the code.


Essay;Why No Firestorm?
On Nov. 5, 1993, armed with improperly obtained warnings about criminal references involving the President and Mrs.
Clinton, four Federal employees went to consult with three privately hired Clinton lawyers.
One of the private lawyers was Denver's James Lyons, whose "report" during the 1992 campaign threw most reporters off the Whitewater scandal's scent; five  months before, Lyons was a caller to, and scheduled to be a visitor of, Vincent  Foster, at the time of his apparent suicide.


First Data Received From Jupiter Probe
Scientists received the first data from the space probe Galileo today, a message beamed more than 2.3 billion miles that may give Earth its first close-up look at the giant planet Jupiter and how time began.
Galileo, which traveled for six years before reaching its current orbit around Jupiter, is expected to give scientists at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration their first measurements of the massive planet's atmosphere, composition, climate and weather patterns.


Impenetrable Defense Guides Badgers to Title
Wisconsin's superb defense, strength and size proved more effective than Duke's speed in today's championship game of the National Collegiate Athletic Association soccer tournament.
The Badgers captured their first title on their initial visit to the Final Four with a 2-0 triumph over Duke.
Coaches in many sports like to say that defense wins championships, and Wisconsin evidently has the best defense in the country.
The triumph was Wisconsin's seventh consecutive shutout and 17th shutout of the season.
The Badgers' five shutouts in the post-season setting a tournament record.


Clinton's Subpoena Fight Is Part of Long War
When the Senate Whitewater committee convenes this week to debate President Clinton's decision to defy its subpoena, the senators will be adding to an already rich history of confrontation between lawmakers and witnesses over the attorney-client privilege.


French Deadline Passes With No Word From Serbs on Pilots
A deadline set by the French Government for information from the Serbs on two pilots shot down over Bosnia in August passed today with no immediate indication of the stern action France had threatened if the airmen were not released or their fate clarified.
Herve de Charette, the French Foreign Minister, said on Friday that the pilots, whose Mirage 2000 was shot down on Aug. 30, must be released by Sunday or the Serbs would face "multiple consequences." Two days earlier, Jacques Chirac, the French President, called President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia to deliver what officials described as "an ultimatum."


Doubts Over a Smoking Ban
Last month, the Borough of Flemington passed a local ordinance prohibiting minors from smoking in public.
Now, Assemblywoman Shirley K. Turner, Democrat of Ewing Township, said she would introduce a similar measure to be applied statewide.
But the Mayor of Flemington, Austin H. Kutscher, doubts that this is  a good idea.
"We are 4,000 people in one square mile," said Mr.
Kutscher, a cardiologist.
"I don't know if this would work in Newark or Jersey City."
The Flemington ordinance goes into effect March 1 for a three-year trial period.
Mayor Kutscher said it would be wiser to put off passage of a statewide  ban until the local measure could be evaluated.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC


We Have Come to Banish the Darkness'


U.S. Troops in Bosnia Find a 'Shellshocked' People
Just past midnight, Lieut.
Col.
Sidney Kooyman of the First Armored Division  wandered into the bomb shelter that doubles as a television room for the handful of American soldiers who have already arrived in Bosnia.
He began to pull off his camouflage uniform, the fatigue evident in his face  after another day of trying to make sense of a land that the United States will  try to bring peace to.


CHRONICLE
MICHAEL JACKSON's doctors upgraded his condition yesterday to stable and improving, and were considering moving him from intensive care to a private room, hospital officials said.
In a statement, Beth Israel Medical Center North said that the gastrointestinal ailment that caused the entertainer to collapse last week was under control and he has begun eating solid foods again.
"His heart status is completely normal," the statement said.


Jump Shot, Slingshot: The Little Guys Win
It was like David versus Goliath.
But in this case, Goliath was named David Robinson, and last night, he was vanquished by the little guys.
Robinson scored a season-high 45 points, but he was not tall enough, strong enough or dominant enough to defeat the Knicks, even after Patrick Ewing, Charles Oakley and Anthony Mason all fouled out.
Using a four-guard lineup that was quicker and more resourceful than the San Antonio Spurs, the Knicks pulled out an extraordinary 118-112 double-overtime victory, giving Don Nelson another lift during his brief tenure as New York's coach.


War Crimes Panel Orders Suspect Released
A soldier suspected of murdering Bosnian Serbs has been ordered released by an international war crimes tribunal because Serbia failed to respond to repeated requests for evidence that would support an indictment, a person close  to the tribunal said today.
The soldier fought with the Bosnian Croat militia, and investigators from the tribunal suspect that key witnesses to atrocities he may have committed now live in Serbia.
But although the case involves the killing of Bosnian Serbs, officials in Serbia did not reply to requests for assistance from the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia by a deadline of last  Friday, according to the person close to the tribunal, who spoke on condition of anonymity.


Protestant Calls I.R.A. Stand a Setback for Peace
The leader of the largest Protestant political party in Northern Ireland said today that the peace effort in the British province had been set back by the Irish Republican Army statement that it would not cooperate with a new panel on  disarming paramilitary groups in the North.
On Saturday, the overwhelmingly Roman Catholic I.R.A. said it would not cooperate with the International Body on Decommissioning, which is headed by George J. Mitchell, the former Democratic Senator from Maine.
The panel held its first organizational meeting on Saturday in New York.
Next weekend, it will take testimony from political groups, government officials and private individuals in Dublin and Belfast.


U.S. Dialysis Industry Serves All Patients;No to Managed Care
To the Editor:
Re your Dec. 4-6 front-page series on dialysis: Debate on the causes of the higher mortality of American patients than counterparts in Europe, Australia, Canada and Japan has been persistent.


Rajat Neogy, 57, Founder of Journal on Africa
Rajat Neogy, the Ugandan-born founder of Transition, a magazine that became influential in Africa, died on Dec. 3 at his home in San Francisco, where he settled two decades ago.
He was 57.
He had been in declining health and had inflammation of the pancreas, his daughter Renu Neogy said.


2d Ebola Fever Case Suspected in Liberia
A Liberian refugee being treated for the deadly Ebola virus in the Ivory Coast has told doctors he left a friend with similar symptoms in his village in  war-shattered Liberia, a senior official said today.
Foreign medical experts and Ivory Coast officials, who have been tracing the  refugee's movements and isolating those he met, have asked for permission to enter Liberia and go to the village to investigate.


Fire Suspect Was a Picket For Vendors
The forces that brought Roland J. Smith Jr. to a landlord-tenant dispute in Harlem may be rooted in another quarrel that once held the neighborhood in its grip: last year's heated turf war over 125th Street between store owners and illegal vendors.
The landlord-tenant dispute was between Sikhulu Shange, a black man who owned a record store and faced eviction, and Fred Harari, a white merchant who Mr.
Shange thought was partly responsible.
When Mr.
Shange found himself faced with leaving the storefront he had rented for nearly two decades, a few Harlem leaders organized street demonstrations.


Bilingualism Enhances Our Competitiveness
To the Editor:
Re letters on bilingual education (Dec. 5, 7):


Racism Issue Leads NOW To Censure
The National Organization for Women, in an unprecedented move, has publicly censured the president of its largest chapter, telling her to apologize for statements she made about racism and the O. J. Simpson case.
The president of the Los Angeles chapter, Tammy Bruce, who has led L.A.
NOW for seven years, was reprimanded last week by Patricia Ireland, the national president of NOW, the nation's leading feminist group.


Mobil to Stay With Omnicom Unit
The Mobil Corporation has decided to keep its worldwide corporate image advertising account at DDB Needham Worldwide in New York after a monthlong review.
The billings were not disclosed.
Gail Campbell Woolley, a spokeswoman for Mobil in Fairfax, Va., said a "limited number of agencies" participated but  declined to identify them.
DDB Needham, part of the Omnicom Group, also handles  domestic advertising for the Mobil gasoline brand and Mobil service stations.


Four in Family Die as Pickup Crushes a Car
Elba Ticas feared something was wrong this morning when none of her brothers  showed up to help her with her newspaper delivery route.
At 9 A.M. the police arrived at her Woodmere apartment to give her news that  was worse than her worst imaginings: Her three brothers and her cousin had been killed in a car crash at 3:25 A.M. today.


Viacom Weighs A New Venture
The media-entertainment conglomerate Viacom Inc. is looking into entering the recorded-music business, the company's chief executive, Frank Biondi Jr., said last week.
Viacom is a television-show syndicator and the owner of cable networks like MTV and Nickelodeon.
It has grown rapidly in the last 18 months with its purchase of Paramount Pictures, Simon &amp; Schuster books and the Blockbuster video and music store chain.


A Multicultural Album
Marlies Yearby's "Feathers at the Flame," presented by Ms.
Yearby's Movin' Spirits Dance Theater on Thursday night at the Tribeca Performing Arts Center, promised a great deal.
Ms.
Yearby has solid credentials as a choreographer and performer.
Her collaborators included Laurie Carlos, a writer and performer of extraordinary vibrancy; the gifted composer and performer Tiye Giraud, and seven strong performers.
But the hourlong mixed-media piece was profoundly disappointing.
In "Feathers at the Flame," Ms.
Yearby explores with more brain than heart the relationship of American blacks and American Indians and the ways oral histories are handed down.
The text, written by Ms.
Carlos, mixes fragments of memories, dreams and everyday conversations, spoken by seven performers who move almost continuously -- often interacting with one another -- and who punctuate their frequently overlapping monologues with sequences of syncopated breathing.


A 'Duchess' Returns, Engulfed by Depravity
As the current Princess of Wales can testify, marrying into a royal family brings its own set of nasty problems: confusing intrigues, spying courtiers, double-agent spin doctors, secret sexual liaisons, the confusion of private and  public lives and of course those imperial whims of iron.
If the members of the House of Windsor want to avoid sleepless nights, they had probably better skip the Cheek by Jowl company's searing interpretation of John Webster's "Duchess of Malfi" (at the Majestic Theater of the Brooklyn Academy of Music through Friday) when it arrives in London at the end of the month.


Choreographer With an Ear for Song
You might call Mark Morris a song-and-dance man.
He tends to use more vocal music in his work than other choreographers.
The grandest example is his magnificent treatment of the Handel oratorio "L'Allegro, il Penseroso ed il Moderato," a production he presented at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in 1990 and revived last summer at Lincoln Center.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
Deconstructed Love Songs, With a Wry Deborah Harry Jazz Passengers The Knitting Factory


No Headline
I never thought we had that kind of hatred still in our midst. -- THE REV.
C.
R.
EDWARDS, discussing the murders of a black woman and man in Fayetteville, N.C., near Fort Bragg. [A1:5.]


INSIDE
French Leader Eases Stand


Bridge
Each year it is possible, subjectively, to rank published bridge books in two ways, by the quality of the deals and by entertainment.
This year, for the first time since "Right Through the Pack" appeared almost half a century ago, the same book tops both lists for this department.
It is "Contract Killers" by Phillip and Robert King, a son-and-father combination who contribute, respectively, a high level of bridge expertise and the writing skill of a professional playwright.
The book consists of four long parodies of Agatha Christie, John Grisham, Margaret Mitchell and Mario Puzo titled "Contract for Murder," "The Club," "Harlett O'Scara" and "The Bridgefather." It is available for $19.95, including  shipping, from The Bridge World, 39 West 94th Street, New York, N.Y. 10025.


Saatchi &amp; Saatchi plans to link all its agencies that handle business-to-business accounts.
SAATCHI &amp; SAATCHI ADVERTISING will link all its agencies that handle business-to-business accounts in a single worldwide network named Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Business Communications.
It begins with offices in six countries serving a flagship account, E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company.


Hill May Be Harvard's Answer to Marbury
Georgia Tech's Stephon Marbury has been the freshman point guard who has been the early season sensation in college basketball.
But when Harvard and Dartmouth open the Ivy League schedule here Tuesday night, the Crimson's exciting freshman, Tim Hill, has already made an impact on  opponents and his team.


On My Mind;What Beijing Fears
The top-ranked academic sent by Beijing to a conference of intellectuals from around the world asked for the floor to explain his Government's policy on human rights.
Shuqing Wu, president of Beijing University, spoke only five or six minutes,  but with careful clarity.


When a Store Changes Color On 125th St.
ROSE RIVERS is not a naive woman.
Nothing is guaranteed in this life, she knows.
She also knew there was an element of risk when she took the business plunge of her life three weeks ago by setting up shop as La K Fashions, on West  125th Street just east of Malcolm X Boulevard, a k a Lenox Avenue.
Actually, she took ownership of an existing store that had sold women's clothes under the name of Leona for more than 50 years.
Not wanting to upset faithful customers with sudden change, she decided to leave the neon "Leona" sign above the entrance and to keep the store's appeal to "the mature female shopper."


American Venture Buys Brazil Pay-TV Stake
A joint venture of Capital Cities/ ABC Inc. and the Hearst Corporation has acquired a 20 percent stake in a leading Brazilian pay television company, the investors announced yesterday.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.
The Brazilian company, Tevecap S.A., has eight pay-TV systems in Brazil's major cities and a network of 42 affiliated pay-TV operators.
Also known as TVA, the company has more than a half-million subscribers.
TVA is controlled by Abril Group, based in Sao Paulo, one of South America's biggest media companies.
TVA is also a partner in the satellite service Galaxy Latin America, which is to begin a service of 144 channels early next year that  will be available throughout Latin America.
(AP)


POPE &amp; TALBOT TO SELL DIAPER UNIT TO PARAGON
Pope &amp; Talbot Inc. agreed yesterday to sell its disposable diaper business to Paragon Trade Brands Inc. for $65 million -- $50.5 million in cash and Paragon common stock valued at $14.5 million.
Pope &amp; Talbot, a pulp and wood concern in  Portland, Ore., plans to use the proceeds from the sale to pay down bank lines of credit.
The diaper business generated about $157 million in revenue in 1994,  or 24 percent of Pope &amp; Talbot's $660 million of revenue.
The company said it would remain in the private-label consumer products tissue business.


Failing on Fourth, Switzer Won't Take the Fifth
He strode into the news conference wearing a dark green sweater with a green  shirt underneath and he was peering from behind brown-tinted glasses.
Head up.
Thoughts focused.
No duck and dodge from Barry Switzer on this one.
He faced the firing line this afternoon, the day after his controversial call led to the Dallas Cowboys' 20-17 loss at Philadelphia, and he appeared well aware that what was being tossed his way was explosive.


Show Trial in China
Wei Jingsheng, China's leading campaigner for democracy, goes on trial for his life tomorrow in a proceeding that exposes the emptiness of Beijing's claim  to be a society ruled by law.
If the Clinton Administration means to maintain any credibility as a defender of human rights in China, it must make a maximum effort to win Mr.
Wei's freedom.
After 20 months of secretive administrative detention, Mr.
Wei was formally arrested last month on the baseless charge of trying to overthrow China's Communist Government.
Then his trial was scheduled with less than a week's notice.
As of 48 hours before the opening of courtroom proceedings, the attorney hired by Mr.
Wei's family had not received written notice of the charges and had not been given an opportunity to meet with his client.


Tenacity in the Service of Public Culture;New Victory Theater Is Latest Icon on Which Architect Leaves His Mark
Just moments before the gala opening last night of the New Victory Theater on West 42d Street, Hugh Hardy, the architect responsible for the restoration of this, the oldest surviving theater in New York City, was more beset with relief  than opening-night jitters.


Israel Sells Out Bond Offering, First Without U.S. Guarantee
After a whirlwind roadshow with American investors, David Brodet of Israel's  Ministry of Finance was able to announce that Israel had sold all of its new bond offering, its first since the assassination of Yitzhak Rabin and its first  without the backing of the United States Treasury.
The sale was an important test of whether Israel could raise money in the world's capital markets after Mr.
Rabin's assassination and the continuing political turmoil among Israelis and Palestinians over the Prime Minister's policy of trading Israeli land for Palestinian pledges of peace.


New Trouble for Strawberry
Darryl Strawberry, the former Mets outfielder who was let go by the Yankees on Nov. 30, was charged today with failing to make child-support payments.
Strawberry, who has two children by his former wife, Lisa, is due in court for arraignment Jan. 23, the district attorney's Bureau of Family Support Operations said.
Strawberry, 33, faces one count of willful failure to provide child support, two counts of violating a court order to provide child support and another order to provide spousal support, the Deputy District Attorney Mark  Goldman said.


Budget Games
Haley Barbour, chairman of the Republican Party, thinks he has found a rhetorical device to fend off White House attacks on the G.O.P.'s proposed cuts  in Medicare.
People should focus, he says, not only on how much the two sides want to cut but on how much each wants to spend.
The G.O.P. wants to spend $1.65 trillion over the next seven years.
The White House would spend $1.68 trillion.
Mr.
Barbour concludes that the difference -- $30 billion or about 2 percent -- is too small to matter and that President Clinton's vicious attacks on the Republican plan amount to demagoguery.
Mr.
Clinton has wrongly ridiculed the G.O.P. for proposing modest hikes in subsidized premiums.
But Mr.
Barbour's rhetorical thrust is little better.
The two plans differ by amounts that the $30 billion figure does not begin to capture.


Lowery Says He Regrets Run-In With Ball Boy
Nick Lowery, the Jets' 39-year-old field-goal kicker, said today that he regretted an incident during Sunday's game against the New England Patriots at Foxboro, Mass., in which he slapped a 20-year-old New England ball boy.
A National Football League spokesman said the league was looking into the incident and would not speculate what disciplinary action, if any, Lowery faced.
When Don Silvestri, who made the second-half kickoff for the Jets, told Lowery that the ball was rock hard in the 26-degree cold, Lowery said he walked  toward the ball boy, David Foscaldo of Foxboro.


In Shunning Roof and Rules, Forgoing Thermostats, Too
In his dream, the sun bathed his face, calypso rhythms tugged at his feet and a beautiful woman beckoned from the edge of a warm green sea.
But when Marcus Williams awoke yesterday morning, he was back in New York City, a homeless man trying to survive the streets on the coldest day of the season.
"I don't want anything to do with the shelters," said Mr.
Williams, 51, who spent the bitterly cold night burrowed in a canvas-covered warren of newspapers and blankets along the Hudson River.
"I'm going to spend the winter right here.


Q &amp; A
Naming the Stars


Editors' Note
An article in Business Day on Dec. 1 reported a decision by Lazard Freres &amp; Company to close its municipal finance operation and noted the political scandals that affected the operation's business.
The account briefly described the role of Richard P. Poirier, a former partner at Lazard, who was involved in  a number of the firm's major municipal transactions.
These included deals in New Jersey, Louisiana and Kentucky in which questions were raised about political connections and financial arrangements.
The Times should have asked Mr.
Poirier for his response to the accusations  against him.
Mr.
Poirier says he "was never involved in any aspect of any Lazard transaction in the State of Louisiana."


Exemption Set In Clinton Plan For Crackdown On Tax Deals
The Clinton Administration, which proposed last week to close what it said were billions of dollars of tax loopholes used in Wall Street financing, retreated ever so slightly yesterday.
Among the Administration's proposals was to deny tax benefits to corporate bonds issued for maturities longer than 40 years and to hybrid securities that go by names like MIPS and combine characteristics of debt and ownership.


This Time, Miami Matches Marino
Dan Marino set another National Football League record tonight -- this one for career pass attempts -- and finally the Miami Dolphins' quarterback and his  embattled teammates were able to enjoy a victory with it.
Marino surpassed Fran Tarkenton with his 6,468th pass attempt midway through  the fourth quarter of Miami's hanging-on-for-dear-life 13-6 victory over the Kansas City Chiefs before 70,321 at Joe Robbie Stadium.


Brief Clause in Bill Would Curb U.S. Power to Protect Wetlands
Buried deep in a spending bill now before Congress are two sentences that could give clear sailing to a highway project in New Hampshire, harbor dredging  in South Carolina, a mine in Montana and many other projects around the country  that have been threatened by the Government's environmental objections.
The terse provision would take away one of the Environmental Protection Agency's major tools for protecting the country's wetlands: the veto that the agency is allowed to cast against permits that the Army Corps of Engineers issues to developers for wetlands projects.


Huge Comet Raising Hope for Spectacular Show
ABOUT once every 20 years, one of the many comets that wander into the inner  solar system puts on a show visible to the naked eye.
Astronomers have been notoriously unsuccessful in predicting which comets will shine and which will fizzle, but despite their poor track record, they say there is a fair chance that a huge comet now headed this way will kindle some rare celestial fireworks.
Ever since an object formally named Comet C/1995 O1 (Hale-Bopp) was discovered last July, observatories around the world have been watching it closely because it is astonishingly bright.
Far beyond the orbit of Jupiter, it  is nevertheless much brighter than normal for a comet so distant from the Sun.


P.G.B. Stillman, 77, A Teacher of History At the Choate School
P.
Gordon B. Stillman, a private school administrator and teacher who shared  his knowledge of history, tennis and squash with generations of students, died yesterday at his home in New York City.
He was 77.


Blue-Chip Stocks Climb, With Dow Up by 27.46
Blue-chip stocks ended higher yesterday, bolstered by a strong rally in oil stocks.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 27.46 points, to 5,184.32, recovering part of the ground lost in the two days since closing at a record 5,199.13 on Dec. 6.
The broader Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 stocks rose 2.04 points, to 619.52, just short of its Dec. 6 record of 620.18.
But the Nasdaq composite index fell 0.91 point, to 1,061.50.


If the U.S. Takes Sides
Arming and training Bosnian Muslims, as Senator Bob Dole and his supporters would like to do, cannot possibly help the peace agreement or advance United States interests.
Abandoning neutrality would put our troops at greater risk, and our allies would hold us responsible for the consequences if war broke out again, unleashed in part by the emboldened Bosnians.
Congress should help the Clinton Administration, which wants to arm the Bosnian Muslims but only through an intermediary, by decisively rejecting this dangerous plan.


Women's Cup May Come to U.S.
The United States became an overwhelming favorite to play host to the 1999 Women's World Cup after Australia and Chile withdrew today.
The FIFA spokesman Keith Cooper said that unless Australia and Chile reconsidered before the February bid deadline, FIFA's executive committee would have no other choice.
FIFA is the sport's worldwide governing body.


Senators Make Change in General Manager
General Manager RANDY SEXTON was dismissed yesterday by the Ottawa Senators and replaced by PIERRE GAUTHIER, who had been assistant general manager of the Anaheim Mighty Ducks.
Terms of Gauthier's five-year contract were not disclosed.
"What is really needed is a hockey team that has the fans' support and a general manager with the reasonable confidence of those in the league he works with," ROD BRYDEN, the team owner, said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Wall Street Plays Down Effects of Securities Bill Wall Street sees the securities bill that passed Congress last week as a mild step toward quelling frivolous investor suits, not the radical advance as portrayed in Washington.


Accounts


Panama Doesn't Need U.S. Forces to Remain
To the Editor:
A Dec. 4 news article suggests that continued occupation of Panamanian territory by United States military forces after the year 2000 would be beneficial to that country's economic and political stability.
A recent University of Panama debate showed such thinking to be misguided.


India Court Bars Hindu Nationalist From Ballot
Less than six months before a general election that Hindu nationalist politicians say could give them their strongest chance yet of gaining power at the national level, the Supreme Court issued a ruling today that will have the effect of disqualifying the country's most strident advocate of Hindu supremacy  from seeking election.
The court ruled against the Hindu supremacist, Balasaheb K. Thackeray, because of a stump speech in 1987 in which he called Muslims "snakes."


A Rats-to-Riches Tale
The Florida Panthers faced a decision after last season's 20-22-6 performance.
Roger Neilson, who had coached the expansion team in the first two years of its existence, wanted to continue to develop the team around his experienced players, most of whom were the rattle-your-teeth defensive types with limited offensive skills.


Plan to Loosen Secrecy Rules
Assemblyman William J. Pascrell Jr., Democrat of Paterson, met with officials of the Division of Youth and Family Services yesterday to discuss his proposals  to soften secrecy rules surrounding child abuse cases and to increase public scrutiny of the state's child-welfare agency.
His plan calls for an ombudsman to investigate complaints against the agency, a commission to examine its programs  and budget and public reports about children who die or are seriously abused while under agency supervision.
Mr.
Pascrell, who is also Mayor of Paterson, said he was prompted to take action after the Paterson police, responding last week to a teen-ager's complaint that she had been beaten by her mother, found seven children living in a squalid apartment.


Corrections
A report in the A la Carte column of the Long Island Weekly on Sunday about holiday dinners at the de Seversky Conference Center in Old Westbury misstated the schedule.
The dinners, at 7:30 P.M., will be held on Friday and Saturday, not Thursday and Friday.


Mystery of Frequent Fliers
Biologists are not quite sure why this year's migration of tiny bats to the seaside village of Cape May Point is bigger than ever, but they say they suspect that last July's heavy rains may have something to do with it.
"They could be hanging around because there is still food here," Annette Scherer, an endangered-species biologist for the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, told the A.P.
Not to worry, though.
None of the 44 species of bats are  bloodsuckers, said Barbara French of Bat Conservation International, a nonprofit group in Austin, Tex.
TERRY PRISTIN


Jobs: French and British
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 5 front-page news analysis describes France's economic conflict as  "a problem that Britain dealt with, painfully, 15 years ago": that is, "an economy so burdened with the costs of providing five-week vacations, comprehensive free health care and generous pensions that it can no longer generate enough jobs."


Agnelli Says He Will Retire From Fiat Post
Giovanni Agnelli, the patrician head of Fiat S.p.A. who turned the family auto business into an international conglomerate, announced today that he would  step down "within the next few months," after 30 years as chairman.
Addressing an annual gathering in Turin of Fiat executives from around the world, Mr.
Agnelli named as his successor the managing director of Fiat, Cesare  Romiti.


Corrections
An article in the Styles pages on Sunday about churches with electronically enhanced music systems misstated the denomination of St.
Mary the Virgin Church  on West 46th Street in Manhattan.
It is Episcopal, not Roman Catholic.


Donahue Will Leave U.C.L.A. for CBS
TERRY DONAHUE, the leader in football victories at U.C.L.A. and in the Pac-10, resigned as coach yesterday after leading the Bruins to 13 bowl berths in 20 seasons.
The 51-year-old Donahue, who led the Bruins (7-4) to an upset of  Rose Bowl-bound Southern Cal and a spot in the Aloha Bowl on Christmas Day, has  taken a job with CBS Sports.
Donahue will coach the Bruins against Kansas in the bowl game before leaving  the coaching ranks.
He has a 151-73-8 record since taking over for DICK VERMEIL in 1976.


Physically So Close, But Emotionally Alone
Many residents of apartment houses see one another daily without knowing one  another at all.
On Sunday afternoon, Yoshiko Chuma and the School of Hard Knocks evoked such a situation in "Three Stories (The Hitchhike Project)," offered as part of the 92d Street Y's autumn dance series at Playhouse 91.
The work was collaboratively choreographed by its cast: Ms.
Chuma and two guest dancers, David Dorfman and Vicky Shick.
Pat Dignan's lighting often made each of them inhabit a separate pool of light.
Although there were moments when  these people briefly got together, they spent most of the time apart, dancing into and out of states of agitation, wistfulness, desperate gaiety and exhaustion.
These moods were matched by a score by Robert Een, a cellist, who played it with Hearn Gadbois, percussionist, and Anne DeMarinis, accordionist.


Two Bands That Are Spacey and Earthy
They sing about the insect world, make off-kilter psychedelic rock in the upper registers of their instruments and seem to exist in a bizarre world of their own.
They are the Flaming Lips, at Irving Plaza on Saturday night, and Mercury Rev, at the Mercury Lounge on Friday night.
These similarities aren't entirely coincidental.
Jonathan Donahue, the singer and guitarist in Buffalo's Mercury Rev, played in the Flaming Lips, a 10-year-old band from Oklahoma City, for a year and a half.
The two bands also have their differences.
At Irving Plaza, the Flaming Lips  made very clear demarcations between their noisy, spiraling jams and their vocals, turning down the intensity and distortion whenever Wayne Coyne began singing in his cracking voice.
At the concert by Mercury Rev, Mr.
Donahue's voice was used as a background instrument, enabling the band to string multiple  songs together into one long jam with forward motion.


Israelis Leave Biggest Town In West Bank
In a hasty departure a day ahead of schedule, the last Israeli soldiers slipped out of Nablus tonight, handing over the West Bank's largest city to an advance team of Palestinian police officers.
The unannounced pullout was completed in an hour, and was apparently ordered  to avert possible attacks on the departing Israeli forces and clashes with gathering crowds of celebrating Palestinians.


Dance Notes
Spotlight on a Treasure


Swallowed Up in San Francisco


3 More in House Say They'll Leave
Three more House members said today that they would not run for re-election next year.
That means that 27 of the 435 House members -- 19 Democrats and 8 Republicans -- have chosen not to return in 1997.


Ghoulish Murderer Is Executed in Texas
A man who said he killed a 74-year-old woman and then drank some of her blood was executed in Texas today.
The man, Esequel Banda, 31, died seven minutes after being injected with lethal chemicals.


Panel Faults Education Of Disabled
Hoping to set in motion the biggest effort in New York City's history to change how students in special education are treated, an independent panel yesterday recommended taking tens of thousands of children now in separate schools or classrooms and returning them to regular schools, where they would receive extra help.
While the framework of recommended changes was announced last May, the final  report outlines in detail the legal and financial dimensions of making the changes.
The proposal, by a panel of New York University educators appointed by  the Board of Education, does not offer a cost estimate, but an official familiar with the report said it could be $100 million during the three to five years that it would take for the changes.
Most of the money would be used to train teachers.


Amid Protest, Some Seek to Foster Calm
Community leaders in Harlem walked up and down 125th Street yesterday, seeking to calm shoppers and store owners in the wake of a racially motivated arson attack on Friday that destroyed a white-owned clothing store and left eight people dead, including the attacker.
During their tour, they made a point of stopping at the white-owned Bargain World.
On Saturday, the day after the fire at Freddy's clothing store, several protesters handed out leaflets in front of Bargain World that urged shoppers to  boycott the discount store.


At Hotels, Fewer Holiday Discounts
While toy makers, clothiers and distillers live for the holiday season, the period from Thanksgiving through Christmas can be the dead est of times for the  hotel industry.
Occupancy rates in December typically tumble to about 50 percent, compared with a year-round average of 65.2 percent in 1994, and would fall even further without a wide array of discounts and other enticements.
Many of those enticements, often including free parking and free breakfast, are widely available again this holiday season.


Finally, Enough Actresses To Nominate for Oscars
In recent years Hollywood, which is already gearing up for the Academy Awards, has endured the embarrassment of trying to find five nominees in the best-actress category.
For that matter, coming up with five best-film candidates has often been a bit of a struggle, too.
This year looks different.


World News Briefs;Algeria Jails Director Of Its Largest Newspaper
Authorities suspended publication of Algeria's largest newspaper and arrested its director as he was leaving for Paris to receive a literary prize.
The director of the French-language Liberte, Aubrous Outoudert, and the newspaper's editor-in-chief, Hacene Ouandjeli, were charged on Sunday with "repeated publication of a defamatory news item."


6 Die in Car Bombing in Madrid; Basque Separatists Are Accused
A car bomb killed six civilian employees of the Spanish Navy today, and Foreign Minister Javier Solana accused the Basque separatist group E.T.A. of being behind a "terrible criminal attack."
The car bomb exploded as the unmarked military van drove through southeastern Madrid, carrying the civilian naval mechanics and drivers home for lunch, said Jose Luis Gutierrez, a Defense Ministry spokesman.
Fourteen other people were wounded in the blast.


Soybean Prices Rise on Forecast For Continued Drought in Brazil
Soybean prices surged to their highest levels in more than 18 months yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade after forecasts for scant rain in southern Brazil this week.
The forecast would extend a drought that threatens the world's second-largest soybean crop after that of the United States.
On other markets, heating oil rose while crude oil fell.
The Commodity Research Bureau index gained 0.16 point, to 245.33.


Marching for Harmony


Job and Pride Regained Is Confidence Restored
Cheryl C. was only doing her civic duty.
In 1994, she spent a month sequestered on a jury that eventually convicted a  man for robbery.
When she returned home, she learned that the co-op board where  she worked as a secretary now had a new president and a new office staff, and that she had been laid off.


Porter and Berlin in Muted Colors
By definition, jazz repertory orchestras have to take on all sorts of colors, and on Thursday the Carnegie Hall Jazz Band became heir to the pastels of the arranger and composer Gil Evans.
The evening's subject was music by Cole Porter  and Irving Berlin, and through the arrangements of Mike Abene and Jim McNeely, Mr.
Evans and his light, airy textures spoke from behind walls of muted trumpets and trombones.
The concert opened with Mr.
McNeely's "Berlin Porter Overture," an extended piece that stacked song on song, with Mr.
McNeely casting them differently each  time.
"Blue Skies," for example, became dissonant.
Mr.
McNeely had tempos and rhythms change for each composition, occasionally opening the tunes up to improvisations.


BRODERBUND STOCK UP ON NEWS OF NEW INVESTOR
Shares of Broderbund Software Inc. rose 5 percent yesterday after a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission showed that Paul G. Allen, a co-founder of the Microsoft Corporation, had acquired a 5 percent stake in Broderbund, of Novato, Calif.
Mr.
Allen paid $59.8 million to acquire 1.03 million common shares as an investment, according to the filing.
Mr.
Allen began buying the stake on Dec. 7, the day that the Learning Company abandoned an agreement to merge with Broderbund, in favor of a $606 million bid by Softkey International Inc.
Purchases that Mr.
Allen made that day and on Dec. 8 were at  prices ranging from $57.72 to $58.50 per share.
Broderbund's shares rose $3.3125, to $61.3125, in Nasdaq trading.


Hewlett-Packard In AT&amp;T Accord
The AT&amp;T Corporation and the Hewlett-Packard Company said today that they would collaborate on a proposed communications network to allow less expensive transmission of multimedia and interactive services.


Johnson May Get Shot at Olympic Double
There is a good chance that world track officials will alter the Olympic timetable to allow the American sprinter MICHAEL JOHNSON to attempt a 200-400 double at next year's Atlanta Games, a spokesman for the International Amateur Athletics Federation said yesterday.
Johnson, who won both events at the world championships in Sweden in August, met over the weekend with PRIMO NEBIOLO, the  I.A.A.F. president.
"I think Nebiolo understood the needs of Michael Johnson, and if it will be  possible, he will do all that is needed to give him the opportunity to double,"  GIORGIO REINERI, the I.A.A.F. spokesman, said. (AP)


Harlem Store Owner Had Cited Anti-Semitism Before Fatal Fire
The day before a gunman-arsonist turned a Harlem clothing store into an inferno that killed seven employees and himself, the store's owner, who is Jewish, told a court that demonstrations by black protesters outside his premises had become a menacing caldron of anti-Semitic, anti-white racism and that arson and physical attacks seemed imminent.
A hearing on the owner's appeal for relief from the protests was under way in State Supreme Court in lower Manhattan last Friday even as Freddy's clothing store, on 125th Street, lay in ruins, the trapped employees dead inside with the assailant, Roland J. Smith Jr.


Derivatives in London
The London International Financial Futures and Options Exchange said yesterday that it would lease the old trading floor of the London Stock Exchange as a dual trading floor to handle its growing derivatives trading business.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Trizec Raises Investments
The Trizec Corporation said today that it had raised its ownership stake in two San Diego shopping malls and had bought lease positions on six more retail centers.
The company invested a total of $164 million (Canadian), or nearly $119 million (United States).
Trizec, a Canadian real estate concern, said the interests were acquired by its Hahn Company retail unit from the Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association of America, or T.I.A.A., based in New York


Gingrich Draws Protest to Fund-Raiser
Inside a warm, plush ballroom of the Pierre Hotel in Manhattan last night, about 400 revelers at the annual Louis Marshall Award Dinner greeted this year's keynote speaker with raised wine glasses, craned necks and discreet applause.
But outside, in the freezing cold, more than 250 protesters accorded him a reception that matched the harsh weather, hollering that he had no right to command the podium at one of the most important annual social events in the Conservative movement of Judaism.


Editors' Note
An illustration on Saturday with a letter about "big-money donors" in politics depicted a hand, wearing a diamond bracelet and ring, casting a ballot.
Several readers have pointed out that the lines marking facets in the diamonds seemed to form Stars of David.
The drawings of the diamonds were adapted from illustrations in an 1895 mail-order catalogue.
They were not intended to make any editorial comment.


The Cleveland Quartet's Grand Finale
Before Sunday afternoon's farewell concert by the Cleveland String Quartet, which disbands this week after 26 years, Jane S. Moss, vice president for programming at Lincoln Center, spoke of this esteemed quartet's contributions to New York's musical life.
"I've tried to go back and calculate how many times they have played in Lincoln Center events," she said to the capacity audience at Alice Tully Hall, "but I gave up counting after 55."
With that the talking was over.
There were no chatty commentaries on the music -- a trademark of the quartet's concerts -- and no farewell speeches.
The  musicians -- Paul Katz, cellist, and Peter Salaff, second violinist, who have been there from the beginning; James Dunham, the violist since 1987, and William Preucil, the first violinist since 1989 -- strode on stage looking eager and upbeat and settled down to work, playing with luminous tone, abundant technique  and a breadth of phrasing that seemed inspired by the occasion.


A Blue Streak: Rangers Preserve Mastery on Home Ice
Mark Messier kept running into people, places and things last night at Madison Square Garden.
The Ranger captain accidentally thumped a teammate, Niklas Sundstrom, and the collision jolted both of them.
"I guess I was thinking, 'I have to wake him up,' " said Sundstrom, a rookie, who was smiling at his little joke.


Final Act Fueled by Old Grievances
Walter Wells saw Roland J. Smith Jr.'s face on television and newspapers in recent days, and he realized that he had seen the face before.
It was last Thursday, he said, and Mr.
Smith was among the picketers outside Freddy's clothing store on 125th Street in Harlem.
He recalled that the man's face had been angry, and he was screaming slurs.
"I remember him because he was the most vocal one out here," Mr.
Wells said yesterday as he stood outside the burned remains of Freddy's.
"We went in, then  he started calling me Uncle Tom. Then he spit at my old lady. When we came out,  they were screaming, 'Look at those Uncle Toms coming out, going to shop in the  white man's store." '


Marathon Defense on TV By Lawmaker From Utah
In one of the most drawn-out scenes in modern political soap opera, a weepy Representative Enid Greene Waldholtz spent five hours today defending herself as the victim of a husband who was a "seamless liar" and a thief.
While she took some responsibility for irregularities in her personal and campaign finances, she said she should not suffer the same legal consequences as her husband because his scheming was deliberate, part of a facade of deceit cemented in place before they ever met.


What Do Women (Under 12) Want?
COMPUTER software occasionally comes packaged with odd prizes and peripherals, but McKenzie &amp; Company must be the first to include a tube of lipstick, not to mention a pink-ribbon breast-cancer-awareness pin emblazoned with the name of a shoe company.
You also get an audio CD with tracks from the Strawberry Zots, Poet, Cool Notes, Tee Green and, on phantom track 20, the sounds of a ping-pong game.
The program (about $60) comes from Her Interactive, a new division of American Laser Games Inc., a company best known for arcade shoot-'em-ups demanding quickness with the trigger finger rather than the lipliner.
McKenzie &amp; Company is one of a handful of new computer games aimed at preadolescent girls, whose male classmates are presumably drooling over computerized mayhem, kick-boxing the stuffing out of their enemies and slathering them with buckets of Doomful gore.
The most violent thing about McKenzie &amp; Company is a section where the goal is to protect flowers by killing  weeds.


Despite the prohibitive cost of its advertisements, television is where book publishers want to be.
THE initial image is of puzzle pieces, each depicting a piece of a crime: handcuffs, a fingerprint, a police scene.
"A crime begins in the mind," a man's  voice says.
The pieces fall into place, forming a man's face.
"So does the solution," the voice continues.
"And no one brings all of the pieces together like Jonathan Kellerman, the master of psychological suspense."
This television advertisement, to begin appearing in January, ends not with the author's face or dramatic scenes from a new movie or prime time series.
Its  final image is a book, "The Web," Mr.
Kellerman's latest hardcover thriller that Bantam, a division of Bantam Doubleday Dell, will publish later this month.
The  ad was created by Franklin Spier, the lead advertising agency for book publishers.


Jackson Earns Degree at 33
Bo Jackson, who gained renown as a two-sport professional, put on a different uniform today.
He wore a black gown and mortarboard as he lined up with about 1,000 others who were graduated from Auburn.
Thunderous applause greeted him as  his name, Vincent Jackson, was called and he received his diploma.
Jackson, 33, won the Heisman Trophy as a senior at Auburn in 1985 but was six courses short of graduating.
He received a bachelor's degree in family and child development, which he completed partly through correspondence work after retiring from baseball last spring.


BILL WOULD SEVER MEDICAID BENEFITS FROM WELFARE AID
A little-noticed addition to the Republican welfare bill, now awaiting final  action in Congress, would eliminate the longstanding guarantee of health insurance coverage for many welfare recipients.
The versions of the welfare bill initially passed by the House and the Senate would have retained the guarantee of Medicaid coverage for anyone qualifying for cash assistance under the standards in effect on June 1 of this year.


McGraw Ends Follett Suit
The McGraw-Hill Companies said yesterday that it had halted a lawsuit against Follett Campus Resources Inc., one of several companies the publisher had accused of reselling books instead of destroying them.
McGraw-Hill, which this summer came to a financial settlement with two other book companies involved in  the suit, declined to discuss the terms of the agreement with Follett.
McGraw-Hill said it continued to press similar suits in Federal District Court in Newark against employees of Guaranteed Destruction Inc., and several other book wholesalers and used-book dealers.


Playoff Possibilities Give a Host of Teams A Few Days of Hope
Among the ramifications of Barry Switzer's decision to run a play on fourth-and-1 against the Eagles on Sunday rather than punt was an unexpected gift to the San Francisco 49ers.
When the Eagles stuffed Dallas's attempt for a  first down and went on to win, 20-17, the 49ers gained control of the race for home-field advantage in the National Football Conference playoffs.
The 49ers, like the Cowboys, have a 10-4 record.
If both teams win their final two games and finish 12-4, Dallas cannot get the home advantage because they lost the head-to-head meeting against San Francisco this season.
So the 49ers, who play Minnesota (8-6) at home next Monday night and finish at Atlanta  on Dec. 24, control their playoff fate.


Sonics' Schrempf To Miss Six Weeks
The Seattle SuperSonics' second-leading scorer, forward Detlef Schrempf, has  a non-displaced fracture of a bone just below his left knee and will be out six  weeks.
Schrempf, who was averaging 18.7 points, underwent a CAT scan and a magnetic  resonance imaging test today, the team said, and the tests revealed the fracture of the fibular head just below the knee.


Nationsbank Settles Customer Lawsuits
The Nationsbank Corporation has agreed to spend $30 million to settle class-action lawsuits from more than 18,000 customers who contended that they had been misled about the risks of buying two Nationsbank bond funds and lost $40 million to $50 million.
The settlement covers the Nations Government Income term trusts 2003 and 2004.
The funds invest in government bonds and derivatives, which are risky contracts whose value derives from the price of an underlying security.


TYCO INTERNATIONAL TO BUY EARTH TECHNOLOGY
Tyco International Ltd. of Exeter, N.H., agreed yesterday to buy the Earth Technology Corporation for $8 a share, or about $70 million.
Earth Technology, based in Long Beach, Calif., designs water and waste-water treatment facilities.
It reported sales of $178 million for the fiscal year ended on Aug. 25.
Tyco International, which had sales of $4.54 billion in its last fiscal year, has four business segments: fire-control products, fiber optic cable, disposable specialty products and flow-control devices.


Fame Never Name of Brown's Game
The timing is great," Jim Brown said, referring to his induction into the College Football Hall of Fame along with the late Paul Robeson, his hero.
Brown, the Syracuse all-America halfback of 1954-56 and one of 12 former players to be honored, identifies with Robeson, who died in 1978 but for many years was an outspoken critic of American government and society because of segregation.


Waiting for the New Broom
The news that the Pataki administration has gutted the fraud-fighting office  of New York State's Inspector General is depressing.
Gov.
George Pataki promised time and again that he would bring in a new broom to sweep out the dusty politics-as-usual of the Cuomo era.
But his regime is beginning to resemble an old mop, the kind that makes the floor look worse than it did before the scrubbing.
This page has already nagged the Governor to make public the still-unreleased financial reports from his inauguration, to tell his commissioners flatly that they should not be raising funds for his re-election campaign, to get behind campaign finance reform and to tell his former running mate, Dennis Vacco, to stop stuffing the Attorney General's office with well-connected Republicans.


Jets Add Moral Victories to the Loss Column
If you're looking for some positive sign about the Jets -- losers of two straight, five of their last six and nine of their last 11 -- consider that their last three losses have come by 3, 3 and 2 points.
Or that Coach Rich Kotite insists the team is playing hard, that the effort is there.
But don't talk to Kotite about moral victories.


Market Place;Bill limiting shareholder suits is seen as only incremental change.
PEOPLE in Washington describe securities legislation now on President Clinton's desk as a radical change that should deter frivolous lawsuits by investors who in the past have won billions of dollars from companies they say defrauded them.
But after analyzing the bill, the product of a four-year effort that brokerage houses pushed for, with major accounting firms, insurers and high-technology companies, many on Wall Street say that the changes are simply incremental.


Pilots Give Backing To Delta Venture
The pilots' union at Delta Air Lines Inc. said today that it had officially decided to support a tentative agreement to set up a low-cost operation to compete head-to-head with such fast-growing no-frills carriers as Valujet Airlines and Southwest Airlines.
Over the weekend, the governing body of the Air Line Pilots Association, which represents Delta's 8,600 pilots, approved an agreement reached last week between Delta and union negotiators.


More Bid Rumors Lift Abbey National Shares
Shares in Abbey National P.L.C. and Royal Bank of Scotland P.L.C. rose yesterday after a weekend press report renewed speculation of a bid from HSBC Holdings P.L.C.
Abbey's shares were up 12 pence at 638 while Royal Bank was up  17 pence at 584.
HSBC was up 2 pence at 998.


4 More Possible Ebola Cases Seen in Liberia
The lethal Ebola virus may be present in four people who lived with a Liberian refugee who has the disease, United Nations officials said today.
The report reinforced fears of a possible Ebola outbreak in Liberia, where six years of civil war have destroyed health care services, and tens of thousands of refugees live in substandard conditions.


Bristol-Myers to Cut Costs by Closing Plants
The Bristol-Myers Squibb Company said yesterday that it would close several plants as part of a plan to save at least $2.5 billion within three years.
The moves will result in a charge against earnings of $250 million to $300 million in the fourth quarter.
The New York-based drug maker said that its cost-cutting measures, which include consolidating administrative tasks, had been under way since late 1994.
They are expected to result in savings of as much as $500 million in 1996, $900 million to $1.1 billion in 1997 and $1.1 billion to $1.5 billion in 1998.


A Christmas Program, Sacred and Secular
Harold Rosenbaum and his Canticum Novum Singers looked at both the sacred and secular sides of the Christmas repertory on Saturday evening at St.
Ignatius of  Antioch Episcopal Church.
The sacred part of the program, which was given pride  of place, proceeded chronologically from the 14th to the 20th century, and if the brisk movement was sometimes jarring (there was a huge stylistic jump from Purcell to Langlais), it showed an impressive historical sweep.
The heart of the program's early-music section was a group of Ave Maria settings, including two works (in four and six voices) by Josquin and one each by Vittoria and Arcadelt.
The variety of approach was stunning: Vittoria's settings proceeded in rich chordal blocks, while both of Josquin's (and to a lesser extent, Arcadelt's) unfolded in seamless polyphony.


CONTINUUM TO BUY HOGAN SYSTEMS IN STOCK DEAL
The Continuum Company said yesterday that it would acquire Hogan Systems Inc. for about $230 million in a stock deal that would unite two developers of software for financial services companies.
Continuum develops software for insurance and financial services companies; and offers consulting services.
Hogan provides software and related services to about 130 of the world's largest banks.
The International Business Machines Corporation now has exclusive rights to sell Hogan's software in the United States.
Under the deal, holders of Hogan common stock would receive 0.36 of a Continuum share -- worth $14.625 at Friday's closing price of $40.625 -- for each Hogan share.
Continuum stock fell  $3.75, to $36.875 yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange; Hogan rose 87.5 cents, to $12.50 in Nasdaq trading.


COMPANY BRIEFS
PORTAGE INDUSTRIES CORP., Portage, Wis., a maker of extruded plastics, retained  Mesirow Financial Inc. as its adviser to review its strategic and financial alternatives, including a possible sale of the company.


Ziff-Davis In Deal With Web Provider
Hoping that their respective brand names will give each other a lift, the Ziff-Davis Publishing Company, a leading publisher of computer magazines, and the Yahoo Corporation, which operates one of the most popular directories on the Internet's World Wide Web, are expected to announce a partnership today, according to executives familiar with the deal.
The agreement is said to call for Internet Life, a fledgling Ziff-Davis quarterly introduced in October, to be renamed Yahoo!
Internet Life.


Tettleton Snubbed Yanks, But Surhoff Is Still Waiting
The Yankees really wanted Mickey Tettleton.
Really really wanted him.
As in,  they were willing to pay between $6 million and $6.6 million for him to be the designated hitter and play for them the next two seasons.
But Tettleton was not swayed, and yesterday he elected to accept a lesser offer, signing a two-year, $5 million contract to return to the Texas Rangers.


The Abandoned': Elderly Serbs in Region Retaken by Croatia
Only the old remain, like Evica Vudisavljevic, whose powerful, gnarled hands  speak of decades of surviving on the land.
"It's very hard for me," she said, standing in her barren room with two beds  and no electricity.
"I'm all alone. I'm 90 years old."


France Finds a Reading Test Incomprehensible
People of the land of Racine and Moliere, of Hugo and Balzac, of Proust and Sartre, frequently can't grasp what they read, according to a new study that concludes that some literacy skills in France are far worse than those in the United States.
But the French need not worry about being embarrassed by the report.
When French officials studied its preliminary conclusions two months ago, they were so incensed that they insisted that all references to France be excised from the 200-page document, "Literacy, Society and Economy," published here last week.


Orders for Computer Chips Fall Along With Book-to-Bill Ratio
New orders for computer chips declined in November, the Semiconductor Industry Association said today, indicating that demand could be slowing.
The trade group's book-to-bill ratio, a closely watched gauge of demand for computer chips, fell to 1.14 in November from 1.18 in October.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Federal Farm Credit Bank is selling $50 million of medium-term notes due in 1998 through First Tennessee Bank.
The notes are callable in six months, carry an interest rate of 5.965 percent paid semiannually and are priced at par.


Placid on the Outside, Miserable on the Inside
THE SUMMER BEFORE THE SUMMER OF LOVE By Marly Swick 209 pages. HarperCollins. $21.


In a 'City' Haunted by Gaultier
One of the jokes in the French film "The City of Lost Children" is there for  fashion insiders only.
In an eerie laboratory on a iron island Jules Verne might have imagined, six cloned brothers wear army-green jump suits to carry out the commands of the evil scientist Krank, who kidnaps children to steal their dreams.
When one brother turns his back to the camera, there is the telltale sign that, whether this is the past or the future, there is only one designer making dreary lab clothes: Jean-Paul Gaultier.
Every costume in the film is outfitted with Mr.
Gaultier's signature, a tab at the back of the jacket, that puts the item into four-digit pricing and pronounces it a serious fashion statement.


Clash Between School Board and State Panel Intensifies
Relations between the Roosevelt school board and a state panel charged with overseeing the troubled district worsened tonight, apparently increasing the likelihood that state officials would move to take over the system.
At a meeting here ordered last week by the State Education Commissioner, Richard P. Mills, who warned that the school district was on a destructive path, panel members and board members clashed bitterly over who has the authority in key decisions.


Pataki's Plan to Dismantle Lilco Is Criticized at a Public Hearing
Gov.
George E. Pataki's plan to break up the Long Island Lighting Company and cut electric rates on the Island by 12 percent drew criticism at a public hearing last night, particularly from workers at the utility concerned about the fate of the company.
Under the Pataki plan, Lilco would sell its gas business and power plants to  private companies, and the Long Island Power Authority would buy the Lilco transmission and distribution system.
The state would issue more than $4.5 billion in tax-free bonds so it could pay its debt on the defunct Shoreham nuclear plant.


By Design;The Magic Circle of a Chain Belt
A chain belt makes a sparkling addition to a wardrobe and a nifty holiday gift besides.
Sling it around hipster pants as designers like Calvin Klein did in their spring or fall runway shows.
For an even newer transmutation, wear a skinny one the way Karl Lagerfeld suggested for spring: on the waist of a tailored jacket.
Silver-toned belts are de rigueur and look best whether with winter white, spring's ice-cream colors or against black.


Canada Seeks Near-Total Ban On Tobacco Promotion Efforts
The Canadian Government, smarting from a decision by the country's Supreme Court to strike down some restrictions on tobacco promotions, is introducing legislation to ban most such promotions.
The move follows the court ruling, on Sept. 21, that said that previous legislation restricting tobacco advertising was an "unconstitutional restraint on freedom of expression."


Faltering Strike by Pilots' Union Stirs Loyalty in Federal ExpressWorkers
Federal Express has been good to Bill Satterlee.
Now Mr.
Satterlee, a pilot with the overnight delivery company for 16 years who earns as much as $200,000 a year, intends to return the favor.
After Mr.
Satterlee, 51, had triple-bypass heart surgery last year, Federal Express, instead of putting him on disability, gave him a job training other pilots until he was well enough to return to the cockpit.
The company also picked up the tab for about $10,000 in expenses for tests to recertify him for flying.


Corrections
A report in the Daily Briefing column in some New Jersey copies on Saturday referred incorrectly to the 1 percent payroll tax approved by the Jersey City Council.
It applies to companies with payrolls of at least $2,500 a quarter, not companies with more than 2,500 employees.


Holy Cross's Gain is B.U.'s Loss
DAN ALLEN, the Boston University football coach who in six seasons twice took his team to the Division I-AA playoffs, has quit to become coach at Holy Cross.
The announcement is to come today.
Allen, 40, was 38-36 in six seasons at B.U.
He was an assistant coach at Holy Cross for eight seasons beginning in 1982, before leaving for B.U.
In 1993, the Terriers went undefeated in the regular season and he was named coach of the year in the division by the Yankee Conference, the American Football Coaches' Association and the Gridiron Club of Boston. (AP)


Canopener Adds New Gadgets
Abbott Systems started with Canopener, a Macintosh utility that looks into files, even damaged ones, that the Mac cannot otherwise open and allows text and graphics to be copied.
Canopener is still around, now in version 3.0; it costs $59.
Abbott's team of programmers, both of them, have since added seven other little programs to the mix.
You can waste a lot of time with the first one, Kaleidoscope, which is high praise.
It paints an image of the Mandelbrot set (you know, those entrancing chaotically repeating things) on the screen, and lets you zoom in and out, isolating details that resemble the whole thing, altering colors and speed and type of motion, saving images, moving them into other programs or printing them  or sending them out on the network.
The images can be transformed into pseudo-screensavers, though the brief instructions forgot to tell how to turn it off. (Command-period, of course.) A Powermac, or a Macintosh with a math co-processor (F.P.U.) is required, and the program can work with 24-bit color.
The version tried here was 1.0; 2.0 is better for Powermacs.
Kaleidoscope is $29.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about racial tensions in the Washington area over an incident involving a black teen-ager at an Eddie Bauer store misspelled the name of the public relations firm hired by the clothing chain.
It is Hill &amp; Knowlton, not Hill &amp; Nolton.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.


New York's SoHo Is on the Verge of Losing Its Cultural Flavor
To the Editor:
While the rest of "America Realizes the Arts Attract Tourists" (Arts pages, Dec. 5), New York presumably has a leg up on other cities "because culture has always been central to its image." You are wrong that "no one needs to promote SoHo." Perhaps not to the rest of the world, but someone needs to remind New York City not to look a gift horse in the mouth.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Agreed to terms with Harold Baines, outfielder, on a one-year contract, and Chad Kreuter, catcher, on a minor-league contract.


Political Violence Erupts in Bangladesh Strike
Armed militants of the governing Bangladesh Nationalist Party clashed today with opposition groups seeking to oust Prime Minister Khaleda Zia as political violence shook Bangladesh on the third day of a general strike.
Witnesses said at least 12 people, including a policeman, had been injured.
The police arrested an unspecified number of militants.


Panthers Drop Devils Below .500 Mark
The Devils are known as a team that plays well only against the league's best teams.
But that reputation got blown across the frozen marshes of the Meadowlands tonight.
Although they were playing the league's most productive team, the Florida Panthers, the Devils showed little spirit and lost by 2-1 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The loss dropped the Devils' record to 13-14-3 and means they have won only once in their past five games.


Bridge Plan Is Blocked
Officials of the North Jersey Transportation Planning Authority met with the  National Park Service yesterday to discuss modifying a temporary construction bridge to Ellis Island for pedestrian use.
The authority's chairman, Richard DuHaime, pledged $2 million to cover the cost.


Challenging Giuliani, Council Attacks Sale of Hospitals
Preparing the ground for a likely legal battle with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani over the future of the city hospital system, the City Council issued a report yesterday saying the Mayor's plan to sell the system "makes no sense" and urging the state to remove the hospitals from his control.
The report, prepared by the Council's staff and endorsed by Speaker Peter F.  Vallone, said that selling the 11 public hospitals would actually cost the city money and could leave uninsured patients without access to medical care.


World News Briefs;Japanese Seek Inquiry Into Leak at Reactor
Local officials, accusing the Government of betraying their trust, today demanded a thorough examination of an experimental fast-breeder reactor that leaked a highly corrosive coolant.
Operators of the Monju reactor began draining 270 tons of radioactive liquid  sodium from its cooling system to determine why some of the coolant leaked on Friday and began burning.


Leonidas H. Berry Is Dead at 93; Medical Expert Helped Blacks
Dr.
Leonidas Harris Berry, a specialist in diseases of the digestive tract who dedicated himself to bringing medical care to black communities that had none, died on Dec. 4 at his home in Chicago.
He was 93.
In 1946, Dr.
Berry became the first black physician to join the staff of Michael Reese Hospital in Chicago and the first black internist at Cook County Hospital there.
He retired in 1975 as chief of endoscopy service and senior attending physician at Cook County.


When Players and Fans Were Players
The scene: Nick Buoniconti, the former linebacker, and Marty Glickman, the former Giants' radio announcer, swapping tales after a screening of HBO's "Rebels With a Cause: The Story of the American Football League."
"The Titans practiced at Rikers Island," says Glickman, later the voice of the Jets.


Letter Bombs Appear Before Austria Vote, Again
At least one letter bomb exploded today in Austria and the police found two more in what security officials warned could be the start of a new series of attacks before general elections on Sunday.
"The appearance of new letter bombs on the eve of the elections is not just a cowardly and underhanded attack on the health and life of Austrians, but on our  entire society," Chancellor Franz Vranitzky said.


Sports of The Times;Are Refs Really So Necessary?
THE real refs, as some designate them, are returning this evening to the National Basketball Association after a lengthy lockout and will replace the replacement, or ersatz refs.
This makes some in the N.B.A. happy.
"It's about time," said Bob Hill, coach  of the San Antonio Spurs.


Philip Morris Is Reorganizing Kraft Foods Overseas Operations
The Philip Morris Companies said yesterday that the international business of its Kraft Foods Inc. subsidiary would be reorganized into four regional units based in Europe.
The company also announced that two top executives were leaving.
Philip Morris, the New York-based tobacco and food giant, said that Raymond Viault, 51, president and chief executive of Kraft Jacobs Suchard, a Swiss-based maker of coffee and confectionery goods, would leave to pursue "new  business challenges."


CHARMING SHOPPES TO CLOSE FASHION BUG STORES
Charming Shoppes Inc. said yesterday that it would close 290 stores that were losing a total of $20 million a year before overhead expenses.
The company, which has 1,423 stores in 46 states under the names Fashion Bug and Fashion Bug  Plus, has been hit hard by the year's weak retail environment.
In January, the company, based in Bensalem, Pa., plans to close 120 stores.
Most of the remaining 170 locations are scheduled to be shut by the end of July, with the rest to be closed by January 1997.
The cost of closing the stores is expected to reduce earnings about $65 million in the fourth quarter, the company said.
Charming Shoppes earned $5.16 million, or 5 cents a share, on sales of $345.3 million in its fourth quarter ended Jan. 28, 1995.


And the Band Marches On, 2, 3, 4
It was Fourth of July in December when the Mark Morris Dance Group presented  an ebullient ode to the generic American marching band on Sunday afternoon at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
Mr.
Morris has matured considerably as a choreographer in recent years.
The fact that he has now tossed out an overt crowd-pleaser in "Lucky Charms," a New York premiere, does not mean that the work lacks sophistication.


The Depths of Fahrenheit


The Death Toll Nears 3 Dozen
A storm that brought a massive cold wave to most of the East and into the South has left almost three dozen people dead from hypothermia and weather-related accidents from Wisconsin to Georgia, including 15 in Iowa.
The storm buried Buffalo under 37.9 inches of snow on Sunday -- the city's worst single-day storm on record.
The storm shut the airport and schools and turned malls into pre-Christmas ghost towns.
The snow finally stopped falling yesterday.


GRAND UNION STORES TO CUT 500 JOBS IN REGION
The Grand Union Company said yesterday that it would lay off about 500 employees by closing its distribution centers in Mount Kisco, N.Y., and Carlstadt, N.J.
The supermarket chain, based in Wayne, N.J., said it had accepted a proposal from C &amp; S Wholesale Grocers Inc. to supply food and other goods to Grand Union's 103 supermarkets in the metropolitan area.
The proposal should save the company more than $14 million a year for the next seven years, Grand Union said.
C &amp; S already supplies 127 Grand Union stores.
Grand Union emerged from bankruptcy protection in June.


Plan for Claims At Nationwide
The Nationwide insurance group said over the weekend that it planned to add nearly $1.1 billion to its reserves by the end of the year to pay claims related to asbestos and environmental cleanups.
Like many other insurers, including, most recently, the Cigna Corporation and the Aetna Life and Casualty Company, Nationwide decided this year that enough was known about its asbestos and environmental liabilities to estimate the total amount needed to pay those claims.


Denny's Bias Case To Yield Payments
More than 294,500 people who joined two class-action lawsuits accusing Denny's restaurants of racial discrimination are to begin receiving checks this  month as part of a $46 million settlement.
Denny's, owned by the Flagstar Companies, agreed to the amount in May 1994 to settle the Justice Department lawsuits, which were filed in San Jose, Calif., and Annapolis, Md.
The Maryland case involved six black Secret Service agents who said they had waited 55 minutes for service while 15 of their white colleagues received second and third helpings.


Hunch Leads to Discovery of Herd Of Tibet Deer Thought to Be Extinct
FOLLOWING a hunch that took him trekking through Tibet, a scientist with the  Wildlife Conservation Society has found a herd of Tibet red deer, a species not  seen in the wild by a Western scientist for about 50 years.
The animal, a relative of the North American elk, was last reported in a Western publication in the 1940's, and the deer was subsequently listed as "probably extinct" by the World Conservation Union, said the scientist, Dr.
George B. Schaller, the director for science at the conservation group.
The Wildlife Conservation Society carries out wildlife research and operates the Bronx Zoo.


Marine Apologies at Okinawa Rape Trial
A United States marine tearfully apologized in an Okinawa court today for his role in a rape case that has shaken defense ties between Japan and the United States, but insisted he did not actually rape the 12-year-old schoolgirl.
Pfc.
Rodrico Harp, 21, of Griffin, Ga., said he was pressed by another accused serviceman into taking part in the abduction of the girl and only confessed to rape in an earlier statement to American officials because he thought he would get a lighter sentence.


SCIENTIST AT WORK: Richard Klausner;New Administrator Is 'Not an Administrator'
I AM not an administrator," says Dr. Richard Klausner, an odd declaration coming from the new director of the National Cancer Institute.
What, then, is this 44-year-old biologist who has taken the reins of the largest institute of the National Institutes of Health?
And why would a man with such an attitude accept the directorship in the first place?


No Coleman, No 76er Victory
Mahmoud Abdul-Rauf had 22 points and 10 assists and Bryant Stith had 21 points, 8 rebounds and 7 assists tonight as the Denver Nuggets cruised to their  fifth straight victory, 104-91, over the Philadelphia 76ers.
Jerry Stackhouse had 20 points and Clarence Weatherspoon added 18 for Philadelphia, which lost for the 14th time in the last 15 games.


Chess
A so-called "friendly" match has nothing to do with friendship or amiability.
Such a contest is merely one in which no championship, not world, national, city or club, is involved.
The players aim to win for the sake of pride or prize money.
That's how it was in the confrontation between the grandmasters Judit Polgar of Hungary and Jeroen Piket of the Netherlands early last month on the Antillean island of Aruba.
The sponsor, Joop van Oosterom, surely wanted to see how the 19-year-old Polgar, the highest-ranked woman in the world, would fare against the 26-year-old Piket, one of the top players in Europe.
Their ratings were very close, but Polgar made the eight-game series look one-sided, with a 6-2 score.
In the process, she showed off impressive endgame technique, one example being Game 6.


Agreement Reached In Strike at Boeing
Negotiators for striking machinists and the Boeing Company have reached a tentative agreement to end a 67-day strike, the union said late today.
Union leaders said they would recommend that workers accept the contract when they vote on Wednesday.


Arming Bosnians Adds to Violence
To the Editor:
Re " 'Neutrality' Won't Protect Our Troops" (Op-Ed, Dec. 7):


Philadelphia Police Scandal Results In a Plan for a Suit ClaimingRacism
When Darryl Shuler returned home from a trip to Houston in early 1989, his parents were not the only ones waiting for him.
Three Philadelphia police officers, saying they had a search warrant for drugs, entered his home and handcuffed and arrested him.
Mr.
Shuler said that before driving him to the 39th District police station, where he was charged with selling drugs, the officers ransacked the house, confiscated a box with $17,000 in cash that his elderly father had saved and told him they found a bag  of cocaine.


School Plan on Fast Track
Sponsors of legislation to allow the establishment of charter schools as an alternative to public schools have met some of the objections of the powerful New Jersey Education Association, and the measure is expected to reach a vote in the Senate next Monday.


Saturn Picks Agency For Japan Account
The Saturn Corporation said yesterday that it had named Dai-Ichi Kikaku in Tokyo to handle its account in Japan, the first market the auto maker plans to enter overseas.
The billings were not disclosed, but trade publications estimated them at $15 million to $35 million.
Greg Martin, a spokesman for Saturn in Troy, Mich., said Dai-Ichi Kikaku was awarded the account after a nine-month review that was narrowed to that agency and two other finalists also based in Tokyo: Leo Burnett-Kyodo, part of the Leo  Burnett Company, and the Tokyu Agency.
He added that Dai-Ichi Kikaku would work  with the domestic Saturn agency, Hal Riney &amp; Partners in San Francisco, to "insure the consistency of Saturn's message." Saturn, a unit of the General Motors Corporation, intends to begin selling cars in Japan in 1997.


A Day for Dole and Torricelli
As expected, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman yesterday became the 18th Republican governor to endorse United States Senator Bob Dole for president.
Not coincidentally, perhaps, the endorsement occurred on the same day that United States Representative Robert G. Torricelli of Englewood announced the opening of his campaign for the Senate seat being vacated by Bill Bradley.


Big Labor Can Only Dream of Higher Wages
To the Editor:
Re your Dec. 7 news article on John J. Sweeney, the new president of the A.F.L-C.I.O.:


Facing Budget Queries
ONE of the problems Dr.
Richard Klausner is facing in his new role as head of the National Cancer Institute is the spending for AIDS research.
He himself has  criticized the institute's accounting.
But the latest evidence of the trouble is a brief report by the Gay Men's Health Crisis in New York, which reviewed the institute's records and interviewed top officials in the agency.
Derek Link of the New York group, who prepared the new report, had read with  concern an earlier report commissioned by the institute that had found accounting confusion in the institute's spending on its intramural research program, the studies done at the institute.
Mr.
Link's report stated that about  $172 million, or 81 percent of the entire $212 million AIDS research budget, was intramural.
This was more than $68 million more than the institute had reported.


Bill Would Cut Medicaid-Welfare Link
Congressional experts today issued a brighter economic forecast that gave the Clinton Administration and Congress more room for maneuvering in their budget negotiations, but less flexibility than many had hoped.
The forecast, prepared by the Congressional Budget Office, predicted that the Government could reap a $135 billion windfall in new revenue and savings over the next seven years from a stronger-than-expected economy.
That is considerably more than the $100 billion that Congressional officials had said would accrue from the revised forecast.


Executive Changes
ALCO STANDARD CORP. , Valley Forge, Pa., appointed James Forese, a former I.B.M. executive, as executive vice president and chief operating officer.


As Crime Soars, South African Whites Leave
At the end of this month, Heidi Moller will move from South Africa to Germany, leaving the country she was born in without a hint of regret.
Her husband's business was not doing well.
The school system, she says, is disintegrating.
But most of all, she says, she is leaving because fear had come  to overwhelm her family.
Last year, her husband, Hans, a surveyor, was shot at from a passing vehicle  while working in a Johannesburg suburb.
A few months later, he was forced off the road by hijackers and was shot in the leg.
One of Mrs.
Moller's best friends was shot and her husband killed in front of their children.
Her brother-in-law was shot at in his driveway as four men tried to steal his car, while his family watched helplessly from the house.


Fed Officials' Remarks Curb Gain in Bonds
Treasury prices ended slightly higher yesterday, as comments by Federal Reserve officials held back buying.
The price of the 30-year bond rose 4/32 , to 11115/32 .
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction of its price, fell to 6.04 percent, from 6.05 percent on Friday.


In Harlem Tragedy, Issue Isn't White and Black
To the Editor:
Re "Giuliani and Bratton See Racism in Harlem Fire" (front page, Dec. 10): It would be irresponsible to characterize as racist the tragedy in Harlem, which resulted from a dispute between a record store owner, a Jewish retailer and a black landlord.
This was never a case of black-Jewish conflict and should not be used to inflame tensions.


CHRONICLE
Happy birthday, Mr.
Chief Justice of six generations ago.
JOHN JAY ISELIN, president of the Cooper Union for the Advancement of Art and Science, will join  in the 250th birthday celebration today of his great-great-great-great-grandfather John Jay, the first Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court.
Jay, who had been a diplomat and Governor of New York, also helped draft the Constitution.
A party is to be held at Columbia University, from which John Jay graduated in 1764, when it was known as King's College.


As a Store Burned, A Court Order Stalled
At noon on Friday, Judge Harold Tompkins was anxious and testy.
He was eager  to sign a temporary restraining order barring protesters from demonstrating within 50 feet of Freddy's clothing store in Harlem, fearing the protests could  escalate into violence.
Neither he -- nor anyone else in his courtroom at State Supreme Court in Manhattan -- knew that the store had burned to the ground shortly after 10 that  morning.
Eight people died in the inferno, including a gunman who set the store  on fire and then fatally shot himself.


Newfound Elves (Not Santa's) Blaze at the Very Edge of Space
SCIENTISTS have discovered a new class of lightning that exists high above thunderheads and that flickers in blazing disks on the fringes of space, spreading out laterally for hundreds of miles.
The dance of this mysterious light, caught repeatedly on sensitive instruments last summer, joins a number of unusual bolts that scientists have recently found shooting upward from clouds to heights as great as 60 miles above the earth, including unconventional types of  flashes known as blue jets and red sprites.
The newly observed lightning flashes have been named Elves, with no Yuletide  link intended.
The name is an acronym derived from the phrase "emissions of light and very low frequency perturbations due to electromagnetic pulse sources." Their discovery is being announced this week in San Francisco at a meeting of the American Geophysical Union, the world's largest professional group devoted to earth studies.
The color of elves is not yet known but is thought possibly (and not inappropriately given the season) to be green.


Put Casinos Near Poor
To the Editor:
Re "Casinos Are No Solution" (Op-Ed, Dec. 7): Nobody wants casinos except the poor.
New York City has its own poor.
So why not put casinos near the poor -- like on vacant land along the Harlem River Drive?
It would give the poor in Harlem and the Bronx jobs and the city revenue at the same time.
Why let revenue leave New York when it can be kept here?


Speaker Seeks Ethics Inquiry Into Pataki Inaugural Group
The Speaker of the State Assembly ordered two legislative committees today to investigate whether any laws were broken by the private corporation that financed Gov.
George E. Pataki's inauguration, setting up a confrontation between the Democratic Assembly and the Republican Governor.


In Peru, a Fight for Fresh Air
Every night before she goes to bed, Anna Gilapa gets down on her knees and stuffs cloth in the cracks around her doors and windows to protect her family from the acrid smoke released by the nearby smelter of the Southern Peru Copper  Corporation.
Mrs.
Gilapa fears for the health of her 1-year-old son, Brian, who suffers from severe respiratory problems and often coughs up thick mucous.
And for that, she and other residents of this bleak coastal town 580 miles south of Lima blame the largest local company, Southern Peru Copper, which environmentalists say spews 2,000 tons of sulfur dioxide into the air each day, or 10 to 15 times the  limit for similar plants operating in the United States.


Grozny Journal;Krishnas Cast Bread on Roiling Waters in Russia
It is never hard to spot the relief workers spread among the desperate people of this shattered city: they are the ones in the white Land Cruisers with bold,  colorful flags flying from the hoods.
They wear Gore-Tex hiking boots, carry satellite phones in their day packs, and usually report to headquarters in Geneva, Paris or Bonn.
Except, of course, for the crew based in Boarding School No. 1.


NBC-Microsoft Talks Denied
The Microsoft Corporation and the General Electric Company's NBC unit denied  a report yesterday that they were in talks about the sale of a stake in the television network to Microsoft.


Kmart Appoints Finance Chief
The Kmart Corporation named Martin E. Welch 3d today as its chief financial officer and senior vice president.
Mr.
Welch formerly held those positions at the Federal-Mogul Corporation, which makes industrial parts like ball bearings and sealing components.
Mr.
Welch, 47, is the latest in a succession of outside executives brought in to revive the discount retailer.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Miscellany
*
The Interpublic Group of Cos., New York, formed an alliance with the Coleman Group, New York, to create a limited liability company that will operate under the Coleman Group name.
The terms were not disclosed.
Owen W. Coleman, 55, president and chief executive at the Coleman Group, will continue in that position. *
Publishers Information Bureau, New York, reported that magazine advertising pages rose 2 percent in November from November 1994, to 21,467.
For the first 11 months of 1995, total ad pages rose 5.8 percent, to 190,010, from the corresponding period a year earlier. *
Mastercard International, New York, has signed an exclusive four-year agreement with NHL Enterprises, the licensing unit of the National Hockey League, to become the official "payments system" of the N.H.L.
Mastercard will also sponsor hockey broadcasts on the Fox network unit of the News Corp.
Trade publications estimated the agreement was worth $12 million.


PATAKI PROPOSES A BAN ON PAROLE IN VIOLENT CRIMES
Stepping up his campaign for stricter penal laws, Gov.
George E. Pataki announced today that he would introduce legislation to abolish parole for even first-time violent offenders, and he asked the Legislature to approve construction of the first new maximum-security prison in the state in a decade to handle the increase in inmates that would result from the new sentences.
If Mr.
Pataki's proposal became law, New York would join 11 other states in doing away with parole for its worst offenders, a change that the Governor maintained would reduce crime by keeping felons behind bars longer.
But as happened earlier this year when the Governor successfully pushed to cut off parole for repeat violent offenders, some judges, criminal justice experts and Democratic officials immediately criticized the plan as too inflexible, costly and severe.


Serbs Say Captive French Pilots Are to Be Released Today
Two French pilots, apparently held in Bosnia since their plane was shot down  in August, are expected to be released on Tuesday, Serbian officials said today.
The Bosnian Serb military commander, Gen.
Ratko Mladic, tried to use the captives as a bargaining chip to have his indictment as a war criminal revoked, Western and Serbian officials said.


Police Hope Store's Protest Tapes Hold Clues to a Motive
Four barely audible videotapes of the picketing in the days before the murderous arson attack on Freddy's clothing store in Harlem are emerging as vital evidence for police investigators looking into the motives of the attacker.
The police said that they would have to enhance the grainy tapes, which were  recorded by a security camera in Freddy's, to determine whether anyone can be seen associating with the attacker, identified by the police as Roland James Smith Jr.
Mr.
Smith, who participated in some of the picketing that went on for  weeks outside the store.


Bank of Boston In Venture
The Bank of Boston Corporation said today that it had reached an agreement with the Thomas H. Lee Company and Madison Dearborn Partners to form an independent company to expand its mortgage servicing business.
The bank said it would contribute its BancBoston Mortgage Corporation unit in exchange for a 45 percent stake in the new company and about $146 million in cash.


Shares in National Grid Set to Be Sold
Scottish Power P.L.C. and North West Water P.L.C. said yesterday that they planned to sell about L380 million ($583 million) worth of shares in the National Grid Group P.L.C.
The sale of up to 181 million National Grid shares comes on the first day of trading in the company's stock, after the spinoff by its 12 regional utility owners to their shareholders, including two utilities acquired by Scottish Power and North West Water.
Scottish Power, which bought Manweb P.L.C., and North West Water, which bought Norweb, were obligated under terms of the acquisitions to sell their Grid stakes within a year.
North West Water will sell up to 100 million shares and Scottish Power will sell up to 81 million shares.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Pastor and Wife Are Acquitted on All Charges in Sex-Abuse Case
After less than a day of deliberation, a jury today acquitted a lay pastor and his wife of all charges of sexual abuse of children in a trial that critics  say demonstrated the worst aspects of police misconduct in such cases.
The defendants, Robert and Connie Roberson, were accused of being at the center of a sex ring in which children were ritualistically raped and abused.
The Robersons ran a food bank and led a Pentecostal church in the central Washington city of Wenatchee.


HEALTH SYSTEMS BUYS GRADUATE HEALTH UNITS
Health Systems International Inc. said yesterday that it had acquired the G.  H. Holding Corporation and most of its for-profit units for $94 million in cash  and notes.
The companies were bought from Graduate Health System Inc., a nonprofit health care company based in Philadelphia.
The purchase includes Greater Atlantic Health Services Inc., a health maintenance organization with about 93,000 members.
Health Systems, an H.M.O. based in Woodland Hills, Calif., has formed a company to manage six nonprofit Philadelphia-area hospitals and Founders Health Care Inc., which manages physician practices and a health services facility.
Graduate Health System will retain ownership of the hospitals and Founders.


Gang Robs Koreans In Churches
Three Korean churches in Flushing, Queens, have been robbed in the last three weeks by a group of men that stole money, jewelry and credit cards from the congregants, the police have said.
In all cases, two to four men with knives and guns burst into the churches during services.
The group is also suspected of ambushing a Korean man at his home in Flushing and taking his wallet, the police said.


Dollar Ebbs in Thin Trading; Many Await Central Bank Cuts
The dollar declined modestly against the German mark and the Japanese yen in  thin trading yesterday as dealers waited to see whether central banks in the United States and Europe would soon lower interest rates.
Trading stayed in a tight range against the mark and the yen, with the dollar moving just three-quarters of a pfennig and roughly half a yen.
It finished mixed against other major currencies.


Traveling Whitewater Files
Just when it seemed possible that the White House could not handle Whitewater any more clumsily, here come two new moves to undermine public confidence.
The disclosure that Vincent Foster removed three files from Hillary Clinton's law firm during the 1992 election campaign and turned them over to the Clintons' political fixer, Webster Hubbell, is truly a blow to those who want to believe the Clintons have nothing to hide.
The files related to Mrs.
Clinton's work for  Madison Guaranty, the savings and loan owned by the Clintons' Whitewater investment partner, James McDougal.
The White House will no doubt argue that the files are innocuous.


4 Executives Make Hall of Fame
The American Advertising Federation in Washington has selected four executives to be inducted into its Advertising Hall of Fame.
The honorees are: Edwin Artzt, former chairman and chief executive of the Procter &amp; Gamble Company in Cincinnati; William Backer, former vice chairman and worldwide executive creative director at Backer Spielvogel Bates in New York, now called Bates Worldwide, a unit of Cordiant P.L.C.; Howard Bell, president emeritus of the federation and president of the American Advertising Foundation  in Washington, and Thomas Murphy, chairman and chief executive of Capital Cities/ ABC Inc. in New York.
They will be honored at a luncheon at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in New York on March 26.


Bills on Youthful Offenders
A bill to create a superagency to coordinate and oversee the punishment and rehabilitation of youthful offenders -- a major element of Governor Whitman's juvenile justice initiative -- sailed through the Assembly on a unanimous vote yesterday.
The Assembly also approved two bills that would allocate $3 million for a military-style boot camp for juvenile offenders and $7 million to help local governments set up their own program to help juvenile offenders, The Associated Press reported.


Observer;Money's Funny Ways
Everybody with enough sense to look over his shoulder when walking down a dark alley is now familiar with the stock market's spooky response to news that  a lot of human beings have been fired in another industrial "downsizing."
The stock market booms.


Ultrasound Helps Avoid Surgery
A powerful form of ultrasound can significantly reduce the number of American women who undergo surgery to tell if their breast lumps are cancerous or benign, Federal scientists said today.
The scientific panel unanimously urged the Food and Drug Administration to approve the High-Definition Imaging, or H.D.I., ultrasound as a test to help doctors decide which women need a biopsy and which can skip the surgery.


Affidavit Excerpts Describe a Pattern of Harassment
Following are excerpts from affidavits filed last week in State Supreme Court in Manhattan by Fred Harari, the owner of Freddy's clothing store, and two employees, who described what they said was a pattern of harassment by protesters.


Millennium Formed By 10 Companies
A group of 10 independent communications consulting companies and agencies is joining to form the Millennium Communications Group, offering services like strategic development, media relations, research and graphic design.
Bernie Mogelever, a managing member of Millennium, said it would assemble teams of workers from the different companies to work on projects for clients, as each company also continued to operate independently.


Drunken Driving Bill Passes
The State Senate unanimously passed legislation yesterday that would make prison mandatory for a driver who causes a death while intoxicated or after losing a license for drunken driving.
"We're going to treat that as if you've killed them with a knife," said the bill's sponsor, Senator Gordon A. MacInnes,  Democrat of Morris Township.
The Senate also passed a bill allowing confiscation of license plates if a motorist is found driving with a license suspended for drunken driving.
Both bills have cleared the Assembly.


Nets Want to Beat the Magic, and Win Back Their Reputation
The midway point is still two months away, yet the energetic Nets are pointing to Tuesday night's showdown with the Orlando Magic at Byrne Meadowlands Arena as a game that could define the first half of their season.
Adding spice will be the presence of Shaquille O'Neal, the Magic center who has rejoined the team after missing the first seven weeks of the season with a broken right thumb.
He practiced with the team today in Orlando, and will be in  uniform and on the bench Tuesday night, but is not expected to play while he works into playing shape.


2 Families, 4 Years After the Layoffs
The flow of good jobs out of America to cheap-labor countries has become a fact of American life, and "Living on the Edge" tells what that means for a few  of the men and women left behind.
Tonight's edition of "Frontline" grew out of "Minimum Wages: The New Economy," Bill Moyers's 1991 report on layoffs in Milwaukee.
The producers returned in 1993 and again this year to see what was happening to two blue-collar families; they found some improvements at substantial costs.
Tony Neumann and Claude and Jackie Stanley are three of the thousands of workers laid off in recent years by Briggs &amp; Stratton, Milwaukee's biggest employer.
Tony and Terry Neumann are white, the Stanleys are black, but they have a lot in common.
Since losing the jobs that had kept them in the fairly comfortable, seemingly secure middle class, they have been scrambling to stay afloat.
It's been years of hard work, disappointments and a realization that things will never again be what they were a few years ago; once realistic expectations now seem wishful.


Clinton and Peres Reaffirm Desire for Broad Peace in Mideast
In their first extensive meeting since the funeral of Yitzhak Rabin, President Clinton and Prime Minister Shimon Peres of Israel declared their intention today to join forces in pursuing an agreement with Syria, and with it  a comprehensive Middle East peace.
"I pledge to you personally, Shimon, that I will be your partner in peace," Mr.
Clinton said at a joint news conference.
Mr.
Peres responded that it was time to end the Arab-Israeli conflict, "with you, Mr. President, in the forefront, by our side."


Ethical Issues Raised On Pataki Inaugural
The actions of Gov.
George E. Pataki's inauguration committee have come under ethical scrutiny, with the State Assembly's Speaker, Sheldon Silver, directing two legislative committees to look into whether it broke any laws.
Mr.
Silver, a Manhattan Democrat, accused the committee of operating under a "cloak of secrecy," and said it broke pledges to disclose the names of contributors and keep limits on contribution amounts.


Surgery Preserves Parts of an Ovary For Reimplanting
To help women with cancer avoid infertility caused by radiation and chemotherapy, a group of doctors in Virginia is offering to remove an ovary before a patient undergoes treatment and reimplant part of it later.
The speed with which doctors have moved from animal experiments to potentially widespread use of this operation has surprised some medical experts.
So far, at least four patients in England have each had an ovary removed.
No ovaries have yet been replaced.
And last week the Genetics and I.V.F.
Institute  in Fairfax, Va., sent out letters to thousands of cancer specialists offering their patients the chance to have the operation.


Clinton Aide Removed Files About Legal Work on S.&amp;L.
During the 1992 Presidential campaign, Vincent W. Foster Jr. removed files from Hillary Rodham Clinton's law firm about work she and other lawyers had done for the savings association owned by the Clintons' partner in the Whitewater land venture.
The removal of the files, made public today by the Senate Whitewater committee, raised new questions about the steps taken by the Clinton campaign to defuse Whitewater as an issue.


New RJR Chief Executive Embroiled in Old Fight
Greeting the first public appearance of Steven F. Goldstone as chief executive of the RJR Nabisco Holdings Company, the financiers Bennett S. LeBow and Carl C. Icahn sent a letter yesterday to the company's 450,000 shareholders  assailing his job promotion.
Mr.
LeBow and Mr.
Icahn accused Mr.
Goldstone of "inaction" toward their stated goal of spinning off the company's food business from its tobacco operations.


Patterns
High-Tech Attraction


Poet, Singer, Mother: Patti Smith Is Back
On Thanksgiving weekend, Patti Smith, the influential poet and musician of the 1970's, traveled to Philadelphia to visit the grave of her brother, Todd, who died of a stroke last year.
She left not flowers but cigarettes.
The last time Ms.
Smith, who is 49, saw her brother was at Thanksgiving 1994.
It was then that he consoled her after the loss of her husband, the former MC5 guitarist Fred (Sonic) Smith, who had died of heart failure only weeks before, and urged her to start performing again after a 16-year hiatus.


A Board Goes Out of Business


NEWS SUMMARY
International
A3-16


J. P. MORGAN TO INVEST IN NEW TRAVELERS UNIT
J.
P.
Morgan &amp; Company agreed yesterday to invest $200 million in the combined property and casualty insurance operations of Travelers Group Inc. and  the Aetna Life and Casualty Company.
The investment would give J. P. Morgan a 3  percent stake in the property and casualty business.
Travelers agreed last month to acquire Aetna's property-casualty insurance business for $4 billion.
Travelers said it would merge the business with its own property-casualty operations and would sell a stake of about 18 percent in the merged operations.


Home on the Range (and Mighty Lonely, Too)
In the stillness of the frozen prairie, David Gasal walked along the snowy wheat fields with his constant companion, a rust-colored dog named Snickers, and ruminated about sunsets and songbirds and loneliness.
"I like to listen to the blue jays and watch the sunsets," said the 40-year-old farmer.
"I like the quiet, too. I just wish I had somebody to share  it with."


Giants Seeking Revenge For That Cowboy Rout
When we last left these two teams, running back Emmitt Smith was racing down  the field, holding his index finger up to the sky.
The draw play up the middle went for 65 yards.
It drove a stake through the heart of the Giants as the Cowboys went on to win the season-opener, 35-0.
That loss, the team's worst ever at Giants Stadium, may have ended the Giants' season before it really started.
The Giants will deny this, but there is little question that it sapped a lot of confidence right out of them and probably affected their outlook.
Especially when you consider that the Giants once thought of themselves as near-equals of the Cowboys.


Sensing Victory, Striking Unions in France Press Challenge
France's leading unions repeated their calls for large demonstrations across  the country on Tuesday after apparently rejecting offers of compromise by Prime  Minister Alain Juppe to end an 18-day strike by rail and other public transport  workers that has paralyzed much of the country.
After meetings with union leaders, the Prime Minister announced tonight that  he would be willing to delay for five years an overhaul of the railroad system in addition to suggestions he made on Sunday that he might revise his austerity  program.
It was devised to eliminate a $50 billion deficit in France's Social Security fund.


SPRINT PLANS TO BEGIN LEASING PAGERS IN JANUARY
The Sprint Corporation said yesterday that it would begin to market pagers and paging services to consumers through its alliance with several cable television companies.
Sprint plans to lease the services on a monthly basis, starting in January.
Sprint owns 40 percent of its venture with the cable operators, Tele-Communications Inc., the Comcast Corporation and Cox Communications, a unit of Cox Enterprises.
The partners hope to provide one-stop shopping for all phone, cable television and wireless communications services.
The companies acquired licenses last year to portions of the radio spectrum for use in personal communications services.


After Rave Reviews, San Francisco Mayoral Race Is Ending Run
The 1995 San Francisco mayoral race the race that has proved there is still some fun left in American politics -- comes to an end on Tuesday, when voters decide whether to give the incumbent, Frank Jordan, a second four-year term, or  give his challenger, the former State Assembly Speaker Willie L. Brown Jr., a second lease on political life.
Polls indicate that the victor in the nonpartisan race will be Mr. Brown.


World News Briefs;Fighting Flares Anew Between Somali Rivals
Fighting between rival clans spread today from the southern port of Kismayo to outlying villages, closing a highway out of the capital.
At least 10 people were reported killed and 20 wounded in fighting around Kismayo between forces loyal to Gen.
Mohammed Said Hirsi and those of Mohammed Haji Aden, an ally of Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid.


Julian Szekely, 61, Researcher Of Metal-Production Technology
Dr.
Julian Szekely, a metallurgist and professor of materials engineering at  the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, died on Thursday at the M.I.T.
In-Patient Unit in Cambridge.
Dr.
Szekely was 61 and lived in Weston, Mass.
The cause was cancer, said an M.I.T. spokesman, Charles Ball.


Aguilera Back With Twins; Biggio and Grace to Decide
After a three-month visit to Boston, Rick Aguilera returned to Minnesota yesterday, and after a six-season stay in the bullpen, he agreed to return to the Twins' starting rotation.
In a matter of hours or days, Craig Biggio and Mark Grace, two other attractive free agents, are expected to decide if they want to stay where they have been their entire major league careers or try a new team.


BOISE CASCADE UNIT TO BUY CARA'S GRAND AND TOY
Cara Operations Ltd. agreed yesterday to sell its Grand and Toy Ltd. unit to  the Boise Cascade Office Products Corporation, a unit of the Boise Cascade Corporation, for $101.6 million.
Cara, a Toronto-based food services company, said Grand and Toy is one of Canada's largest office-products distribution companies, with six distribution centers and 80 retail outlets across Canada.
Boise Cascade Office Products is an Illinois concern that had revenue of $941 million in the nine months ended Sept. 30, the most recent period for which information was available.


401(k) Savings Safeguards For Workers Are Outlined
The Clinton Administration proposed today to reduce the time companies could  hold contributions by workers to 401(k) retirement savings plans in a move to provide new protections for employees.
"We've discovered that some employers are holding this money for too long before they turn it over, and we need to change that," Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich said at a news conference.
"It's not their money."


Doctors to Release Pop Singer Today
The singer Michael Jackson was moved from intensive care yesterday, and his doctors said he would be released from the hospital this afternoon.
"His condition is still listed as stable and improving," his doctors at Beth Israel Medical Center North said in a statement, "and he continues to be closely monitored by his medical team."


Equity Offerings Set for This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week: Adept Technology Inc., San Jose, Calif., an initial public offering of 2.4 million shares.
Robertson, Stephens &amp; Co.
All American Communications Inc., Santa Monica, Calif., 4 million class B shares.
Oppenheimer &amp; Co.


Bond Offerings Tentatively Set for This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week was confined to yesterday's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
Tomorrow the Treasury will announce the size of next week's sales of new two- and five-year notes.
The following taxable and tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:


Alberta Energy to Buy Conwest Exploration
The Alberta Energy Company agreed today to acquire the Conwest Exploration Company in a stock swap valued at $1.1 billion (Canadian), or $799 million (United States), creating Canada's second-largest oil and gas exploration company.
Under the deal, Conwest would exchange its 32.1 million outstanding shares for 24.2 million Alberta Energy shares and $361 million (Canadian) in cash.
Alberta Energy would also assume $185 million in Conwest debt.


Turkish Cement Deal
The Belgian cement company CBR S.A. agreed yesterday to pay $264 million for  97.7 percent of Turkey's largest cement maker, Canakkale Cimento Sanayii.
CBR said the acquisition would increase its cement-making capacity by nearly 20 percent.
CBR is acquiring the shares in Canakkale Cimento from the Turkish bank  Yapi ve Kredi Bankasi A.S., which is acting on its own behalf and for the Sukuiova group of companies.
(AP)


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY


Kings Like Vista From Pacific Heights
There is something strange about the Pacific Division standings.
And the Sacramento Kings want to keep it that way.
Off to the franchise's best start since the 1952-53 season, when they were the Rochester Royals, the Kings (13-5) are the most unlikely division leader in  the National Basketball Association.
The Kings have not made the playoffs since 1986.
They have not won a playoff game since 1981, when the franchise was  in Kansas City, after moving from Cincinnati.


People
*
Dick Rogers and Ray Gillette, managing partners at DDB Needham Chicago, a unit of the Omnicom Group, were named to the additional new positions of president for agency operations and president for integrated services.
Also, Jan Zwiren, managing partner and executive vice president for new product and business development, will assume additional responsibilities for a client team.


Murdoch's Son Gets Post
Lachlan Murdoch, the elder son of Rupert Murdoch, the chairman and chief executive of the News Corporation, has been appointed deputy chief executive of  the News Corporation's Australian subsidiary, News Ltd., the company said today.
Lachlan Murdoch, 24, is publisher of The Australian, a newspaper, and is deputy  chairman of Star TV.


When Ancient Celts Suffered Loss of Face
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 5 Science Times article on the cultural causes of depression remarks that according to Japanese clinicians, a supposedly exclusively Japanese disorder, namely "a fear that people will criticize you," "has no parallel in our culture or diagnostic system."


CHRONICLE
Now, DAVID N. DINKINS believes he has truly recovered from his triple coronary bypass surgery in August.
He has been given a green light to resume playing his beloved game of tennis and is scheduled to play tomorrow at the Roosevelt Island Racquet Club.
Never mind doubles; he's going directly back to singles, playing Skip Hartman, the president of the New York Junior Tennis League.
Mr.
Dinkins, who was accustomed to playing five times a week, underwent the surgery after becoming dizzy and fainting briefly in August on a tennis court in Hilton Head, S.C.
Doctors found three blocked coronary arteries, and Mr.
Dinkins has not played since.


Schedule Of Funerals
Funeral services for five of the seven people who died inside Freddy's clothing store on 125th Street will take place this week.
The following is a schedule of services:


Stocks Rise in Japan
Stocks traded higher here today.
The Nikkei index of 225 shares closed up 85.99 points, or 0.45 percent, at 19,312.77.
On Monday, the Nikkei fell 60.19 points.


Terry Southern Memorial
A memorial service for the novelist and screenwriter Terry Southern will be held on Saturday at 4 P.M. at the Unitarian Church of All Souls, Lexington Avenue at 80th Street.
Mr.
Southern died on Oct. 29 at the age of 71.


INSIDE
Waiting for Pilots' Release


Staff Cuts at Sizzler
Sizzler International announced today that it was reducing its administrative staff by 30 percent, or 72 workers, in a revamping intended to save $5 million a year.
The low-price restaurant chain, which grew rapidly for decades, has suffered in the 1990's, in part because of weakness in the California economy and locations too close together.
The company operates or licenses 592 Sizzler restaurants worldwide; 91 Kentucky Fried Chicken restaurants and one Italian Oven restaurant in Australia, and seven Buffalo Ranch restaurants in the United  States.


A Princess Takes Dinner and an Award
The Princess of Wales, fresh from the television interview in which she discussed her bulimia and her adultery, flew into New York City on the Concorde  yesterday morning for a 28-hour visit in which she lunched with friends and attended a gala dinner to receive a philanthropic award.
The Princess was greeted by a horde of photographers hopeful of catching a glimpse of her first New York appearance since the interview.
But she stayed at the Carlyle Hotel amid heavy security and made no other public appearances besides the awards dinner.
She did manage to have a private lunch at the Carlyle with two friends, said Tim Gurney, deputy director for British Information Services.


Swollen Nairobi, Overwhelmed, Falls Into Poverty
Mayor John King'ori says he has a call from God to salvage this city.
Yet attempts by Mr.
King'ori so far suggest that he may also need some help from God to provide the three million or so residents here with such basic services as water, electricity, garbage pickup, adequate roads and reliable telephone service.
The number of people in Kenya's capital has tripled in the last decade and is expected to grow to 4.5 million by the turn of the century.
But the city's finances are so poor, the mayor said, that there is no money to repair roads, expand water supplies or deploy enough trucks to collect garbage for the current population.


Evolving in the Dark, Over 5.5 Million Years
WHEN the light of day is turned off for five and a half million years, creatures trapped in perpetual darkness must learn to navigate without seeing, to live in an atmosphere that could kill outsiders and to make do without the solar energy that sustains the food chain elsewhere.
But survive these troglobionts do, and a pitch-dark cave in Romania has become a laboratory for biologists studying life at the precarious edge of existence.
During the last three years a team of American and Romanian scientists from the University of Cincinnati in Ohio has been mining biological treasure from the Stygian darkness of Movile Cave near Mangalia, Romania, which is on the shore of the Black Sea about 10 miles north of the Bulgarian border.
Dr.
Thomas  Kane, a professor of biology at the University of Cincinnati, said 48 species have been identified in the cave, of which 33 were previously unknown.
Movile Cave has been so scientifically productive that the National Science Foundation  recently renewed its grant to the Cincinnati team studying the cave.


Major Cache of Cocaine Is Seized in Brooklyn
Several police officers got up early to make to make a routine arrest in Brooklyn yesterday.
Instead, they made what the authorities described as the biggest seizure of drugs in the borough in two decades.
Fifty-nine kilos of cocaine with a street value of up to $2 million were confiscated, the police said, along with four ounces of heroin, a loaded .22-caliber revolver and hundreds of rounds of .22-caliber and armor-piercing .38-caliber ammunition.


An Agnelli Stake in U.S.
The Exor Group S.A. will invest $225 million in a $1.5 billion buyout of the  Riverwood International Corporation by Clayton, Dubilier &amp; Rice and several partners.
Clayton, Dubilier, a New York leveraged-buyout firm, said yesterday that Exor, the Luxembourg-based investment arm of the Agnelli group of Italy, would commit the same amount of money it had pledged to the purchase.
The Manville Corporation of Denver controls 81.3 percent of Riverwood's stock.
Riverwood, based in Atlanta, makes paperboard packaging products and machinery.


No Headline
Someone close to you gets hurt and you think it could happen to me.
Should I stick around and risk my children's lives?
You are in a constant state of limbo  trying to figure this out.
That's our daily existence.
That's what we do."
RON STERN, a white South African who is considering moving away. [A14:3.]


Shareholders Back Chemical-Chase Merger
The merger of the Chemical Banking Corporation and the Chase Manhattan Corporation, which would create the nation's largest financial institution, was  overwhelmingly approved by shareholders yesterday
About 99 percent of Chemical's shareholders and 98 percent of Chase's voted in favor of the merger at separate meetings in New York.


U.S. Trade Deficit Shrank Over Summer
The nation's trade deficit, which climbed to worrisome levels in the spring,  shrank in the summer as American businesses were able to sell more overseas and  Americans bought fewer foreign goods.
The Commerce Department reported today that the deficit in the nation's current account narrowed to $39.48 billion in the July-September quarter.


In a New Merger, Medpartner Expands Physician Network
In the latest consolidation in the fast-growing business of providing physician networks to health plans, Medpartners/Mullikin Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire Pacific Physician Services Inc., based in Redlands, Calif., for about $332 million in a tax-free stock transaction.
Medpartners/Mullikin, which is based in Birmingham, Ala., and Pacific Physician Services would initially offer contracts with 4,800 doctors in 19 states.
The merged company would be one of the strongest in physician practice management in the California market, covering 680,000 people in prepaid health plans there.
It would have nationwide revenue of about $1.1 billion.


Chinese Dissident Gains Support on Capitol Hill
The imminent trial of China's leading political dissident attracted the concern of Congress today, creating a fresh problem for the Clinton Administration, which decided in 1994 to forgo linking trade concessions to Beijing's treatment of its citizens.
Wei Jingsheng, 45, a human rights campaigner who has been locked in Chinese jails for all but seven months of the last 16 years, goes on trial in Beijing on Wednesday, accused of trying to overthrow the Chinese Government.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;No Billboards, Whitman Says
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman vetoed plans yesterday by the New Jersey Turnpike Authority to allow billboards to be erected between interchange 10 in Edison and the George Washington Bridge.
The billboards would have brought in a badly needed $1.4 million a year, said Jim Robinson, a spokesman for the authority.
Mrs.
Whitman told the authority she was not opposed to billboards per se, but wanted to see a comprehensive plan on where they would be situated.
Jersey City officials have complained that the billboards would block the view of New York Harbor.


CHRONICLE
If it's not one obstacle, it's another, or so it seemed for the pianist GARRICK OHLSSON in the last few days.
He had two appearances with the London Royal Philharmonic Orchestra canceled because of the labor strike in France and  the weather in London and Amsterdam.
Mr.
Ohlsson, who has spent much of the year performing a Chopin cycle, was to have played with the Royal Philharmonic in Paris last Thursday and in Amsterdam on Sunday.


IN THE KITCHEN WITH: Barbara Smith;And Now, Guidance For the Masses
IT is one of those cold, rainy after noons a hot tea, mystery-novel-by-the-fireplace kind of day.
So why does it feel like the Fourth of July in Barbara Smith's kitchen?


Business Travel;Delta is fighting 'menu fatigue' with a 12-dish roster that goes from Boston cod to barbecue.
DOES Boston baked cod or Louisiana lemon pepper catfish Creole make your mouth water?
How about barbecued short ribs, smoked chicken ravioli or roasted pork loin with dried apple, raisin and apricot sauce?
No, this is not a restaurant review, much less a suggested diet regimen.
Those entrees are among the 12 that will be available on Delta Air Lines domestic flights, in first and business class, beginning this Saturday.


West Bank City, Once Unruly, Revels in Self-Rule
When news arrived that Palestinian police officers were taking control of this city today, Abdullah Abu-Ghdeib went to his closet, pulled out a set of camouflage fatigues he had bought in Jordan and reported for duty.
With his newly issued AK-47 rifle over his shoulder, he stood this morning outside a brooding fort that had been transformed from the local Israeli military headquarters into the command center of the Palestinian police force, after the last Israeli troops pulled out of Nablus on Monday, ending 28 years of occupation.


Supremacists Scarce at Fort Bragg, Army Says
Army officials at Fort Bragg said today that investigators had identified about a dozen soldiers on the base who harbor white supremacist beliefs similar  to those held by two privates charged last week with killing a black man and woman.
But the officials said they had no evidence that any of the soldiers, including the suspects, were organized in a formal way or affiliated with any of the major national white supremacist organizations, like the National Alliance,  based in West Virginia, or the Aryan Nations of Hayden Lake, Idaho.


New York Teachers Had No Choice but to Reject Flawed Contract
To the Editor:


A Suggestion for Rutgers
Gary Barnett, who turned around Northwestern's football program and guided the team to the Rose Bowl, is flattered that Rutgers might be interested in hiring him.
But he recommended someone else to replace the dismissed Doug Graber.
His nominee is the Giants' secondary coach, Zaven Yaralian.


Cone Mills Plans Sale
The Cone Mills Corporation said today that it was in advanced negotiations to sell certain fixed assets and inventories of its foam and fiber business to British Vita P.L.C. of Manchester, England, for about $40 million.


Canada Gets Dial-a-Doc Line; Health Officials Are of 2 Minds
A group of doctors in the province of New Brunswick is rattling the national  health system with a first 900-number medical service, permitting Canadians to dial-a-doc for $2.95 a minute for a consultation on what ails them.
Taking a leaf from the success of phone lines for psychics and purveyors of sex talk, 10 family doctors in the Fredericton area, in southwestern New Brunswick, have just set up their Doctor Direct line.
The caller pays the fee on his or her phone bill.
The phone company takes a cut and sends the balance to the doctor.


A Tale of the New South Africa
Athol Fugard is a world-class playwright whose turbulent homeland, South Africa, has shaped his work, giving it poignancy as well as direction.
Yet he is not a polemicist.
His characters aren't mouthpieces intended to represent all sides in what is essentially a civilized argument.
Instead they are specific and idiosyncratic, sometimes uncivilized, occasionally illiterate, often ugly and deformed, like subcutaneous eruptions in a badly nourished body.
Always they have been spontaneous responses to the hell on earth he saw around him in a country divided and stunted by apartheid.
Like himself, his art  is so much an expression of a particular time and place that you can wonder where it might go in this recently dawned, initially joyous, very uncertain post-apartheid age.


$2.3 Billion Deal To Give NBC Rights To Future Olympics
NBC cornered the Olympic television market yesterday by agreeing to spend $2.3 billion for the broadcast and cable rights to the 2004 Summer, 2006 Winter  and 2008 Summer Olympics even before the sites of the Games have been determined.
The deal is the richest in television sports history, provides a stream of highly rated programming for NBC into the next decade and is a financial legacy  for Juan Antonio Samaranch, the International Olympic Committee's president.


Santa at the keyboard creates an unusual Christmas ad for I.B.M.
WHO needs a computer more than a judgmental old man who compulsively makes a  list and checks it twice?
The answer is perched above Times Square in Manhattan in a remarkable Christmas advertisement.
It was conceived by two Englishmen in an afternoon "of  coffee and desperation" in their office near the Arc de Triomphe in Paris.


Former Tobacco Executive to Begin Telling Secrets to Grand Jury
The man whose secrets about the tobacco industry have become the focus of media and legal attention is scheduled to begin disclosing them to a Federal grand jury in Washington tomorrow afternoon.
Jeffrey Wigand, who was head of research for the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation from 1989 to 1993, is expected to follow up that testimony with an appearance before a Federal grand jury in New York on Monday morning.
Federal investigators are conducting separate criminal investigations in the two cities.


Pairing Dylan With Smith
Bob Dylan took on a challenge when he booked Patti Smith to open 10 shows on  his current tour, which came to the Beacon Theater on Monday night and is to come back tomorrow.
Ms.
Smith's return to performing, a decade and a half after  she withdrew into marriage and motherhood, is a major event; her fervent, uninhibited songs and performances have resounded through punk and alternative rock from Siouxie and the Banshees to Hole and P. J. Harvey.
Ms.
Smith is an avowed fan of Mr.
Dylan, and the two songwriters are kindred  spirits.
Both are visionary writers who seek a moral way -- outside institutions or arbitrary constraints -- in a chaotic world.
Midway through Mr.
Dylan's set,  Ms.
Smith came on stage to sing his "Dark Eyes" with him; the song declares, "Time is short and the days are sweet and passion rules the arrow that flies."


KENETECH SAYS PRESIDENT REPLACES DEPARTING CHIEF
The Kenetech Corporation, a developer of power plants driven by wind and natural gas, said yesterday that its chief executive, Gerald R. Alderson, had resigned and that the company would take a charge against earnings in the fourth quarter.
Kenetech also said it had hired Smith Barney Inc. to explore the company's options.
Kenetech, based in San Francisco, said Mr.
Alderson had been  replaced by the president, Richard Saunders.
The company has not determined the size of the charge, which will be used to write off development and engineering assets and expenses, including some for job cuts.
In the third quarter, the company cut more than 100 of its 925 jobs.
The stock, which traded  at more than $16 in February, rose 56.25 cents yesterday, to $2.1875, on Nasdaq.


Show Sags, So It Gets A Wedding For Ratings
Anemic ratings?
Get yourself a wedding episode.
At least that's what Fox Broadcasting is betting on for tonight's installment of "Party of Five," a series that, despite a scattering of favorable reviews, still languishes in the  bottom quarter of the weekly ratings lists.
In fact, "Party of Five" is a somewhat unusual Fox effort, its low-key depictions of growing up and getting on with life a far cry from the brash coarseness of "Married . . . With Children." Searching for a tonier image, Fox
appears to be aiming for the kind of quality that distinguished a show like ABC's "Family" back in the late 1970's.
Yesterday the network announced that Carroll O'Connor would join the cast next month for five episodes.
If the series fails, it won't be because Fox didn't try.
Sometimes questionably, competitors charge.


Homer Thornberry, Appeals Judge, Dies at 86
Homer Thornberry, the longtime Texas Congressman and United States Court of Appeals judge who lost an appointment to the Supreme Court in 1968 because of a  controversy involving the man he had been named to replace, died early yesterday at his home in Austin.
He was 86 and until a month ago had continued to work as  a senior judge in the Fifth Circuit.
When President Lyndon B. Johnson decided to elevate his buddy, Abe Fortas, from Associate Justice of the Supreme Court to Chief Justice of the United States, the President did not have to look far for someone to take the Fortas seat on the Court.


Worry Rising For Hostages Seized in India
Concerns for the safety of four Western hostages in Indian-ruled Kashmir, one of them an American citizen, have mounted after a shadowy Muslim separatist group said it was no longer holding the men, who were seized more than five months ago.
A note delivered on Monday to a local newspaper in Srinagar, summer capital of the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir, said that three of the hostages had been "arrested" by Indian Army troops, and that the fourth man was "missing" after a clash between members of the separatist group, Al-Faran, and the Indian  forces on Dec. 4.


Going Beyond the Headlines, a Little
Network-news fans can hardly help noticing the profusion of labels for stories that do not quite fit into the usual dinner-time rundown of the day's events.
There's "American Agenda" on ABC's "World News Tonight," "Eye on America" on "CBS Evening News," "The Fleecing of America" on "NBC Nightly News"  and others.
The labeling can get silly, but the impulse to go beyond headline purveying is admirable.
Headlines are like bread lines, and you know what the Bible says about living by bread alone.
So let's have a look.
"The Fleecing of America," introduced on "NBC Nightly News" in June and generally shown on Wednesday nights, is in the evergreen tradition of the expose.
Based on the unarguable assumption that tax money is being squandered on dubious causes and crooked individuals, this useful series has lately taken on Social Security frauds (claims on behalf of the dead and the incarcerated), new  and needless bridges across the Missouri River ($17 million each), the latest multimillion-dollar boondoggle at the embarrassment-prone Denver International Airport and the use of Air Force planes to carry rooters to football games around the country.
The reporting by Lisa Myers and Roger O'Neil is pointed, and they are not likely to run out of scandals soon.
Tonight, for the Christmas season: charity rip-offs.


MOORE AGAIN EXTENDS DEADLINE IN OFFER FOR WALLACE
The Moore Corporation said yesterday that 63 percent of Wallace Computer Services Inc.'s shares had been tendered by the Monday deadline for Moore's hostile takeover offer for Wallace.
Moore also extended the deadline for the tender offer until Dec. 20.
It was the third extension since Moore began the $1.4 billion bid on Aug. 2.
During Wallace's annual meeting on Friday, Moore captured three of Wallace's eight board seats.
Moore, which is based in Toronto, needs 80 percent of Wallace's shares to have the power to shrink the Wallace board to five members, remove an anti-takeover provision and take control of the company.
Both companies make business forms and other supplies.


A 'Norma' With Two Strong Voices
It is mainly in popular music that song and singer become so indissolubly attached.
But it happens in operatic roles, too, with Norma, Bellini's ill-fated Druid, as a prime example.
There are those of us who cannot hear this music separated from the particular tone color and delivery of Maria Callas, others who are mesmerized by Rosa Ponselle's faint recorded shadow from the past.
Jane Eaglen, who with the Opera Orchestra of New York brought "Norma" to Carnegie Hall on Monday night, asks us to think again.
Ms.
Eaglen belongs to a new wave of singing talent, one that has risen up with some suddenness in the last few years and given hope that all of those uncastable roles will soon be castable again.
To understand the character of this particular Norma it helps to know that Ms.
Eaglen sang Beethoven in New York last summer and is soon to sing  Brunnhilde in Chicago.
There are also rumors of a Jane Eaglen-Ben Heppner "Tristan und Isolde" in Seattle.
Will we actually have a fully powered "Tristan" on the stage again?


Traveling From Cezanne's Provence to Soltner's Lutece
THERE is again an abundance of gloriously illustrated four-color cookbooks to give or hoard.
This year, the focus is on Provence, Australia and places closer  to home.
A number of this season's books celebrate restaurants, and there are also some simpler, straightforward volumes about baking.
Every other page of CEZANNE AND THE PROVENCAL TABLE, by Jean-Bernard Naudin,  Jacqueline Saulnier and Gilles Plazy (Clarkson Potter, $40), has a picture with  apples, a favorite subject for the artist.
This beautiful book, the latest in a  series that has explored, through food, Monet, Renoir, Toulouse-Lautrec and Proust, is a study of the painter's life and his Provence.
It is enhanced with his paintings and photographs that almost look like his paintings.
None of the inviting Provencal recipes are for apple dishes.


Experts Urge Less of Some Medical Testing
A federally backed panel of health experts said today that doctors should reduce the use of screening tests that have not proved effective, including some now used to detect prostate and breast cancer.
The recommendations would significantly change some medical practices if adopted by individual doctors, although at least two professional organizations  -- one of urologists, the other of radiologists -- expressed resistance today, saying prudence dictated that existing screens for cancer of the prostate and the breast continue to be used.


Honda Planning a Factory in Ontario
The Honda Motor Company said today that it planned to build an automobile factory in Ontario, but a spokesman for the company stopped short of saying whether or when a deal would be signed.
"It would be a pretty big-size project," said Aki Kato, an assistant manager  of public relations.
"But we haven't finalized details like the type of models or timing for production."


New Job for Buckner
The Chicago White Sox hired BILL BUCKNER as their hitting coach yesterday and agreed to a $2.8 million, two-year contract with center fielder DARREN LEWIS.


Japanese Stocks Lower
Stocks traded lower here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues  fell 29.29 points, or 0.15 percent, to 19,283.48.
On Tuesday, the Nikkei rose 85.99 points.


Freud's Critics Don't Want to Suppress Ideas;Cap the Profits
To the Editor:
Kate Walter's managed-care company says it won't cover her psychotherapy unless it is based on "medical necessity" (Op-Ed, Dec. 9).


Our Towns;Victim of a Scam Heaps Guilt on Her Loneliness
BANKS were out of the question, an envelope under the mattress too obvious.
Carmen D. kept her savings in a coffee can at the back of the refrigerator, behind two others.
It took two years of leaning over a sewing machine 8 to 10 hours a day, five  to six days a week -- "a horrible job" -- but she managed to fill the can.
At last count, she had $3,140.
This would buy plane tickets for her mother, her daughter, 10, and her son, 13, to visit from the Dominican Republic for Christmas.
And it would buy presents.


Bank of Boston and Baybanks To Merge in $2 Billion Deal
The Bank of Boston Corporation said last night that it would buy Baybanks Inc., the leading consumer bank in New England, for $2 billion in stock.
The combined bank, with assets of $55 billion, will be the largest bank in Massachusetts and the 15th largest in the nation.


Bert Lahr's Widow Dies
Mildred Lahr, who was married to the comedian Bert Lahr from 1940 until his death in 1967, died on Wednesday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 88.
Mrs.
Lahr, whose maiden name was Schroeder, was born in Cincinnati and came to New York in 1928 after winning a beauty contest.
She became a Ziegfeld Girl and made her Broadway debut in 1930 in Earl Carroll's "Fine and Dandy." She made occasional appearances in sketches with Mr.
Lahr after their marriage, but he did not encourage her acting ambitions.


Sediment May Hamper Statue of Liberty Visits
Planning a trip to New York City next December, with the obligatory visit to  the Statue of Liberty?
Don't count on it: the national monument might be closed  then, a New Jersey Congressman warned today.
Representative Robert D. Franks said bottom sediment in the channel leading to Liberty Island and around its dock has been building steadily since the 1970's, and unless the silt is removed, ferries will not be able to get there with their loads of sightseers -- about 35 million people annually.


In Mannerly Search of Marriageable Men
In a banner year for movie-business mergers, one of the best-conceived collaborations takes place not in the board room but on the screen.
The grandly  entertaining "Sense and Sensibility" brings together Hollywood's new posthumous  darling, Jane Austen, with Ang Lee, the director whose "Eat Drink Man Woman" had the irresistible good sense to combine Austen-like acuity with Chinese food.
Add to this inspired mix a team of production (Luciana Arrighi) and costume (Jenny Beavan and John Bright) designers who earned their tastefully muted stripes with Merchant-Ivory.
They account for such charming distractions as carefully appointed country houses, bucolic flocks of sheep and custom-made parchment used for the will, ledgers and love letters that are so vital to this  story.
Also add Emma Thompson, who proves as crisp and indispensably clever a screenwriter as she is a leading lady.
And Hugh Grant, as one of those genteel heartthrobs whose amiability and financial prospects can keep Miss Austen's heroines occupied throughout an entire book's worth of small talk.


A Senate Bill Would Punish Iran's Foreign Oil Partners
Over the objections of the European Union, the White House and Senate Republicans have struck a deal to impose financial penalties on foreign companies that help Iran develop its oil and natural-gas fields.
The bill gives teeth to what has so far been an ineffective effort to get United States allies to take part in an embargo that President Clinton required  of American companies earlier this year.


Daunting Ballot Rules Hinder Third Parties
To the Editor:
Re "The Center Holds Out" (Op-Ed, Dec. 10):


Prudential May Sell Landmark Properties
The Prudential Insurance Company of America may sell some of its landmark United States properties, which include the Chicago Hilton and Towers, Nationsbank Tower in Dallas and the Prudential Center in Boston.
Prudential, the largest United States life insurer, is reviewing its roughly  $5.5 billion real estate portfolio to try to replace some of its convention hotels and office buildings with warehouses, manufacturing plants and apartment  buildings.


Corrections
A theater review on Monday about the Cheek by Jowl company's production of "The Duchess of Malfi" at the Majestic Theater of the Brooklyn Academy of Music  misstated its closing date.
It is Saturday, not Friday.


Metro Digest


President Has Lawyer-Client Right, Too
To the Editor:
Re William Safire's "Why No Firestorm?" (column, Dec. 11), on President and Mrs.
Clinton's invoking lawyer-client privilege regarding certain conversations  with various White House counsel in the Whitewater affair:


Compass Group Sells Its Health Care Unit
Compass Group P.L.C., Britain's largest contract caterer, said yesterday that it had sold its health care division for L178.8 million ($274 million) to its managers and a new company controlled by the investment fund Cinven.
Cinven will pay L170.8 million in cash and take an L8 million interest-bearing secured loan  from Compass to buy the division, which operates 15 private hospitals, 2 nursing homes and a health screening business in Britain.
Compass said it would use the proceeds to reduce debt incurred in July with  the acquisition of Eurest International, which was its second purchase in 18 months and put it on a par with Sodexho S.A. as the world's largest contract caterer.
Bloomberg Business News


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about P. Gordon B. Stillman, a private school administrator and teacher, referred incorrectly in some editions to an organization he headed for a time.
It is the Guild of Independent Schools of New York City, not the New York State Guild of Independent Schools.


Union Leaders Urge Approval Of Boeing Pact
Union leaders are recommending that workers at the Boeing Company accept a proposed contract reached with management after a 67-day strike.
"I think we finally accomplished what we set out to do," said Bill Johnson, president of the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers District Lodge 751.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Market Place;For SBC Communications, the definition of home is now elastic.
WITH tens of thousands of employees and billions of dollars in revenue, the Baby Bells were never babies, even at their birth.
But of the seven regional telephone companies spun off from AT&amp;T in 1984, SBC Communications may have grown up the fastest.
Now, with Congress close to sending a landmark communications bill to the White House, SBC is coming into its prime.
Several industry analysts said the company, based in San Antonio, could grow more rapidly in the next three years than MCI Communications, Sprint or even its mother company, AT&amp;T.


Ex-Chancellor Cortines Stays Busy in Projects on Two Coasts
Last year, when the New York City Schools Chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines, took a brief break to relax in Hawaii, the school board president, Carol A. Gresser,  had to interrupt his rest on the third day with an urgent curriculum question.
But before departing on a recent vacation to the same place, Mr.
Cortines told Mrs.
Gresser "you won't be calling me this time!' " she recalled last week.


Chip Maker in Thai Deal
Texas Instruments Inc. and Charn Uswachoke, an entrepreneur based in Bangkok, Thailand, have formed a $1.2 billion semiconductor joint venture in Thailand that will begin production of 16- and 64-megabit dynamic random access memory chips in the second quarter of 1997.
Texas Instruments Inc. will hold a 26 percent stake in the new company, with the rest held by Mr.
Charn, founder and chief executive of Alphatec Electronics P.L.C., a producer of integrated circuits.
Texas Instruments will buy all of the venture's output.
Bloomberg Business News


N. W. Ayer Resigns Pep Boys Account
N.
W.
Ayer &amp; Partners in New York has resigned the creative portion of the account of the Pep Boys (Manny, Moe &amp; Jack) chain of auto-supply stores, which the agency had handled for the last three years.
The billings were estimated at  $23 million, though Ayer said it had handled the account on a fee basis.
The resignation came about a month after the trade publication Adweek said that Pep Boys had asked other New York agencies for reels of creative work.
However, Ayer said it had resigned because of "a shift in Pep Boys' strategy to  a greater retail focus." Pep Boys declined to comment.


F.B.I. Arrests Man in Far East, Charged in Plot to Bomb Planes
The Federal Bureau of Investigation arrested a man in the Far East yesterday  on charges he took part last January in an aborted scheme to bomb 11 American airliners on a single day, Federal law enforcement officials said.
The suspect, Wali Khan Amin Shah, was flown back to New York yesterday on a Government plane after being turned over to F.B.I. agents in Malaysia.
He is charged with conspiracy to bomb airliners, along with two other men arrested earlier this year: Ramzi Ahmed Yousef and Abdul Hakim Murad.


In Congress, Peres Again Appeals to Syria for a Mideast Peace
Prime Minister Shimon Peres of Israel used a sentimental appearance before a  joint meeting of Congress today to issue an appeal to Syria to join him in concluding a Middle East peace.
Mr.
Peres, speaking as if to President Hafez al-Assad of Syria, invoked the image of 20 Middle East leaders standing together and declaring an end to the conflict, "thereby carrying the message to our forefathers and to our grandchildren, that we are again, all of us, the sons and daughters of Abraham,  living in a tent of peace."


WINE TALK
IN most parts of the world, the 1995 vintage will probably turn out well, but it could be months, even years, before we know for sure.
When it comes to wine books as holiday gifts, however, there is very little to debate: this year's crop is one of the largest in years.
Just as with the grapes, quality is generally high, but as always, it pays to be selective.
As usual, most of the new books are instructional.
They start from the premise that wine is a complicated business that must be learned.
The author is  a teacher and the reader is a student, and the point of the book is to make the  lessons as palatable as possible.


SCHERING-PLOUGH TO BUY CANJI, A GENE THERAPY COMPANY
The Schering-Plough Corporation said yesterday that it would acquire all the  outstanding shares of the gene therapy company Canji Inc. that it did not already own, for $54.5 million.
Schering-Plough holds a stake of 8.5 percent in  Canji and is developing cancer treatments based on Canji's scientific discoveries.
Schering-Plough will pay $54.5 million to stockholders of Canji, a  closely held concern in San Diego, in the form of newly issued Schering-Plough common shares.
Canji shareholders will be entitled to royalties on sales of the  new cancer treatments.
Schering-Plough's stock fell $87.5 cents, to $58.375, on  the New York Stock Exchange.


Who's Queen of the Met? Her Fans Know Who
On Monday morning at the Metropolitan Opera, a tour group of students walked  through the Dress Circle promenade, looking at costumed mannequins in display cases and listening to a guide tell stories of the company's glorious past.


U.S. OFFICE PRODUCTS PLANS $110 MILLION IN ACQUISITIONS
The U.S.
Office Products Company said yesterday that it had agreed to pay about $110 million for 12 office supply companies in the United States and a 51  percent interest in Blue Star Group Ltd., an office products company in New Zealand.
U.S.
Office Products said it would pay about $45 million in cash and about $65 million in stock to complete the deals.
The company's shares rose $2,  to $24.125, in Nasdaq trading.
U.S.
Office Products, based in Washington, said that the 12 domestic companies had combined sales of $200 million a year and that Blue Star had sales of more than $100 million a year.


Change in 'Fledermaus'
Nancy Gustafson, who was to sing Rosalinde in Johann Strauss's "Fledermaus" at the Metropolitan Opera, has withdrawn from the first five performances because of illness.
She is to be replaced by June Anderson, who will be singing  the role for the first time.
Those five performances are Dec. 20, 23, 26 and 29  and the New Year's Eve gala on Dec. 31.


Treasury Securities Sag in Price
Prices of Treasury securities sagged in trading yesterday, as higher-than-expected prices at the manufacturing level last month lowered some hopes of an interest rate cut by the Federal Reserve next week.
The strong number followed recent comments by Fed officials about signs of continuing economic strength and served to underline the market's nervousness about inflation, analysts said.
It raised the question about the timing of the next rate cut.
The Federal Open Market Committee, the Fed committee that sets interest-rate policy, meets on Tuesday.


Flag-Burning Amendment Fails In Senate, but Margin Narrows
The Senate today rejected by three votes a constitutional amendment to outlaw desecration of the flag, capping another season in the six-year political battle pitting the values of patriotism against the values of free speech.
The vote was 63 to 36, just short of the two-thirds necessary for passage: 49 Republicans and 14 Democrats voted for the amendment, while 32 Democrats and 4 Republicans voted against it.


Producer Prices Jump but Quirk Is Seen in Data
In a report that proved more startling than worrisome, Government figures showed today that wholesale prices jumped five-tenths of 1 percent in November,  the heftiest increase since January.
The advance, which was about twice as much as expected, initially jolted the  bond market because it seemed likely to dim prospects that an inflation-conscious Federal Reserve would ratify a cut in short-term interest rates at its policy meeting next Tuesday.


From 4 Choreographers
Dances by Li Chiao Ping and three other leading young choreographers from Hong Kong are to be presented on Friday and Saturday at the Henry Street Settlement, Abrons Arts Center, 466 Grand Street, Lower East Side.
The program,  part of a festival marking the center's 20th anniversary, is also to include work by Allen Lam, Wong Kwan Sun and Joycelyn Chung.
Performances are to be at 7:30 P.M., with a matinee on Saturday at 2 P.M.
Tickets for evening performances are $10; $5 for adults and $4 for children at the matinee.
Information: (212) 598-0400.


Have Schools Failed? Revisionists Use Army of Statistics to Argue No
Though conventional wisdom holds that the nation's educational system is in persistent, debilitating decline, a dissident chorus has of late been making an  intriguing but unfashionable argument: Maybe American schools are not so bad after all.
Almost no one contends that American schools, particularly poor urban and rural ones, do not need improvement.
Few doubt that the worst of those schools are a disaster.


Bosnian Serbs Take Vote, And Pact Takes Battering
The Serbs in Sarajevo trudged through a thick snowfall on Tuesday to vote in  a referendum that was as predictable as it was futile.
"This referendum is designed to show the world that the Serbs do not want to  live under Muslim rule," said Vojlislav Maksimovic, the self-declared mayor of Serbian-held areas of Sarajevo.
"We will appeal to the international community to respect the will of the voters."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball


U.S. Drug Czar Departing
President Clinton is considering candidates to replace Lee Brown as head of the White House drug enforcement office, the White House press secretary, Michael D. McCurry said today.
Mr.
Brown, the former Police Commissioner of New  York, is leaving his post to take a position at Rice University in Houston, a move that had been rumored for several days.


Buntin Group Gets Lava Soap Account
The Block Drug Company in Jersey City has assigned the account of its Lava soap brand, recently acquired from the Procter &amp; Gamble Company, to the Buntin Group in Nashville, which also handles other Block products like Goody's Headache Powder.
The billings have not been determined.
Lava was assigned to the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago when the brand was owned by P.&amp; G., but the account had been inactive for several years.


Broader Inquiry in Harlem
Four days after an attack on a Harlem clothing store, officials began to take a closer look at the comments of community leaders who had organized a boycott.
Page B1.


Foreign Affairs;The Coffin's Free
There is always a moment in the ups and downs of any market when the most sophisticated investors get that gut feeling that a company or a country that has been flat on its back is about to rise up and resume growth again.
It's at that moment that the wise investor loads up on that company's stock or that country's bonds and then sits back and waits for the rest of the world to catch  up with his perceptions and drive up the value of his investment.
Well, for about six months now, wise global investors have been waiting to load up on Mexican stocks and bonds in order to be just ahead of the pack.
Unfortunately for Mexico, most of those investors are still waiting.
They are watching Mexico closely.
They are intrigued by the improvements in its economy since the peso crashed one year ago, but still they are sitting on their wallets.


CHRONICLE
So many people wanted to attend a luncheon given in honor of JUDY PEABODY in  the Pegasus Suite of the Rainbow Room today that ROBERT WOOLLEY, the master of ceremonies, said: "We had to rent smaller chairs so we could fit everyone in."
Mrs.
Peabody has been in the front lines of the battle against AIDS almost since the disease was identified, and behind the scenes counseling and caring for AIDS patients and their families and friends.
She is being honored by Gay Men's Health Crisis for her 10-year commitment.


2 Meetings, 2 Responses To a Blaze
A group of politicians, business operators and development officials gathered in Harlem yesterday to condemn the violence that killed seven employees in Freddy's clothing store last Friday.
They also sought to portray the community as a place where businesses can operate safely no matter the race or ethnicity of their operators.
Just hours later, a collection of ministers from Harlem and beyond met 10 blocks away.
And while they, too, condemned the violence, their aim was clearly  to rally support for the Rev.
Al Sharpton, who participated in protests against  the store before it was set afire.


Port Authority to Build Skating Rink Between Towers of World TradeCenter
The Port Authority plans a new year-round skating rink in the windy open space between the city's tallest towers.
Officials said rapid construction would permit skaters to whiz around the World Trade Center plaza by Christmas.
The new rink, which will take up about one-third of the plaza space, is scheduled to open to the public on Dec. 22.


Attacks Against Asian-Americans On the Rise, Especially in California
He chose his course of action matter-of-factly, as if he were deciding which  color shirt to wear.
"I'm going to kill me a Chinaman," is how Robert Page put it in his written confession to the police.
A few hours later, as Eddy Wu carried a bag of groceries from a supermarket in Novato, Calif., to his car, Mr.
Page attacked, leaving Mr.
Wu, 23, with stab  wounds to his back and shoulder, and a punctured lung.


Two Officers Are Arrested In a Break-In
A transit police officer and an auxiliary police officer were arrested in a sting operation yesterday and charged with stealing $10,000 from an apartment that was made to look like a drug den, the police said.
The transit officer, Jose Padilla, 24, and Orlando Suarez, 20, a volunteer auxiliary officer, both residents of the High Bridge section of the Bronx, had been suspected of stealing drugs and money from drug dealers for several months, the police said.
The Internal Affairs Bureau drew them to a Manhattan apartment by having a street informer plant a tip that the apartment was being used by traffickers to prepare drugs for sale and store money.


Garden Grows in New Direction;Struggling Bronx Institution Aims to Widen Appeal
The current attraction at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx is six toy trains that chug circuitously among vegetation and hand-carved evocations of the Brooklyn Bridge and Grand Central Terminal.
At Halloween, 45 dancers in skeleton costumes tapped along a haunted walk.
Periodically, there are wine tastings, not to mention the new line of souvenirs, from floral calendars to stationary, with garden tools and seeds to be out shortly.
A catering facility capable of handling large weddings is in the works.


House Votes to Limit F.D.I.C. Protection
The House of Representatives approved legislation tonight that would revoke Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation protection for a new type of financial product that blends the characteristics of an annuity and a certificate of deposit.
The elimination of F.D.I.C. insurance for Retirement CD's would make them less attractive for commercial banks to offer customers.
Once Retirement CD's reach maturity, investors are paid a fixed amount by the bank until they die.
The bill's sponsor, Representative Marge Roukema, Republican of New Jersey  said, "The lifetime-payment feature exposes the bank to a potential liability of unknown duration." The House action was a victory for the insurance industry.
Senator Alfonse D'Amato, Republican of New York, has introduced similar legislation.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Fishing Interests Clash
New Jersey commercial and recreational fishermen clashed yesterday before a House subcommittee that is considering a proposal by Representative Jim Saxton,  Republican of Vincentown, to extend a five-year-old ban on commercial fishing of striped bass in Federal waters.
The ban has helped to restore the striped bass population, which was substantially depleted in the 1980's.
Allowing commercial fishing could reverse  this trend while also putting other fish at risk, the New Jersey Coast Angler Association and the New Jersey Boat Builders Association testified.


What's Cooking In Virtual Kitchens
PATTI GREANEY, a no-nonsense maker of television commercials whose work bounced her from coast to coast, seldom had much time to cook for herself.
But whenever she found a free moment to pull out the old pots and pans, her expectations of what she might whip up soared far beyond the recipes she had at  hand.
"I mean, if I take the time to cook, I hope what comes out on the other end is a fabulous piece," she said.
So Ms.
Greaney sought expert guidance.
But, she  said, she soon found that cookbooks were too boring, family recipes too mundane, and the world's greatest chefs were, well, generally about as approachable as divas at curtain time.


Bratton Rues Not Arresting Store Pickets
In the weeks before a gunman set a fatal fire at a Harlem clothing store, the building's owners persuaded the police not to arrest any demonstrators who were  picketing the store because they feared that arrests might inflame the tense situation, city officials said yesterday.
But Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said yesterday that he now regretted the police decision not to arrest protesters, and that he would have overruled the owners' wishes if he had known the extent of the threats and racial and anti-Semitic slurs the demonstrators are accused of using.


Political Warfare in France
The modern French welfare state was established 50 years ago by Gen.
Charles  de Gaulle and is understandably cherished by French citizens of all political persuasions.
They enjoy an enviable array of social benefits far exceeding those available to the average American, including national health insurance, generous unemployment benefits, family allowances, early retirement and five to six weeks of annual vacation.
France's Prime Minister, Alain Juppe, underestimated the power of that social contract when he announced some modest reforms in the financing of France's welfare benefits and the privatization of public transportation services.
He has been forced by huge strikes and demonstrations into an abrupt retreat, dropping  the privatization plan and offering to renegotiate the changes in welfare charges and benefits.


Goal Petroleum in Talks
Goal Petroleum P.L.C. said yesterday that it was in talks with a potential buyer that could lead to an offer for Goal, a small British oil exploration company.
Goal shares jumped 21 pence, or almost 31 percent, to 89 pence ($1.36).
At that price, the company, which explores for oil in the North Sea, would be worth L119 million ($183 million).
Goal's statement did not identify the potential buyer.
Bloomberg Business News


Wells Rich Settles With Ex-Chairman
Wells Rich Greene BDDP Communications in New York and Kenneth S. Olshan, who  was ousted as chairman and chief executive in September, said yesterday that they had "settled all disputes" concerning his dismissal.
Mr.
Olshan, who had been seeking the settlement of his contract, will become a consultant to the agency and, according to people familiar with the agreement, will receive a substantial cash settlement.
Mr.
Olshan, 62, will serve until the end of 1997 as a consultant to Wells Rich, which is owned by BDDP Worldwide in Paris.
In a statement, Wells Rich said it "looks forward to continuing its long tradition of service to clients with Mr. Olshan's help." Trade publications reported that important clients like the  Procter &amp; Gamble Company were not notified before Mr.
Olshan was ousted and were dismayed by the abruptness of his dismissal.


Three Devices Spark Fires At the Macy's in Queens
Three incendiary devices set off small fires in the Macy's department store in Queens yesterday -- several hours after the store received a telephoned bomb  threat -- and while damage was minor, the incident caused chaos on a busy shopping day.
No injuries were reported, either from the blazes or from the evacuation of hundreds of shoppers in the store at 88-01 Queens Boulevard in Elmhurst.
But the four-story Macy's was closed from 3:30 to 7:30 P.M., just as a one-day sale  was under way in the heart of the pre-Christmas shopping season.


Granada Says Holders Back Bid for Forte
Granada Group P.L.C. said yesterday that its shareholders had voted by a large majority to support the bid of L3.3 billion ($5.1 billion) for the British hotel company Forte P.L.C.
About 40 percent of Granada's shareholders voted at an extraordinary general meeting on three resolutions: to approve the bid, extend the company's debt levels and issue new shares for the offer, which is to be partly paid in stock.
Only four-tenths of 1 percent of shareholders voted against the resolutions, the company said.
Granada, based in London, plans to cut costs at Forte by L100  million a year.
The company reiterated at a news conference that the acquisition would not dilute earnings in the first year.
Bloomberg Business News


Corrections
An article on Monday about a memorial rally at Madison Square Garden for the  assassinated Israeli Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, listed four people incorrectly among those attending.
Although organizers of the rally announced that the four -- Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato  of New York, and two members of the opposition Likud party in Israel, Benjamin Begin and Ovadia Eli -- had attended, they did not.


Republican-Appointed Clerk Dismisses 10 House Employees
In the latest example of what happens when control of Congress shifts from one party to another, the Republican-appointed clerk of the House of Representatives has dismissed 10 career employees.
Democratic legislators protested the dismissals today, calling them cruel and suggesting that Republicans want to fill the slots with patronage workers.
At the same time, they acknowledged that the clerk, Robin H. Carle, has the right to discharge whomever she pleases.
In this case the clerk told one Democrat, Representative Steny H. Hoyer of Maryland, today that the dismissals were part of an administrative "fine-tuning."


Jets' Hopes for a Better '96: Foley, Yarborough, Brock
The negatives about the Jets are easy to find.
No other team in the National  Football League has a record worse than the Jets' 3-11.
They rank last in total  offense, last in rushing offense, last in average yards gained per pass attempt, last in third-down conversions, next to last in points allowed.
But all is not lost.
There is hope for next year.
Here are three players who  may make a difference:


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Gingrich Backs Land Buy
House Speaker Newt Gingrich supports a proposal to sell thousands of acres of Federal grasslands in Oklahoma and using part of the proceeds to help New York and New Jersey buy Sterling Forest, a 20,000-acre tract of wilderness property straddling the two states.
Sterling Forest, which provides about one-fourth of the state's water, is owned by a Swiss company that plans to turn the property into a community of homes, commercial and industrial buildings and golf courses.
The proposal Mr.
Gingrich favors is to be unveiled today. [Page A1.]


Senate Roll-Call On Flag Measure
The 63-to-36 roll call by which the Senate voted today to reject a constitutional amendment giving Congress the power to prohibit physical desecration of the flag.
A constitutional amendment requires a two-thirds majority for approval.
On this vote, a "yes" vote was a vote to approve the amendment and a "no" vote was a vote to reject it.


Cowboys Could Use Another Deep Threat
Barry Switzer has certainly taken his lumps this season.
Actually, the buzzards began circling as soon as he became the third Dallas Cowboys coach in team history last year, and they have picked and plucked at Switzer at every turn though he has thus far compiled a 22-8 regular-season record.
Around here, his chief critics believe his defining moment as Cowboys coach arrived last Sunday when he made that shocking fourth-and-1 call that failed in the 20-17 loss at Philadelphia.
But give Switzer credit for being able to look into the future back in training camp and pinpoint the one problem area that he feared might bloom into  a full headache for Dallas: no Alvin Harper.


When a Hunter Decides To Put Down His Gun
To the Editor:
Re "The Sadness of the Hunter" (Week in Review, Dec. 10):


Environment Fight Kills Plan For Bridge to Carolina Island
A South Carolina coastal development agency today refused to allow the construction of a private bridge to Sandy Island, one of only two remaining South Carolina islands that bridges do not link to the mainland.
The decision, by the state's Office of Ocean and Coastal Resource Management, was a victory for environmentalists and some residents, who had raised fears that the bridge would promote extensive development detrimental to the island.


Beaumont Theater Plans Its Biggest Makeover
Officials of Lincoln Center Theater said yesterday that they would close the  Vivian Beaumont Theater at the end of the month for a six-to-eight-month renovation that is to cost $4.7 million.
It will be the biggest single project since the theater opened 30 years ago.
The restoration of the 1,050-seat Beaumont, long the object of complaints from audiences and actors alike about poor acoustics and inadequate ventilation, will include the replacement of the theater's heating, ventilation  and air-conditioning systems, construction of new lighting grids and catwalks, and new ramps for handicapped access.
Sections of the ceiling will also be reinforced to improve the sound.


Muslims And Croats Seek Home
The Muslim Mayor of this rural town sounds sincere when he says he would welcome home the Croats who fled during the Muslim-Croat war two years ago.
From behind the desk in his office, whose Finnish-design furniture and a videocassette recorder are rare perks in city nearly demolished by war, Mayor Dzevad Mlaco produced a report to prove his hospitality.
It is a list of 45 families he said had returned under an agreement between Muslim and Croat leaders signed in Dayton, Ohio, last month.
The Dayton accord promised the return of 300 Croat and 300 Muslim families displaced from their homes in four towns.


STRIKES IN FRANCE SURGE AS DEMANDS BY UNIONS STIFFEN
Hundreds of thousands of French demonstrators filled the streets of cities around the country today, while union leaders, sensing that they have caught the wind of revolt, hardened their demands.
The demonstrators demanded not only a total abandonment of Prime Minister Alain Juppe's comprehensive welfare reform plan but also his resignation, a day  after he backed down on several aspects of the austerity plan.


Alzheimer's Group Finds Many Members Want Test for Risk
WHO would want to know years or decades in advance that he or she had as much as a 90 percent chance of getting Alzheimer's disease, given that there is no cure, treatment or prevention?
The New York City chapter of the Alzheimer's Association asked members whether they would take a genetic test that could make such a prediction and, in survey results being released today, 63 percent of respondents said yes.


Executive Changes
BANK OF NEW YORK CO. named Thomas A. Renyi, current president of both the Bank of New York Co. and its Bank of New York subsidiary, to the additional post of chief executive of the bank.
He succeeds J. Carter Bacot, who continues to be the chairman and chief executive of the Bank of New York Co. and chairman of the bank.


Utah Representative Is Criticized for Portraying Herself as a Victim
The senior female member of the House, Representative Pat Schroeder, today called for the resignation of one of her junior colleagues, Enid Greene Waldholtz, and she criticized Mrs.
Waldholtz for portraying herself as a victim  in the mismanagement of her campaign finances.


Results Plus
BOXING


Orange Juice Prices Plunge On Weather and Crop Forecasts
Orange juice futures prices plunged in heavy trading yesterday on the New York Cotton Exchange in reaction to a rising Government crop estimate and the increasing likelihood that Florida would avoid a frost for at least another week.
In other markets, cotton futures dropped and natural gas jumped.
The Commodity Research Bureau's index of 17 commodities dropped 1.37 points, to 243.97.


Horrors Committed by the Japanese
Images of unspeakable cruelty anchor Christine Choy and Nancy Tong's documentary film "In the Name of the Emperor" in the depressing genre of movies  that bear witness to humanity's seemingly unlimited capacity for inhuman behavior.
We see a charred body of a man who has been burned alive, a child riddled with stab wounds after being used as a target for bayonet practice, a woman who has been gang-raped and horribly mutilated.
Along with legions of the dead, these are some of the individual victims of the so-called "Rape of Nanjing," shown in vintage film clips from 1937, the year Japanese troops stormed into the city that was then the capital of China.
Over the next six weeks, the Japanese Army massacred 300,000 civilians, including many thousands of women who were systematically raped before being killed.
The atrocities were carried out in the name of the Japanese Emperor, Hirohito, who was worshiped as a living god by desperate, underfed troops infuriated by the intensity of Chinese resistance.


Gehrig's-Disease Drug Approved
The Food and Drug Administration today approved the world's first drug to treat, but not cure, Lou Gehrig's disease.
Some 30,000 Americans have the fatal neuromuscular disease, formally amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.


Knicks Feel Younger With Every Victory
Charles Oakley has to put fiber in his diet.
Charles Smith chews on ginseng root before the game.
They ice their knees and pass the time talking about pension plans.
Oh, those poor, aging Knicks.
They cannot eat what they want and cannot jump  the way they used to.
It seems all they are good for anymore is winning.


Neuheisel Says No To Coaching U.C.L.A.
RICK NEUHEISEL withdrew his candidacy yesterday for the coaching job at his alma mater, U.C.L.A.
Neuheisel said he has "tremendous loyalty" to Colorado.
"If someone had told me three years ago that I'd be turning down an opportunity to be head coach at U.C.L.A., I would have told them that they were  crazy," he said.
AP


Leeson Files Appeal Of Singapore Sentence
Nicholas W. Leeson, the former securities trader in Singapore whose huge trading losses led to the collapse of Barings Bank of Britain, filed an appeal yesterday to reduce the prison sentence of six and a half years he received earlier this month.
A spokesman in the office of his defense lawyer, John Koh, confirmed that the appeal had been filed.
There was no indication when it would  be decided.
Mr.
Leeson, 28, pleaded guilty on Dec. 1 to 2 of 11 charges and was sentenced the next day by Judge Richard Magnus, who said he "spun a web of deceit" that broke the 232-year-old merchant bank.
Barings collapsed in February under losses of $1.38 billion because of wrong bets that Mr.
Leeson made about the direction of Japanese stocks.
AP


Corrections
An article on Saturday about a Navy admiral found guilty of sexual harassment included an erroneous reference to his college background, provided by the Navy.
The admiral, Ralph L. Tindal, is a graduate of Pennsylvania State University, not the Naval Academy.


PERSONAL HEALTH
IF you have a holiday wish list or are still wondering what to get for those  special people in your life, consider a carbon monoxide detector.
Or buy one for yourself.
It could save your life and protect you from serious carbon monoxide poisoning.
If you are pregnant, it could make the difference between the birth of a live, healthy baby and one who is neurologically damaged or stillborn.
Each year, experts estimate, 1,500 Americans die from accidental carbon monoxide poisoning at home, in motor vehicles and even on cabin cruisers, including some who die from heart attacks touched of by the toxic gas, and 10,000 suffer symptoms that prompt them to seek medical attention.
A simple home device that resembles a smoke detector and some common-sense safety tips can keep you and your family from becoming part of these unfortunate statistics.


Kimberly-Clark Agrees to Sell Some of Scott's Units and Mills
The Kimberly-Clark Corporation agreed today to sell the Scott Paper Company's facial tissue and baby wipes businesses to settle Justice Department antitrust concerns about a merger of the consumer product companies.
The Justice Department agreement was announced shortly after shareholders of  the two companies approved Kimberly-Clark's $9.4 billion acquisition of Scott Paper.
The companies plan to complete the transaction on Wednesday.


Yale Teaching Assistants Vote for a Grade Strike
An organization of Yale's graduate teaching assistants has voted not to submit grades for this term, raising the possibility that some undergraduates will not receive grades on time and that some seniors might have incomplete transcripts with their graduate school applications.
Yale officials stressed that they would not tolerate a grade strike, and did  not rule out the possibility of seeking to expel teaching assistants who withhold grades.


Ethos Capital Management Head To Switch to Moore Hedge Fund
Stanley Shopkorn, a former Salomon Brothers vice chairman whose penchant for  high-risk, high-reward stock trading was symbolized by a blackjack hand embedded in a Lucite cube on his desk, plans to close his hedge fund and sign on with Moore Capital Management Inc., which runs a $2 billion hedge fund headed by Louis Moore Bacon.
Mr.
Shopkorn, who headed equity trading at Salomon before leaving the firm in 1991, and his seven-member team agreed to trade stocks for Moore, which has made most of its profit trading futures, currencies and bonds.
Investors in the hedge fund run by Ethos Capital Management L.P., Mr.
Shopkorn's firm, will have the option of investing their money with Moore.


Irwin Tobin, 71, Official for Schools In Sports Programs
Irwin Tobin, a former director of the Bureau of Health and Physical Education for New York City's public schools, died on Monday at New York University Hospital.
He was 71 and lived in Valley Stream, L.I.
The cause was lung cancer, his family said.


Degussa Profit Up 44%
The German chemical and drug maker Degussa A.G. said yesterday that its profits rose 44 percent in the year that ended on Sept. 30.
Pretax profit reached 404 million German marks ($279 million) in the year, up from 280 million marks.
Sales rose three-tenths of 1 percent, to 13.86 billion marks ($9.6 billion).
For the fiscal year that began Oct. 1, growth is seen continuing, but  at a slower pace, the company said.
Degussa also said it would increase its annual dividend by 25 percent.
AP


Corrections
An article yesterday about budget negotiations between Congress and the White House misstated President Clinton's action on a military spending bill.
He let it become law without his signature earlier this month; he did not sign it.
Because of a technical error, the article carried an incorrect headline in some editions.
The headline, "Bill Would Cut Medicaid-Welfare Link," was intended for an article about new welfare legislation.


U.C.L.A. Gets A Softball Ban
The Pacific-10 Conference has placed U.C.L.A. on probation for one year and penalized the softball program five scholarships over a two-year period because  of violations occurring in its softball program.
U.C.L.A. itself reported that it exceeded National Collegiate Athletic Association softball financial-aid limitations by a total of 2.49 grants in the  1993-94 and 1994-95 academic years, the Pac-10 announced today.


Gingrich Backs Buying Tract On Jersey-New York Border
A proposal to enable the Federal Government to help New York and New Jersey buy Sterling Forest, a huge tract of wilderness property straddling their border, has won the backing of Speaker Newt Gingrich.
His support is expected to break a legislative logjam that has stalled previous efforts to save the land from developers.
The plan involves selling thousands of acres of Oklahoma grassland owned by the Federal Government and using part of the revenue to help the two states buy  Sterling Forest, 20,000 acres of hardwood forests, wetlands and lakes about 40 miles north of New York City that is one of the largest tracts of undeveloped, privately owned property in the Northeast.


Milbury Moving Up In Isles' Pecking Order
It looks as if that escape clause in Mike Milbury's contract, the one that takes effect after two seasons if he wants to explore becoming a general manager, is now a moot point.
Twenty-eight games into his first season as the Islanders' head coach, Milbury was named today as the third general manager in franchise history.


Like Poison to Some
To The Living Section:


INSIDE
Medicare Fraud Settlement


Tokyo Journal;Japan's Feminine Falsetto Falls Right Out of Favor
Smiling beatifically at the restless shoppers, more like a saint than an elevator operator, Hiromi Saito opened her mouth to do her duty.
"I thank you from the bottom of my heart for favoring us by paying an honorable visit to our store," she said in The Voice.
"I will stop at the floor  your honorable self is kind enough to use, and then I will go to the top floor."


COLLEGE BASKETBALL
St. John's


Facing Trial, Arkansas Governor Requests Times Reporter's Notes
Lawyers for Gov.
Jim Guy Tucker today filed court papers seeking access to the notes and tape recordings of an interview conducted by a New York Times reporter, Jeff Gerth, with a figure in the Whitewater investigation.
Governor Tucker is awaiting trial on fraud and conspiracy charges brought by  the special prosecutor in the Whitewater case.
The lawyers said Mr.
Gerth's records might include material important to Mr.
Tucker's defense.


Karl Schrag, Modernist Painter And Printmaker, Is Dead at 82
Karl Schrag, a German-born American painter and printmaker whose work combined aspects of European and American modernism, died on Sunday at his home  in Manhattan.
He was 82 and also had a home on Deer Isle, Me.
In a career that spanned more than 60 years, Mr.
Schrag came to specialize in a painting style characterized by loose, energetic brushwork and resonant colors that restated the concerns of van Gogh, Matisse and Kirchner in contemporary terms.


Harold L. Schiff, Lawyer for Actors, 76
Harold L. Schiff, a lawyer whose clients included many prominent show-business figures, died on Sunday at his home in Pound Ridge, N.Y.
He was 76.
Mr.
Schiff was born in New York City and was a graduate of Columbia University and Columbia Law School.
A senior partner in the firm of Gottlieb, Schiff, Bergman &amp; Sendroff, he represented such stars as Rex Harrison, Bette Davis, Claudette Colbert, Jim Dale and Glynis Johns.


Nets Stopped Cold In First Home Loss
Those dreadful quarters in which the Nets seem to forget the fundamentals of  basketball have been an all-too-frequent occurrence on the road, but they had never surfaced in the favorable confines of Byrne Meadowlands Arena -- until tonight.
As cold as the temperatures were outside, it was no colder than the Nets' shooting in the pivotal fourth quarter, when they missed an incredible 16 straight field-goal attempts.
That drought eventually helped the Orlando Magic escape with a 101-97 victory before a sellout crowd of 20,049.


Company Briefs


BUSINESS DIGEST
Conferees Back TV Chip To Block Violent Shows House and Senate conferees agreed to require television makers to include a computer chip in all new TV sets that would enable parents to block violent programs.
The chip would require the broadcasting and entertainment industries to devise a rating system for violent shows within one year.


Dollar Moves Higher as Traders Foresee a Rate Cut in Germany
The dollar rose yesterday as traders speculated that slowing German economic  growth would lead the Bundesbank to cut interest rates at its council meeting tomorrow.
The German Government said last week that the economy expanded 1.9 percent in the year that ended on Sept. 30, down from 2.5 percent in the year that ended on June 30.
And the Bundesbank, the German central bank, reported yesterday that inflation in western Germany fell to an annual rate of 1.3 percent in the six months that ended in November, from 1.6 percent in the period that ended in October.


Webber Sparks Bullets
Bullets 108, Bucks 102


Sixers Sign Skiles
The veteran point guard SCOTT SKILES signed a one-year contract yesterday with the Philadelphia 76ers and will start for the team tonight against Boston.
Skiles, 31, averaged 13 points and 7.3 assists a game for Washington last season before becoming a free agent.
AP


Old Sushi River, It Just Keeps Rolling
SUSHI bar or sushi barge?
At Tsunami, 70 West Third Street (La Guardia Place), a new million-dollar Japanese restaurant, the giant oval sushi bar in the middle of the room has sushi chefs at work in the center.
They are surrounded by a narrow channel of water with a constant current that carries a line of flat wooden boats around and around.
The chefs put plates of sushi on the boats, and customers remove the desired cargo as the boats pass.
Robert Hsueh, the owner, has patented the system, which includes boats handmade of hinoki, a kind of cypress used in Japanese baths.
There is also a full menu in addition to the sushi.
Though the restaurant's name means tidal wave, the mood of the place, which is filled with fine crafts, is quite serene.


Freud's Critics Don't Want to Suppress Ideas
To the Editor:
Re "Freud May Be Dead, but His Critics Still Kick" (Week in Review, Dec. 10), the article on the Library of Congress's planned Freud exhibition:


NEWS SUMMARY
International
A3-16


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Dec. 8
Dec. 1
Dec. 9
1995
1995
1994 Gasoline production, daily
7.7
7.8
7.9 Distillate production, daily
3.4
3.4
3.3 Gasoline stocks
195.3
195.6
213.0 Distillate stocks
135.7
135.1
142.1 Crude imports, daily
7.4
7.5
7.2 Product imports, daily
1.8
1.5
1.8 Crude stocks
312.6
317.3
338.3 Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.7 Refinery utilization (%)
93.4
93.7
92.2


Michael Jackson Checks Out


SHAW INDUSTRIES AGREES TO ACQUIRE MAXIM GROUP
Shaw Industries said yesterday that it planned to buy Maxim Group Inc. in a stock swap valued at about $115 million, based on the $15.125 closing price of Shaw's stock yesterday on The New York Stock Exchange.
Maxim Group, based in Kennesaw, Ga., owns and franchises floor-covering centers throughout the United  States.
Shaw makes and sells carpeting and rugs.


Two Debuts As 'Boheme' Returns
La Boheme" made an entertaining return to the Metropolitan Opera repertory on Monday evening, though not particularly because of the two company debuts.
This can be only a preliminary report on the Sicilian-born tenor Marcello Giordani, as Rodolfo.
Flashes of color in Act I suggested that the voice had yet to warm up, and sure enough, it suddenly came together for "Questa e Mimi" in Act II, which was fluid and pointed.
The rest of the way he sounded generally confident, if somewhat hard on top.
But Rodolfo's most important singing comes in Act I.


New Jersey Police Returning To Patrol Camden's Streets
The Whitman administration said today that it had reluctantly agreed to provide state troopers to help patrol the violent streets of Camden.
When city officials first asked for the aid in October, the state said no.
But even as Attorney General Deborah T. Poritz announced that Camden would get the troopers' help, she emphasized that they would not stay forever.


Wave of Optimism Lifts Budget Talks
Their differences narrowed by a new economic forecast, negotiators from the White House and Congress expressed optimism today that they could avert another  partial shutdown of the Government this weekend and eventually reach an overall  budget agreement.
But today's sunny mood was not based on the slightest progress in resolving their policy differences.
Both sides cautioned that they were by no means out of the woods.


WACHOVIA TRUST BUSINESSES IN 3 STATES TO BE SOLD
The Bank of New York Company said yesterday that it had agreed to buy the corporate trust business of Wachovia Bank of North Carolina, Wachovia Bank of South Carolina and Wachovia Bank of Georgia, all units of the Wachovia Corporation.
Terms were not disclosed.
Corporate trust departments oversee and process the payments bond issuers make to bondholders.
A spokeswoman for Wachovia said the business it had agreed to sell had 1,600 accounts, mostly in North Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia, representing about $20.3 billion worth of securities.


FOOD NOTES
Ah, Gingerbread


Panel Backs Bill Mandating Chip That Blocks Violent TV Shows
Giving their official endorsement to a deal quietly struck last week, House and Senate conferees agreed today to require television manufacturers to include in all new television sets a computer chip that would enable parents to block out violent programs.
The so-called V-chip measure, which had been opposed by House Republicans, would also require the broadcasting and entertainment industries to devise a rating system for violent shows within one year.
If they failed to do so, "guidelines" would be drawn up by the Federal Communications Commission.


Clinton Invokes Executive Privilege in Resisting Subpoena
In a brief filed this evening, the White House invoked executive privilege for the first time on Whitewater as it formally defended President Clinton's decision to defy Senate subpoenas.
The brief, filed with the Senate Whitewater committee, relied in part on legal arguments put forward in Watergate by President Richard M. Nixon and in the Iran-contra affair by former members of the Reagan Administration.


GATX UNIT OFFERS TO BUY CONTROL OF RAIL-CAR OPERATOR
The GATX Corporation's General American Transport unit said yesterday that it had offered $93 million (Canadian), or $67.4 million (United States), for Hawker Siddeley Canada Inc.'s controlling stake in CGTX Inc., a Canadian operator of a  fleet of railroad cars.
The move would strengthen the position of GATX, which is based in Chicago, as the lessor of the largest fleet of railroad tank cars in North America.
CGTX has 8,400 railroad cars, of which 4,300 are tank cars.
Hawker is based in Mississauga, Ontario.


Could a Stalker Have Been Stopped?
Kristin Lardner, a student at the School of the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston, was gunned down on the street on May 30, 1992.
She was a vibrant, gently rebellious 21-year-old whose fatal mistake was to have gotten into a brief romance with one Michael Cartier, a young man with a rap sheet three pages long.
When she tried to leave him, Mr.
Cartier killed her, and then, minutes later, killed himself.
George Lardner Jr., in this investigation of his daughter's murder, knows where ultimate blame should be placed: on the violent and sadistic Mr.
Cartier himself.
But his anger is all the greater because along the way there were many others who could have prevented the murder merely by doing their job.
Mr.
Lardner, a longtime reporter for The Washington Post, won a Pulitzer Prize in 1993 for a series of articles on Ms.
Lardner's death.
Here he extends his earlier investigation, attributing complacency, ineptitude and bungling to various judges, prosecutors and parole officers who, he argues, should have gotten Ms.
Lardner's murderer off the streets before he could take her life.


Happy Landing for French Pilots


The Ailey Troupe Explores Partnering
When Lar Lubovitch choreographed an astonishing duet called "Fandango" five years ago for his modern-dance company, the surprise was that it was danced to Ravel's "Bolero," a title that refers to another Spanish dance form.
Neither fandango nor bolero, this passionate exploration of dance partnering  has become the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater's latest hit.
Different couples will dance it through the company's season, which ends on Dec. 31 at City Center (131 West 55th Street, Manhattan), and Friday's performance will feature the troupe's first cast, Leonard Meek and Elizabeth Roxas.


Merck to Lift Spending
Merck &amp; Company said today that it planned to increase research and development spending 15 percent in 1996, to $1.5 billion from about $1.3 billion this year.
Merck's chairman and chief executive, Raymond Gilmartin, pledged his  commitment to research in a presentation to analysts at company headquarters here.
Merck also said that its pharmaceutical-benefits management business, Medco Containment Services, now provided benefits to 46 million people, compared with 41.5 million last year.


Cooper-Hewitt Project
To the Editor:
In mentioning the New York City museums undergoing facility improvements (editorial, Nov. 24), you did not include Cooper-Hewitt, National Design Museum.
It will emerge from a $20 million renovation with an expanded museum complex including a design study center, improved accessibility and greater collections  storage and management.


Kareem Brunner's Lesson
Kareem Brunner, a black security guard at Freddy's clothing store in Harlem,  died last Friday with six co-workers in a fire set by a lone gunman who was apparently deranged by his hatred for white businesses on 125th Street.
But Mr.
Brunner still speaks.
In an affidavit describing harassment by protesters picketing the store, he tells of being called a "cracker lover" and a "traitor"  to his race.
The Freddy's affidavits describe a poisonous atmosphere, in which protesters  shrieked about "bloodsucking Jews" and threatened to burn the store.
Yet until the disaster, few people outside of 125th Street knew about the protests.
Aides  to local politicians contended that the demonstrations were so small they scarcely noticed them.
"The only thing that came to us was a landlord-tenant dispute," said Representative Charles Rangel.


Clinton Gives Republicans Pledge on Arming Bosnians
President Clinton sent a letter tonight to Republican leaders that appeared to give them the written assurances they sought that the United States would lead an effort to arm and train the Bosnian Muslims.
The assurances that arrived on Capitol Hill tonight were meant to pave the way for the Senate to offer the President its grudging support for deploying American troops in Bosnia.
Mr.
Clinton heads to Paris Wednesday to sign the Bosnian peace accord.


Gtech Is Challenged in London Dispute
The entrepreneur Richard Branson challenged a United States lottery equipment company today to sue him in court after he accused its chairman of bribery.
Mr.
Branson's allegation has created an uproar over Britain's biggest gambling success story, the National Lottery, and raised questions about the actions of its independent regulator, Peter Davis.


Unwanted Gun, Unimagined Result
After some friends persuaded him that it was a good idea, Sam Walker bought a .38-caliber revolver several weeks ago to protect his family and home in this Houston suburb.
Mr.
Walker says he did not like guns and, until Monday, had never even fired one.


PPG Buys Paint Company
PPG Industries has acquired the Matthews Paint Company, a leading producer of paints for outdoor metal signs.
Terms of the deal, which was announced today, were not disclosed.
Matthews, which is based in Kenosha, Wis., becomes a PPG subsidiary reporting to the specialty coatings unit, which was created to pursue new markets.


Back to Business


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Bail Unchanged for Couple
Prosecutors, tipped off that a couple indicted in October for bribing Newark  city and school officials might try to flee the country, unsuccessfully tried to have their combined bail increased above $446,000, a state official said yesterday.
After a trip that prosecutors said took them to Indonesia and New Zealand, the couple, Roger C. Day Jr. and his wife, Christine Day, were arrested in Italy on Nov. 24 for using doctored passports.
"We didn't believe the amount of bail posted was sufficient to insure they would appear in court," said Andrew L. Rossner, chief of the state Attorney General's Official Corruption and Antitrust Bureau.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Birthday Salute to Sinatra
Their town's most famous son was celebrating in Los Angeles, but that didn't  stop fans in Hoboken from wishing Frank Sinatra a happy 80th birthday yesterday.
Mayor Anthony Russo cut the cake at a noon party held by Sparky Spaccavento, owner of Piccolo's Clam Bar.
"Mr. Sinatra," the Mayor toasted the absent singer, "your experience and your success actually mirror the experience and success of the city and its people. You came from humble beginnings, you had a dream, and you realized that  dream."
TERRY PRISTIN


Blaze Inquiry Is Focusing On Protests
Four days after a fiery attack on a Harlem clothing store left eight people dead, officials began to take a closer look yesterday at the community leaders who organized a racially charged boycott of the store in recent weeks, including the Rev.
Al Sharpton, senior police officials said yesterday.
While there was no indication that the community leaders had anything to do with the attack itself, the officials said they were looking at statements made  by Mr.
Sharpton and two other leaders of the protests against Freddy's clothing  store, Morris Powell and Sikhulu Shange, in the weeks before last Friday's attack, to determine whether they said anything to fan racial or anti-Semitic emotions.


Cold Becomes Routine For Most Residents
As the December sun slanted into the eyes of shoppers on midtown avenues and  of drivers on the region's highways, temperatures began falling again late yesterday for what meteorologists forecast would be the last night of the Northeast's first deep freeze of the season.
For all but the homeless and other poor residents of the region, the cold temperatures were becoming routine after three days, still killing car batteries and chilling holiday shopping but not causing major disruptions.


U.N. and Rwanda Agree to Extend Military Force for 3 Months
After nearly two weeks of confrontation between the Rwandan Government and the Security Council, the Council today extended for three months a peacekeeping mission the Rwandans say they do not want or need.
But the Council agreed to reduce the number of troops and to curtail the tasks they will perform.
Rwanda's representative, Manzi Bakuramutsa, said after agreement was reached  that this would be the last extension of the force.
He had been holding out for  only 800 troops; the United Nations proposed 1,400.


Subway Mumblers
To the Editor:
Re "Taking Mumbles Out of Subways" (news article, Dec. 5), on the New York City Transit Authority's plan to upgrade its public address system with fiber optic cables:


EATING WELL
WHEN the Jewish holiday of Hanukkah begins on Sunday evening, potato pancakes fried in oil, called latkes, will be served.
If, to reduce fat, you make them with pan spray, the ritualists might cry foul.
It's the oil for frying, not the potatoes, that commemorates Hanukkah, or the Feast of Lights.
The oil symbolizes the rededication of the Temple at Jerusalem  21 centuries ago, after the Maccabees defeated Antiochus of Syria.
On entering the Temple, the Maccabees found enough sacred oil to light the menorah for only  one day.
But the oil lasted eight days.


Freud's Critics Don't Want to Suppress Ideas;Psychiatric Care
To the Editor:
Re "Give Me Therapy -- or Else" (Op-Ed, Dec. 9):


Eaten Away by Marine Life, a Section of an East Side Wharf Collapses
A section of a 50-year-old wharf at a power plant on the East River collapsed yesterday morning, apparently after its pilings were eaten away by wood-boring marine organisms, city officials said.
The collapse led divers to discover that about a dozen adjacent pilings supporting the shoulder of the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive just south of East 15th Street were also "either deteriorated or missing," forcing the closing of the outer northbound lane for several hours, a city Transportation Department spokesman said.


Charging Standard for Some Electric Cars
The Chrysler Corporation and the Ford Motor Company took a small step today toward making electric cars more attractive to the public by agreeing to use the same type of charging system for the batteries.
But the General Motors Corporation, the nation's largest auto maker, is pursuing a different -- and incompatible -- charging system.


Report of High Internet Use Is Challenged
A Nielsen survey that concluded that there are more than 24 million highly educated and affluent adult users of the Internet in the United States and Canada may have "significantly inflated" its findings, perhaps by millions, the  study's principal academic adviser now says.
The highly publicized findings of the Commercenet/Nielsen Internet Demographic Survey are based on fundamental flaws that render its conclusions invalid, said Donna L. Hoffman, a business professor at Vanderbilt University in Nashville.


A Guard Most Likely to Be Traded
Last night's Nets-Orlando Magic game featured the best point guard in basketball versus the best point guard on the trading block.
Anfernee (Penny) Hardaway may be headed for the most valuable player award.
Kenny Anderson may be headed for any number of teams, including the Knicks, depending on which rumors you believe.


Maradona Is Acquitted
The Argentine soccer star DIEGO MARADONA and his former personal manager, GUILLERMO COPPOLA, were acquitted yesterday of drug trafficking.
A Rome court ruled that the accusations were unfounded, the Italian news agency ANSA reported.
The case dates to 1989, when Maradona played with the Naples team in Italy's first division.
AP


Darren Robinson, Fat Boys Rapper, 28
Darren Robinson, the 450-pound member of the rap group the Fat Boys, who were known for vocally mimicking the sounds of a drum machine, died on Sunday at his  home in Queens.
He was 28.
The cause was cardiac arrest during a bout with respiratory flu, said Charles Stettler, who named and managed the band.
Mr.
Robinson was rapping for friends when he fell off a chair and lost consciousness.


Panthers Could Be Models For Milbury on Rebuilding
If Mike Milbury is looking for a model on how to build a competitive team in  a short time, he was probably taking a good look at who came into Nassau Coliseum and defeated Milbury's Islanders tonight.
The streaking Florida Panthers, only two seasons removed from expansion, scored 29 seconds into the game, then twice more in the second period.
Three goals is not a lot.
But for a team with this kind of defense and goaltending (the backup Mark Fitzpatrick made 33 saves), it was easily enough, as the Panthers skated their way to a ho-hum 3-1 victory in front of a season-low 8,085 fans.


Judge Upholds Ruling
A judge has decided not to change his ruling allowing the New Mexico freshman KENNY THOMAS to play, despite the National Collegiate Athletic Association's contention that the university withheld evidence challenging his eligibility.
State District Judge DANIEL SCHNEIDER on Monday denied an N.C.A.A. motion to lift a preliminary injunction he issued last month allowing Thomas to play.
AP


Serbs Free 2 Pilots, Clearing an Obstacle to Signing Accord
Two French pilots, detained by the Bosnian Serbs for more than three months and at times feared to be dead, were freed today by their captor, Gen.
Ratko Mladic, who handed them over to French officers at a motel in Bosnia.
The release of Capt.
Frederic Chiffot and Lieut.
Jose Souvignet, who were shot down when their Mirage 2000 was hit by a Bosnian Serb missile during a NATO raid on Aug. 30, cleared away a last obstacle to the formal signing of the Bosnia peace accord in Paris on Thursday.


Texas Executes Man for Fatal '80 Robbery
A member of a fearsome prison gang known as the Aryan Brotherhood was executed by injection today for his part in a 1980 robbery in which two men were killed.
The man, James Michael Briddle, 40, was strapped to the death-chamber gurney  about an hour after the United States Supreme Court rejected a final appeal.


Larry Maxwell, 43, Stage and Film Actor
Larry Maxwell, an actor in theater and films, died on Thursday at his home in Laurelville, Ohio.
He was 43.
The cause was leukemia, said his manager, T. C. Rice.


Singing the Steelworker Blues;A Mini-Mill Deal at LTV Leaves Union Feeling Jilted
For seven long years, the steelworkers here say, they stood by the LTV Corporation as it fought its way back from the brink of collapse.
Thousands lost their jobs, and the survivors made numerous wage and benefit concessions to ease LTV's load.
Today, with the company prospering again, the workers say they are reaping the fruit of their collaboration: betrayal.


172 Museum Pieces For World Cup Draw
The world's most popular sporting event graced the world's most famous museum tonight.
The occasion was the draw for the qualifying rounds of the 1998 World Cup soccer tournament, a draw conducted in the Carrousel du Louvre, the new and well-polished annex full of shops and conference rooms that adjoins the home of  the Mona Lisa and the Venus de Milo.


In Corporate Suites, Coaches Are Quite at Home
Seven middle-aged, white, male university executives convened yesterday to celebrate donations of about $60 million to their schools.
As one of them noted, reflecting the consensus, "We've got a pretty good system here right now."
They seemed about as satisfied yet alert as any group of super salesmen flown to New York to mingle with the suits.
They wore their hair short and spoke in laconic twangs, like airline pilots.
Most had on blue blazers, white shirts and  black slip-on shoes with those little golf-ish tassels.
There were flashes of individual style.
The Indiana man was funny, California was stiff and Nebraska was sanctimonious.


As Mill's Ruins Smolder, Massachusetts Dream Is Doused
Ever since Aaron Feuerstein moved his grandfather's sweater manufacturing business here 40 years ago, the Malden Mills textile complex has been a symbol of hope and pride in the blue collar mill towns of the Merrimack Valley.
It was  the anchor of the economy of northeastern Massachusetts and turned out one of America's most profitable lines of winter wear.
But on Monday night, wind-driven flames from an explosion sent Mr.
Feuerstein's dream up in smoke and flame, and left Methuen and dozens of other small towns in the area in a state of shock and despair, barely three weeks before Christmas.


Torre Is Sure of Only One Thing: Jeter Is His Shortstop
Joe Torre still does not know whether David Cone will pitch on opening day for the Yankees, but the new manager revealed yesterday that Derek Jeter will play shortstop.
The hype that has followed Jeter throughout a marvelous minor league career will finally be transferred to the Bronx on a full-time basis.
Torre, who spoke about how Cone's uncertain status has delayed other decisions, probably spoke too optimistically in deeming Dwight Gooden a potential second or third starter and definitely spoke too optimistically in discussing future interference from George Steinbrenner.
But the Jeter announcement indicated the Yankees can still make some plausible decisions.


Crystal Temptations
To The Living Section:


INQUIRY BY ARMY FOCUSES ON HATE
Alarmed by the killing of a black man and woman in North Carolina last week,  in which two white soldiers have been charged, the Army today ordered a sweeping investigation into extremist activities in its 510,000-member ranks.
Army Secretary Togo D. West Jr. directed the service's deputy inspector general, Maj.
Gen.
Larry R. Jordan, a former commander at Fort Knox, Ky., to lead a high-level team in reviewing major Army bases in the United States, Europe and South Korea, and to report back by March 1.


Some Offer Hope to the Neediest Year After Year
Every year since 1979, Ruth Marton has sent $100 to the New York Times Neediest Cases Fund in memory of her sister, Gerd Muehsam, a Holocaust survivor.
This year, Ms.
Marton added $25 to her contribution to honor her good friend and distant relative Eugene Dorfman, who died in late November.
"Perhaps I can bring a bit of unexpected comfort to an elderly, ailing and lonely woman, possibly a Hitler refugee, as were my sister and I," Ms.
Marton wrote in a letter to the fund.


About Organ Donations
To the Editor:
Re "The Perils of Dialysis," your Dec. 4-6 front-page series: The National Kidney Foundation is conducting a holiday resolution campaign.
Anyone interested in obtaining additional information on organ donation and a free donor card may  call (800) 622-9010.


Caffeine-Sensitive Heart
To The Living Section:


NBC's Triple Play Bolsters the I.O.C. and Its Chief
NBC's $2.3 billion shopping spree yesterday has lent financial certainty to the International Olympic Committee for a dozen years and given additional political security to the committee's 75-year-old president, Juan Antonio Samaranch, should he decide to run for re-election in 1997.
Since assuming the presidency in 1980, Samaranch has worked vigorously to rid the modern Olympics of any vestige of amateurism, from participants to marketing.
College stars are out in basketball and ice hockey, professionals are in.
Corporations pay $40 million each to become worldwide sponsors of the Winter and Summer Games.


G.M. and Poland Agree To Build Opel Plant
The General Motors Corporation and the Polish Government reached agreement yesterday on G.M.'s plan to build a factory in Poland for about $350 million.
In Warsaw, G.M. and officials of the Ministry of Industry and Trade said Adam Opel  A.G., the German unit of G.M., had presented a plan to the Government for the factory to be built next year, and it had been accepted.


Corrections
A brief report by the Dow Jones News Service in Business Day yesterday about  the Trizec Corporation misstated the amount spent by the company to raise its stake in two San Diego shopping malls and to buy leases in six other retail centers.
The total investment was $164 million in United States dollars, not Canadian dollars.


U.S. Agency Denies A Drug Approval Gap
A NEW report from the Food and Drug Administration asserts that contrary to what critics have said, there are no important drugs on the market in Germany and England that are not on the market in the United States but should be.
Dr.
David A. Kessler, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, told a gathering of representatives of the the pharmaceutical industry on Tuesday that with the release of this report it is time to put to rest the incorrect perception that important, effective drugs were routinely available in other countries, but not  here in the United States.


15 Are Killed by Car Bomb Near Algiers
A car bomb killed 15 people and wounded more than 40 in Algiers today in the  worst attack since last month's presidential elections, the state-run television of Algeria reported.
No one yet claimed responsibility for the attack but suspicion immediately fell on Islamic militants who have carried out a violent campaign for nearly four years in an effort to unseat the Government.
The fighting has left as many  as 30,000 Algerians dead.


O'Neal Could Play on Friday
Long after his teammates had left Fairleigh Dickinson's gymnasium today, Shaquille O'Neal stayed behind.
He worked on spin moves.
He worked on fadeaway jumpers.
And yes, he worked on free throws.
O'Neal, the Orlando Magic's part-time rap artist and full-time All-Star center, will return to the lineup this week, most likely Friday night in Orlando against the Utah Jazz, although he will be in uniform on the bench Wednesday night in Chicago as he was tonight against the Nets.
Whenever O'Neal returns, he will wear a protective splint over the broken right thumb that forced him to miss the first seven weeks of the season.
O'Neal will also make the Magic even better, despite their surprising 16-4 record without him heading into tonight's  game against the Nets.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Playing Cards to the Troops
More than 7,600 decks of playing cards from the gambling tables of Atlantic City will soon be in the hands of United States servicemen traveling to Bosnia,  an American Red Cross official said yesterday.
Seven casinos responded after the organization's Atlantic County chapter requested the cards on Friday, said Debbie Van Sant, the executive director.


After Blaze, Mourning Loved Ones
They gathered in dimly lighted funeral parlors in Manhattan, Queens and the Bronx yesterday, separate faces, separate families, linked by circumstance and one woeful act at a clothing store on 125th Street in Harlem.
Four days after eight people died in a blaze at Freddy's, including the man who set fire to the store, the families and friends of the victims comforted each other and struggled to cope with their grief.


Vincent S. Baker, 75, Advocate For Discrimination-Free Harlem
Vincent S. Baker, who devoted his life to keeping black history alive while pursuing a vision of a bias-free Harlem society, died on Monday at Beth Israel Medical Center.
A lifelong resident of Harlem, he was 75.
His sister Ruth Baker Harwell said the cause was a heart attack.


Dow Drops by 9.40 and Other Indexes Also Fall
A slide in technology stocks, combined with diminished hopes for an interest  rate cut by the end of the year, kept stock prices in negative territory yesterday.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 9.40, to 5,174.92.
Broad market indexes also fell.
Eastman Kodak, Allied Signal, United Technologies and Union Carbide all fell a point or more.


New York Teachers Had No Choice but to Reject Flawed Contract;Sacrifice for All
To the Editor:
"The Teachers Say No" (editorial, Dec. 9) declares that a two-year wage freeze for teachers is "a sacrifice justified by the worst fiscal crisis in the  city in a generation."


Rebecca C. McGreevy, Estee Lauder Executive, 62
Rebecca C. McGreevy, a senior vice president of public relations at the Estee Lauder Companies, died on Monday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
She was 62.
The cause of death was heart failure, a company spokeswoman said.


Group Sues To Halt Sale Of Reservoirs
A coalition of civic, housing and environmental groups from New York City and Westchester County announced yesterday that it had filed suit to block Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to sell the city's water and sewer system to a quasi-public state authority.
The group also announced that it would join City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi in his court battle with Mr.
Giuliani over the proposed sale of the waterworks's vast array of 19 upstate reservoirs, 14 sewage treatment plants and miles of pipelines.
The Mayor sued the Comptroller last month after Mr.
Hevesi used his power to block the sale of bonds needed for the plan to proceed.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Special Education Is Debated
Mark J. Finkelstein, president of the New Jersey School Boards Association, testified yesterday that some students would lose vital services under the State Department of Education's proposal to cut special-education aid to districts that classify more than 10 percent of their students as having special needs.
But Deputy Education Commissioner Richard A. DiPatri told the joint Senate and Assembly Education Committee hearing that some students are placed in costly special education programs for the wrong reasons.


Blaming It on Her Husband
Representative Enid Waldholtz, the Utah Republican, cannot hide from charges  that her Congressional campaign took illegal contributions by contending that her husband made all the big money decisions in the family.
Whatever plausibility that lame excuse had in the old days has surely disappeared in this age when women have, rightly, gained greater command of their own destinies in politics and the workplace.
The fact is that Mrs.
Waldholtz won her seat in a come-from-behind election largely through the help of heavy last-minute financing that she now admits may have been illegal.
Representative Waldholtz does seem to have drawn a short straw in the marriage lottery.
Her husband, Joe, who became familiar to millions of TV watchers as the delegate with the silliest hat at the last Republican convention, told her he was a wealthy man with a big trust account.
But now she  says she has discovered that Mr.
Waldholtz is a penniless con man who embezzled  money from everybody, including his wife, his father-in-law and even humble aides in Mrs.
Waldholtz's Congressional office.


No Sign of Lost Russian Jet
Officials searching for the wreckage of a plane in Russia's Far East used helicopters, planes and ships today, but turned up no new leads five days after  the jet disappeared.
A spokesman for Moscow's Emergency Situations Ministry said workers thought a satellite photograph showed evidence of what could be the tail and other scattered debris.


Sports of The Times;Swan Song Of an Old Sooner
DAN Reeves chuckled yesterday when he was asked to characterize the Giants' game in Dallas this Sunday.
No, this won't be the clash of titans it has sometimes been in the past when  the Giants and the Cowboys were vying for supremacy.


University Agrees to Pay In Settlement On Medicare
The University of Pennsylvania's health system has agreed to pay $30 million  to settle Government complaints that it filed improper Medicare bills for doctors's services, Federal prosecutors in Philadelphia said today.
The settlement, which Government officials said appeared to be the largest Medicare settlement by a single health care provider, followed a Government audit of 100 patients treated in 1993 by doctors affiliated with the University  of Pennsylvania.


CIRCUIT CITY SUBSIDIARY TO SELL NEW CHRYSLERS
The Chrysler Corporation agreed yesterday to let the used-car subsidiary of Circuit City Stores Inc. sell new Chryslers, Plymouths, Jeeps and Eagles on its  lot in Norcross, Ga.
Circuit City is primarily a retailer of consumer electronics and appliances, but its Carmax unit operates four auto lots that stock late-model used cars.
E.
Thomas Pappert, Chrysler's vice president for sales, acknowledged that some Chrysler dealers had opposed granting a franchise to Carmax.
He said Chrysler did not expect any similar agreements.


Behind the Ghastly Photo
Leona's Sister Gerri" was shown as part of this year's New Directors/ New Films Series. Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared  in The New York Times on March 31. The film opens today at the Cinema Village, 22 East 12th Street.
We knew the corpse, naked and abject, but we never knew the story.
Or we didn't until "Leona's Sister Gerri," Jane Gillooly's searingly effective study of an infamous photograph and how it came into being.
Patiently piecing together the facts behind this wrenching image, Ms.
Gillooly brings a wide breadth of understanding to the tragedy she uncovers.


Hypocrite Hit Parade
Whatever happened to gangsta rap?
It was only six months ago that Bob Dole and William Bennett grabbed headlines by decrying Time Warner for distributing songs with violent and misogynist lyrics.
Now these politicians have moved on to new battles in the culture wars -- reaping fresh ink by speaking out against show-biz nightmares of depravity like "Money Train" and Ricki Lake.
They don't talk about gangsta rap much anymore, and no wonder.
If the goal of their last battle was to protect children from such music, it was a total bust.


T.W.A. SUES ICAHN, ITS FORMER OWNER, OVER TICKET SALES
Trans World Airlines Inc. filed a lawsuit yesterday against its former owner, Carl C. Icahn, asking the court to stop his travel agency businesses from selling T.W.A. tickets to the public at discounts of up to 25 percent.
Mr.
Icahn denied any wrongdoing and accused the airline of trying to disrupt the businesses, Global Discount Travel Services and Global Travel Marketing Service  of Las Vegas, Nev.
To repay a $190 million loan, T.W.A. had given Mr.
Icahn rights to sell T.W.A. tickets with a face value of $610 million.
T.W.A. contends that Mr.
Icahn broke an agreement to sell his tickets only to corporations or businesses that put together blocks of seats for international travelers.
Instead, the agencies are selling the tickets to the public directly or through  travel agents, sometimes at discounts, according to the lawsuit filed by T.W.A.  in St.
Louis Circuit Court.
Mr.
Icahn said that the agreement stated that the tickets could be marketed by his businesses and by travel agents.


In Election, Russian Communist Starts to Sound Like a Communist
The leader of Russia's Communist Party should be having a ball right now.
When voters elect a new Parliament on Sunday there is little doubt that his slate will win more votes than any other.
But the Communist leader, Gennadi A. Zyuganov, has suddenly begun to discover that resurrection has its price.
For months he has sold himself and his party as being more like Western European Social Democrats than the gruesome Stalinists Russia thought it put to the stake four years ago.


TOMKINS AGREES TO BUY GATES RUBBER
Tomkins P.L.C. of London said yesterday that it would acquire the Gates Rubber Company from the Gates Corporation for an undisclosed amount of stock and the assumption of $240 million in debt.
Additional terms of the transaction will not be disclosed until a definitive agreement is reached.
The choice of Tomkins, a diversified industrial company, caps a nine-month selection process for the Gates family, the primary shareholders of the Gates Corporation, one of the world's largest privately held companies.
The board of Gates, which is based in  Denver, reviewed final bids this week from Tomkins, Tenneco Inc. and a third finalist, which was believed to be the Dana Corporation.
Gates Rubber makes power transmission belts, automotive hoses and connectors and has $1.4 billion in annual sales.


House Ethics Panel Proposes Limit on Royalties From Books
The House ethics committee today proposed a new rule to prohibit members from earning more than $20,400 a year in book royalties, saying the step was necessary since Speaker Newt Gingrich's book deal "creates the impression of exploiting one's office for personal gain."
If the House leadership agrees to bring the rules change up before Congress quits for the year and it is adopted, it would take effect on Jan. 1 and could cut into royalties still due the Speaker for his book, "To Renew America," which sold well last summer, but is now offered at cut rates.


A Quick Bean Soup, Via Italy
This looks like a long recipe, and it does have many ingredients.
But with a  food processor, all the cutting and chopping goes quickly.
In 30 minutes or sooner, you have a very hearty and quick version of a Tuscan bean soup that is thickened with bread and that ordinarly takes hours to make.
The pancetta or prosciutto is optional.
If you don't use either, add a little salt.
And if you like, a salad can be served on the side.
1. Chop whole onion.


Political Memo;Pataki Shows Brighter Side Of '96 Budget
When he took office in January, Gov.
George E. Pataki vowed to break the state's decade-long tradition of passing late budgets.
He threatened to close down state government.
He withheld the pay of legislators and their aides.
Still, he failed: the 1995 budget was the second latest on record.
Mr.
Pataki walked away from that fight bloodied in more ways than one.
Not only was he blamed for late passage of the budget, he was also best known during his first months in office as the author of a budget that ordered deep spending  cuts for many cherished programs.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:


A Wal-Mart Rating Cut Is Under Study
Moody's Investors Service said yesterday that it was considering lowering its debt ratings on Wal-Mart Stores Inc., which has about $8.6 billion of long-term  debt, because it expected the retailer's growth to slow.
Moody's, which is owned by Dun &amp; Bradstreet, said it expected retailing to remain competitive as weak consumer demand constrained sales growth and profit margins industrywide.


A Couple of Wacky Laboratory Mice
In the grand tradition of Ralph Kramden and Ed Norton, the season's funniest, most engaging buddy team includes a smart aleck with big plans and his none-too-bright best friend.
As the catchy theme song to "Pinky and the Brain" tells you, "they're laboratory mice, whose genes have been spliced," and being cartoons doesn't hinder their ambition.
In every episode, Pinky and the Brain plot to take over the world.
"Steven Spielberg Presents Pinky and the Brain" is a spinoff of the insanely  clever "Animaniacs," the hit series also produced by Mr.
Spielberg's company.
Like "Animaniacs," the newer show has plenty of silly stories and "Tom and Jerry"-style slapstick to tickle children; it also comes with "Rocky and Bullwinkle"-type wisecracks that zoom over children's heads.
The childlike Pinky and the grown-up Brain are smartly paired family heroes.


Canada Is Doubtful on Salinas, but the U.S. Hints at Welcome
Carlos Salinas de Gortari, Mexico's former President, will face tightened immigration restrictions in Canada, where he has made his base since traveling into exile in March.
But the Clinton Administration threw down a welcome mat for Mr.
Salinas today, calling him "a friend of many people in the United States."
Canada's move complicates efforts by Mr.
Salinas to establish a stable overseas home.
Several weeks ago, the former President was reported to be in Cuba.


Jesse Jackson Jr. Elected
Jesse Jackson Jr. overwhelmingly defeated his Republican opponent today in a  special Congressional election.
The 30-year-old Democrat, who is the son of Jesse Jackson, the civil rights leader, had been heavily favored to defeat Thomas Somer, the Republican, in the predominantly Democratic district on Chicago's South Side and southern suburbs.


No Headline
This is the first time in history we'll be amending the Bill of Rights.
Do we really hold the symbol more important than the principle?
Is the flag really  more important than freedom of speech?" -- SENATOR TOM DASCHLE. [B10:5.]
"Today the Senate must decide whether this is freedom or the abuse of freedom. Will the Senate of the United States confuse liberty with license?" -- SENATOR ORRIN G. HATCH. [A1:2.]


Oilers Put McNair in the Limelight
At Alcorn State in Mississippi, Steve McNair was a show unto himself -- 16,823 yards in career total offense, 400.55 yards a game, both the best ever.
In his last college game, despite a strained hamstring that limited his mobility, he completed 52 of 82 for 514 yards, and so what if his team lost by 43 points.
So what if Alcorn State played against Division I-AA teams rather than the Division I-A powerhouses.
In April's National Football League draft, the Houston Oilers made him the third choice over all and gave him a contract worthy of the great quarterback they think he will be -- $28.4 million over seven years.


ADDENDA
Accounts *
Bell Atlantic Corp., Arlington, Va., to Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising and its  media buying services unit, Zenith Media, both of New York and owned by Cordiant P.L.C., as the agency of record for broadcast on its account, with billings estimated at $40 million.
Those duties were previously handled by J. Walter Thompson New York, a unit of the WPP Group.
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi handles most of the creative portion of the Bell Atlantic account. *
Cellular One, Schaumburg, Ill., to Cramer-Krasselt, Chicago, to handle advertising, public relations and direct marketing in the Chicago market, previously handled by Smith, Badofsky &amp; Raffel, Chicago.
The billings were estimated at $7 million.


Reformers In Russia Scramble For Votes
With four days left before parliamentary elections here, the Russian Government's political leadership is spending much of its time trying not to panic -- and the rest of the time reminding voters that Communism was, is and always will be bad.
At a news conference today, Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin acknowledged that the Communists would prevail on Sunday.
But he added that even if they did, his Government would continue its policies of reform.


BLACK &amp; DECKER TO SELL A TECHNOLOGY UNIT
The Black &amp; Decker Corporation of Towson, Md., agreed yesterday to sell PRC Inc., its information technology and services business, to Litton Industries for $425 million.
The sale will allow Black &amp; Decker, best known for its power tools and household appliances, to improve its balance sheet and to focus on core businesses, the company said.
Proceeds will be used to pay down debt.
Litton, of Woodland Hills, Calif., said PRC had estimated sales of about $720 million in 1995.
PRC designs and supports computer-based information systems for the Federal Government, commercial customers and state and local governments.


Turks Seek Acceptance Of Culture In Germany
When her father died 15 years ago, Nilgul Imrencler buried him in the Muslim  section of the Cologne West cemetery, believing that his grave would enjoy eternal serenity.
In a land where there are rules for everything, though, she was unaware of the bylaws for the dead.


RIGEL ENERGY TO ACQUIRE AN OIL COMPANY IN ALBERTA
The Rigel Energy Corporation agreed yesterday to acquire all of the outstanding common stock of Inverness Petroleum Ltd. in a transaction valued at  $380 million (Canadian), or $275 million (United States).
Under the terms of the offer, Inverness shareholders will receive 0.625 of a Rigel share for each of the 31.5 million common shares held.
A combination of the two oil and gas concerns based in Calgary, Alberta, would significantly increase Rigel's resources.
Proven gas reserves would rise 79 percent, while proven liquid reserves would increase 58 percent.
Production of liquids by the combined operations would rise 74 percent, while natural gas production would increase 144 percent.


Argentina's Hard Rock Cafe Shuttered in Trademark Dispute
When Charles Lewis, a British developer, was looking for new countries in which to open Hard Rock Cafe franchises, Argentina seemed ideal: it has a large  middle class that prides itself on keeping up with trends.
Mr.
Lewis -- whose family owns Hard Rock Cafe outlets in Puerto Rico, St.
Thomas and the Bahamas -- was right.
Since opening in the Recoleta district here two months ago, the restaurant, which features rock-and-roll memorabilia, has been drawing about 10,000 patrons a week.


Evangeline Bruce, 77, Hostess Known for Washington Soirees
Evangeline Bruce, the widow of one of the most influential diplomats of the cold war and one of Washington's last grand hostesses, died on Tuesday at her home in Washington.
She was 77.
Mrs.
Bruce -- whose husband, David K. E. Bruce, was the United States envoy to France, Germany, Britain, China and NATO before his death in 1977 -- was known for her legendary soirees at their Georgetown home, at once properly old-fashioned and glitteringly up to the minute.
Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis once sent her a note praising "the bright path you cut through an age where so few people have grace and imagination and the virtues of another time."


Bosnia and Serbia Plan Ties, But Not Croatia and Serbia
Bosnia and Serbia will establish diplomatic relations as part of the peace treaty to be signed here on Thursday, Richard C. Holbrooke, Assistant Secretary  of State, said here today.
Mr.
Holbrooke told reporters, however, that Serbia and Croatia were not yet ready to take a similar step.
He declined to provide any details.


De La Hoya Looking To Win Over Fight Fans
With his Olympic medal, Golden Boy nickname and the adulation of the Mexican-American community, Oscar De La Hoya has been as conscious of his image  as if he were trying to sell a squeaky-clean bar of soap.
But one thing he has never had is the admiration of New York fight fans.
And  so the lightweight champion (World Boxing Organization version) is going to try to win them over by becoming more of a slugger when big-time boxing returns  to Madison Square Garden tomorrow night.


Only 4% Rise In Federal Express Net
The Federal Express Corporation said today that its fiscal second-quarter net income rose a lower-than-expected 4 percent on higher costs resulting from a work slowdown by its pilots' union and declining international profits.
For the quarter ended Nov. 30, net income rose to $89.9 million, or $1.57 a share, from $86.1 million, or $1.53, a year ago.


Knicks Are at Ease Playing For Nelson
Don Nelson cannot believe how quickly they have adjusted.
General Manager Ernie Grunfeld and Dave Checketts, president of Madison Square Garden, are crossing their fingers, hoping their new coach and their old players continue their sprinter's pace.
Their fans have done everything but form a half-circle round the locker room and touch their foreheads for signs of a fever.
Almost no one expected the Knicks to be this hot, this early after losing Pat Riley in the off season and adding no one new except a backup point guard like Gary Grant to their roster.


Corrections
A brief front-page report yesterday summarizing an article about the White House response to subpoenas from the Senate Whitewater Committee misstated the reason cited by the White House for its resistance.
It cited executive privilege along with attorney-client privilege, not in place of it.


Stocks Rise in Japan
Stocks traded higher here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 215.82 points, or 1.12 percent, at 19,499.30.
On Wednesday, the Nikkei slipped 29.29 points, or 0.15 percent.


Bavarian Law Orders Crucifixes for Schools
The Bavarian state parliament today passed a new law ordering crucifixes to be hung in school classrooms after the German supreme court ruled the southern state's previous law unconstitutional.
The Federal Constitutional Court ruled in August that Bavaria could not insist that crucifixes hang in state classrooms because this violated the religious freedom enshrined in the constitution.


Ebersol Is the Big-Play Man at NBC
For Dick Ebersol, the biggest deal in the history of television, the $2.3 billion agreement that he engineered between NBC and the International Olympic Committee for rights to the Games of 2004, 2006, and 2008, represents the culmination of both his professional and his personal life.
The deal, announced Tuesday, put the largest possible exclamation point behind the "big-event" strategy that Ebersol devised to bring NBC Sports back from oblivion, a strategy -- securing the most prominent sports events for NBC on a long-term basis -- that he believed had reached a high point with his surprise coup of grabbing the rights for the 2000 and 2002 Games in a $1.25 billion deal announced last August.


Metro Matters;On 125th St., Patrons Reject Race Boycotts
EVERY now and again, something happens in New York City that brings to mind that old children's game, the one that asks, "What's wrong with this picture?" The evolving story in Harlem is the latest such event.
If the residents of Harlem are so hostile to whites, if the racial tensions on 125th Street run so deep, then why was Freddy's -- the store destroyed in a murderous attack that took eight lives -- intent on expanding?
And why are Korean-, Hispanic- and Jewish-owned stores routinely attracting black customers?


Cogen Seeks a Partner
Cogen Technologies Inc., the nation's largest privately held independent power producer, said today that it was seeking a partner to accelerate its expansion in international markets.
Houston-based Cogen, which has raised more than $3 billion for domestic power investments, has hired CS First Boston to review its options for growth outside the United States, and potential partners.


Ex-Patrolman Is Released
Laurence M. Powell, one of two former police officers convicted in the videotaped beating of a black motorist here, was released from Federal controls  today after serving more than two years.
The final two months of Mr.
Powell's sentence were served under home confinement, in which he had to call a supervisor every day and meet other conditions.


10 Suspected Ebola Cases Turn Out to Be Cholera
Easing fears about another potential Ebola epidemic, the World Health Organization said today that 10 of 15 suspected cases in Liberia were in fact cholera.
The United Nations agency had said last week that one Liberian refugee had fallen sick with Ebola and had likely infected four other people sharing his hut in a border village near the Ivory Coast.


Essay;Punditsky's Report
Here is Gennady Punditsky with my insider's forecast of Sunday's Russian election, including how to instantly analyze results, also what it will all mean.
"The Commies are coming!" is what your American headlines are screaming.
Polls say Communist Party will win 25 percent of party vote for seats in the Duma.
This noisy Parliament is our version of U.N.
General Assembly -- all talk, with real power remaining in Kremlin -- but its election is like snow blowing in wind about presidential election next June.


CITATION SHARES DROP 22% ON EARNINGS ESTIMATE
Shares of the Citation Corporation fell 22 percent yesterday after the company said that based on preliminary information, it would not meet analysts'  earnings expectations for the quarter ending on Dec. 31.
According to First Call Inc., Citation, which is based in Birmingham, Ala., was expected to earn 28 cents a share in the first quarter.
The company, a maker of iron, steel and aluminum casting, did not disclose a reason for the expected weak results.
In last year's first quarter, Citation earned $3.1 million, or 24 cents a share, on sales of $59.3 million.
Citation shares fell $3.25, to $11.50, in Nasdaq trading.


Howard Bartnick, Wall St. Lawyer, 43
Howard A. Bartnick, a senior investment banking lawyer, died on Friday while  at a business meeting in Manhattan.
He was 43 and lived in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
The cause was heart failure, said Sarah A. Luke, a spokeswoman for Paine Webber Inc., the investment banking concern where Mr.
Bartnick worked as a senior vice president and general counsel for capital markets and investment banking.


Bill Seeks to End Automatic Citzenship for All Born in the U.S.
A House panel today began considering a new and unusual idea to discourage illegal immigration: amending the Constitution to end the automatic grant of citizenship to everyone born in the United States.
The proposal is among a small group of bills, most introduced by House Republicans, that would amend or reinterpret the Constitution to deny citizenship to children born in the United States if their parents are illegal aliens.
To accomplish that, the Congress would have to repeal part of the 14th Amendment, which was adopted after the Civil War to insure citizenship for former slaves and their offspring.


German Aid For Victims Of Torture
When Johannes Hundee Hurisso was released after 12 years in an Ethiopian prison, torture had devastated both his mind and body.
Guards had beaten him relentlessly in what they said were efforts "to chase the devils of counterrevolution from your mind," and upon his release in 1991 he was unable to walk and barely able to breathe.


Cause of Wharf Collapse Still Investigated
The possibility that a 200-foot barge, as well as voracious marine organisms, played a role in the collapse of an East River wharf on Tuesday was under investigation yesterday.
"We have not ruled anything out," said Richard Mulieri, director of public information for Consolidated Edison, which leased the wharf from the city.


NBC Selling Microsoft a Stake in Cable Channel
NBC and the Microsoft Corporation will announce a deal today under which Microsoft would buy a 50 percent interest in NBC's cable channel America's Talking as part of an effort to form an all-news channel that could challenge the Cable News Network, executives close to the negotiations said last night.
Microsoft is expected to pay an estimated $100 million for the half-interest  in the channel, which would be renamed since its format would no longer consist of all-talk programming.
NBC would operate the channel, relying on its network news organization as well as its affiliate news service, which is based  in Charlotte, N.C.
NBC's affiliated stations are also expected to provide news material to the channel.


Pushed Off Platform, Woman Escapes Under Oncoming Train
A 46-year-old woman was pushed off a Brooklyn subway platform last night as a train pulled in, but she escaped with cuts and a broken wrist after the train ran directly over her on the tracks, the police said.
The man who pushed her -- apparently a stranger -- escaped from the crowded station even as several bystanders yelled "Grab him," the police said.
Investigators were uncertain of his motive, since the woman said she had not spoken to the suspect and the police said the attack did not appear to be a robbery attempt.


Temple's Inside Game Stops No. 2 Villanova
Derrick Battie, Marc Jackson and Lynard Stewart scored 12 points apiece tonight as Temple handed No. 2-ranked Villanova its first loss of the season, 62-56.
Villanova (7-1) trailed by 55-47 with 2 minutes 49 seconds to play before rallying behind Kerry Kittles, who shot 2 for 14 from the floor but scored 5 of  his 10 points in the final 1:15.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a wake for a victim of the attack referred  incorrectly in some editions to the woman shown at the coffin of Angelina Marrero.
She was an unidentified relative, not Ms.
Marrero's mother.


Poster Boy For a Drop In Crime;The Out-of-Town Press Makes Bratton a Hero
He was a brassy, bigger-than-life Police Commissioner until last February, when Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani vetoed his idea of a police parade down Broadway  on his birthday, cut his press staff in half and made it clear that he should reduce his public profile.
But while William J. Bratton now projects a more modest profile in New York,  limiting reporters' access to his activities and allowing the Mayor to take credit for the city's drop in crime, the Commissioner has still managed to become something of a national and international media star.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Representative Pat Schroeder's call for the resignation of Representative Enid Greene Waldholtz, Republican of Utah, misattributed a statement about Ms.
Waldholtz's defense.
It  was Mrs.
Schroeder, not Ms.
Waldholtz -- citing charges of irregularities in her personal and campaign finances -- who said Ms.
Waldholtz's position amounted to  "because I am a victim, I am not responsible."


Assa to Buy Essex
Assa Abloy A.B. said yesterday that it would buy Essex Holding, a United States lock company, for $170 million.
Assa, a Swedish lock concern, said the purchase would give it a market-leading position in the United States.
With the  addition of Essex, Assa said it would reach annual sales of about 5 billion kronor ($744 million).
(Dow Jones)


Housing Official Fined
A former Essex County official who ran a Federally subsidized housing project was fined $50,000 yesterday for taking kickbacks for hiring guards from companies owned by a Newark businessman.
Judge Alfred M. Wolin of Federal District Court ordered the former official, Larrie West Stalks, to spend six months under detention at her South Orange home.
She must also pay $67,271 in restitution to the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, Assistant United States Attorney Bryan Blaney  said.


Beard's Nets Just Want Some Respect From Refs
Most people were wondering what Nets Coach Butch Beard was talking about last weekend when he questioned how the regular referees would view his team once they returned from their lockout.
He wondered whether they would recognize that this year's team is more professional, more disciplined and more determined than last year's team, that it is a team that should be accorded as much respect as any other team in the National Basketball Association.


When Brotherhood Is a Father's Dream Come True
IT was time to go to school.
As we headed for the door, my 5-year-old son, Tonio, said he was cold and ran upstairs to get a sweatshirt.
I glanced over to see how his little brother Sam was doing, but he had already walked out the door with his big sister.
Both boys seemed to be relaxed, as if neither had any idea that the day was going to be different.
Starting that morning, they would begin spending time apart, and although separation is part of life, up to now it had not been part of theirs.


Pontiac Dealers Choose Graham
The Tri-State Pontiac Dealers Association, which represents 78 dealers in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, has named Graham Advertising in Colorado Springs to handle its account, which had been at Deutsch Inc. in New York for the last 12 years.
The billings were estimated at $4 million.
Ron Schlemmer, president of the association, confirmed a report of the change this week in Adweek, adding that it came after a monthlong review in which the participants were Deutsch, Graham, the D'Arcy Automotive Retail Team division of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., and Martin Advertising in Birmingham, Ala.


Battling the Elements in Bosnia


No Action, But Rebuke From U.S.
The Clinton Administration criticized China today for imposing a harsh new prison sentence on its most prominent human rights campaigner, Wei Jingsheng, but stopped conspicuously short of threatening specific retaliatory action.
But some members of Congress, expressing unhappiness at President Clinton's failure to speak out before Mr.
Wei's conviction, warned that the dissident's imprisonment could lead to a restoration of the linkage that Washington once made between trade privileges for Beijing and its record on human rights.


Study Finds Potential Addiction Therapy
Researchers say they have demonstrated for the first time the ability to immunize rats against some of the stimulant effects of cocaine, opening a potential new treatment for drug addiction.
Scientists at the Scripps Research Institute in San Diego said they had inoculated rats with an artificial cocaine-like substance that triggers the production of antibodies to cocaine.
These antibodies, they said, act as biological "sponges" that bind with cocaine and reduce the amount of the drug available in the blood to reach the brain.


Seville Journal;Brought to Knees, Arid Land Prays
In an earlier life, Seville's port sent great galleons down the Guadalquivir  River and across the ocean to the Americas, carrying weapons, textiles, tools, bringing back silver, gold and hardwoods, all to this city's greater glory.
The fine palaces and mansions here still testify to those prosperous times, but galleons sailing up the Guadalquivir these days would have trouble reaching  Seville.


Senatorial Passions: U.S. Interest or Deadly Quagmire?
Following are excerpts from the Senate debate yesterday on sending United States troops to Bosnia, as transcribed by The New York Times:
Bob Dole (R-Kan.) "Our goal should be a Bosnia that is self-reliant."


COMPANY NEWS
BLACK &amp; DECKER TO SELL A TECHNOLOGY UNIT The Black &amp; Decker Corporation of Towson, Md., agreed yesterday to sell PRC Inc., its information technology and services business, to Litton Industries for $425 million.
The sale will allow Black &amp; Decker, best known for its power tools and household appliances, to improve its balance sheet and to focus on core businesses, the company said.
Proceeds will be used to pay down debt.
Litton, of Woodland Hills, Calif., said PRC had estimated sales of about $720 million in 1995.
PRC designs and supports computer-based information systems for the Federal Government, commercial customers and state and local governments.
(Dow Jones)


Squabble at the U.N.
Even before the Bosnia peace agreement is signed in Paris, the United States  and the United Nations have squared off for the next squabble: Who will police the volatile Croatian region of Eastern Slavonia?
"The problem is that no one seems eager to go there," Argentina's representative on the Security Council, Emilio J. Cardenas, said today, as Madeleine K. Albright, the American representative, accused Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali of shying away from a responsibility so as to protect the  image of the United Nations.
NATO has already declined the task.


Victory His, Jesse Jackson Jr. Heads to Congress
Only hours after winning election to Congress, Jesse Jackson Jr. flew to Washington today, eager to confront Republicans and give voice to a Chicago district that has gone unrepresented since the resignation three months ago of Mel Reynolds, who is now in prison.
In a special election on Tuesday, Mr.
Jackson, 30-year-old son of the civil rights leader and former Presidential candidate, trounced his Republican opponent, Thomas Somer, by about 3 to 1.


Oregon Players to Honor Waters's Son
Oregon's football players will wear the initials of the late son of their defensive coordinator, CHARLIE WATERS, on their helmets when they play Colorado  in the Cotton Bowl.
Cody Waters died in his sleep Dec. 3 less than two weeks before his 18th birthday.
An autopsy failed to determine what caused his death.
(AP)


Ray-Ban Work Goes to Burnett
The international division of Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc. in Rochester said yesterday  that it had named Leo Burnett/Greater China in Hong Kong, part of the Leo Burnett Company, to handle consolidated regional creative advertising for its Ray-Ban brand of sunglasses in 13 markets.
The account, for which the billings were not disclosed, was previously handled by various local agencies on a project basis.
Burnett will work in markets including Australia, Indonesia, New Zealand, South Korea and Thailand.


Communications Bill Could Hurt Liberty Cable
A provision in the telecommunications bill nearing completion in Congress could make it tougher for upstart companies to challenge entrenched cable monopolies in New York and other big cities, although it could lead to lower cable prices for some apartment dwellers.
The provision has jolted Liberty Cable, a small Manhattan-based company that  is Time Warner Inc.'s only real competitor in the New York cable market.


Beijing's Account of Trial And Sentence in Wei Case
Following are excerpts from a Chinese Government statement about the conviction of Wei Jingsheng today, as issued by the official New China News Agency and Chinese television and translated by The New York Times:
Beijing's No. 1 Intermediate People's Court today reached a verdict in the case of Wei Jingsheng, sentencing him to 14 years in prison and revocation of political rights for 3 years for plotting to overthrow the Government.


Pataki Proposes Closing Of a Brooklyn Hospital
Gov.
George E. Pataki announced today that his 1996 budget proposal would call for the closing of Kingsboro Psychiatric Center in Brooklyn, a 485-patient  center that is one of the state's largest psychiatric hospitals and one of its most troubled.
That comes as part of a larger proposal to reorganize the state's mental health system to cut spending for mental health services and allowing counties to spend the reduced money as they choose.


CHRONICLE
Sir ANDREW LLOYD WEBBER, the composer and producer who also has developed quite a reputation for his palate, is making a foray into the world of restaurant criticism.
Sir Andrew has written a review of the London branch of Vong that will appear this week in The Sunday Times of London.
If all goes well, he may take some encores.
"If they kind of like it and if I feel I have the time, I might do it monthly," Sir Andrew said yesterday in New York before returning to London.
He was here for a tribute given to him on Monday by the Actors' Fund.


Swiss Bank Plans New Class of Shares
The Swiss Bank Corporation said yesterday that it would introduce a new single class of shares and grant all foreign shareholders voting rights, becoming the latest Swiss company that aims to attract more international investors.
Switzerland's third-largest bank, the parent of the SBC Warburg investment bank, said it would ask shareholders on May 7 to replace bearer shares with a unified registered share with a par value of 50 Swiss francs ($42.50).
(Bloomberg Business News)


White House and G.O.P. Agree to Get 'Serious' on the Budget
After nearly three weeks of virtually fruitless budget talks, Senator Bob Dole said this evening that the White House and Republicans would begin "serious negotiations" on Friday and would work through the weekend to try to reach a deal.
Mr.
Dole did not elaborate.
But senior Republican and Democratic aides said that starting Friday, the talks will be elevated to a higher level and limited to five key people.
They are Leon E. Panetta, the White House chief of staff, Mr.
Dole, Speaker Newt Gingrich and the Democrats' Congressional leaders, Senator Tom Daschle and Representative Richard A. Gephardt.
Except for Mr.
Panetta, the others have not taken part in the direct discussions, which included eight negotiators on each side and dozens of aides.


SNACK FOOD COMPANY LANCE INC. TO TRIM 507 JOBS
Lance Inc., a snack food company in Charlotte, N.C., said yesterday that it would cut 507 jobs, or 9 percent of its work force, as it closes a plant in Columbia, S.C., and trims operations in Greenville, Tex.
The company will take a $40 million charge for the moves, resulting in a loss for the fourth quarter, ending on Dec. 30, and probably a small loss for the year.
Lance said it would lay off 213 employees at its Columbia Vista Bakery plant and 294 in Greenville in 60 days.


Adler Boschetto Forms Bell Venture
Adler Boschetto Peebles &amp; Partners in New York and Bell Communications Research in Livingston, N.J., a communications software and consulting company owned by the seven regional Bell companies, said yesterday that they would form  an alliance to develop marketing strategies for companies seeking to extend their business into interactive media.
The terms were not disclosed.
Bell Communications will work with the ABPI Interactive unit of Adler Boschetto, which is headed by Mary Olson as president.


INSIDE
Russian Reformers Worry


Advocates For Young Sue New York City
Advocates for abused and neglected children filed a class action lawsuit yesterday in Federal court in Manhattan, seeking a takeover of New York City's troubled child welfare agency by a court-appointed receiver.
They charged that the recent death of Elisa Izquierdo represented only the latest failure of a system so ridden with illegal practices, chronic mismanagement and indifference to chlidren that it cannot be fixed from the inside.


Bridge
One might not think that Bridge 101 would be part of an English division's remedial program, but it happens at Mohican College.
The instructor, David Silver, contends that bridge bidding is based on a "closed vocabulary and context-determined syntax," and that students' language skills are enhanced by learning "a semantic subset of the English language."
The authorities at this fictional institution approve: no equipment to provide.
The students love it: no essays to write.
And the instructor, who has no lesson plans to prepare or essays to mark, describes it all in "Tales Out of  School." It is available for $12.95, including mailing, from The Bridge World, 39 West 94th Street, New York, N.Y., 10025.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League CINCINNATI REDS -- Announced the resignation of Darrell Rodgers, assistant for baseball operations.


Fishburne and Branagh Meet Their Fate in Venice
Kenneth Branagh has the rare ability to deliver Shakespearean dialogue as if  it were street talk, with an expert casualness that keeps the meaning of the language crystal clear.
Mr.
Branagh's terrific skill as a popularizer is a boon  to the new "Othello," in which he plays an accessible, alarmingly human Iago to  Laurence Fishburne's voluptuous Moor.
Within Iago resides the heart of the tragedy, which loses its complexity when the character radiates nothing but evil.
Thanks to Mr.
Branagh's seductively colloquial performance, this time the  character's poisonous nature is revealed in full.
It's true that this "Othello" has been truncated, rearranged and illustrated  by its director, Oliver Parker, in unapologetically high-handed ways. (There's a map that looks like a board game to show that Othello, the celebrated military leader, is being sent from Venice to Cyprus.) But it has also been given a blunt vitality, one that makes this look like the timeliest of Shakespeare's tragedies.
Mr.
Branagh's superb performance, as the man whose Machiavellian scheming guides the story of Othello's downfall, guarantees this film an immediacy that any audience will understand.


Green Keeps Mets' Hot Stove Warm
This off season, the Yankees are involved in a swirl of activity and angst, as usual.
And the Mets are playing the quiet church mouse to the mouse that roars in the Bronx.
In another year, this juxtaposition might well have driven the Mets' architects and players to distraction.
But not this time, not with a team that is caught between a surprisingly strong 1995 and a promising 1996.


California Winners Leave Political Questions
There were clear victors in the major Bay Area elections on Tuesday, with former Speaker Willie L. Brown Jr. capturing the mayor's job in San Francisco and State Senator Tom Campbell winning the right to represent one of the San Jose area's Congressional districts.
But the voting results, despite their numerical clarity, left several major questions hanging.


Health Care System Is Abandoning Patients
To the Editor:
Re "Health Lobbyists Win Adjustments to Medicare Plan" (front page, Dec. 10): The latest backroom deal between the conference committee and the health care lobby representing the managed-care industry continues the transfer of wealth from the public to the private sector that has become a characteristic of health care in America.


France Attacks European Allies Over Nuclear Vote in the U.N.
France today sharply criticized its European Union partners who voted for a United Nations resolution urging an immediate end to nuclear tests and said it had no legal impact.
"We have observed -- and it is not surprising -- that there has been an insufficient show of unity in the E.U.  on a subject concerning the security and defense of everyone," Foreign Minister Herve de Charette told the National Assembly.


Stocks at Record Again, With Dow Rising 41.55
Stocks reached another record high yesterday as computer-driven buy programs  lifted prices ahead of Friday's triple expiration of options and futures contracts.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 41.55 points, to 5,216.47, topping a record close of 5,199.15 set last Wednesday.
Two broader indexes also rose to new highs.


Arrest in Spanish Plot
A suspected Basque guerrilla, thought to be connected to a group that tried to shoot King Juan Carlos in August, has been arrested in the French border town of Hendaye, the Interior Ministry said today.
The police say the guerrilla, Santiago Mauri, may be an associate of Juan Jose Rego Vidal, who was arrested with his son, Inaki, and another suspected guerrilla, Jorge Garcia Sertucha, on Majorca on suspicion of plotting to shoot the King.
The plan was foiled when the police, who had been watching the three for several weeks, moved in and confiscated their weapons.


Marisol: Almost a Fatality
The lawsuit now known as Marisol v.
Giuliani is named for a girl who almost became one of the city's child fatality statistics.
When the police found her last May, the child, called Marisol in the lawsuit  filed yesterday by Children's Rights Inc. and Lawyers for Children, was a starving 4-year-old, naked beneath a urine-soaked sheet.
Her front teeth had been knocked out, her feet scalded, her body covered by bruises and cigar burns.
One leg bone was splintered, large clumps of her hair were missing, and she had been sexually abused.


GE Lighting Investment
GE Lighting said today that it planned to invest more than $100 million over  four years to expand capacity at its Mattoon, Ill., light bulb plant.
The concern, which is the lighting unit of the General Electric Company, said it would use a major part of the investment to increase production of its halogen light bulbs.


Clinton Gets Wary Backing From His Rival, Dole
Only hours before President Clinton departed for the signing of the Bosnian peace agreement in Paris, Senator Bob Dole sought to ease his mission.
He reached back 25 years in history and recalled the furious Senate debates over the Vietnam War and the issue of supporting American troops and their Commander  in Chief.
The Kansas Republican and Senate majority leader presented one of the more arresting moments in the inevitable overlap of foreign policy and domestic politics: Mr.
Dole, the scarred war hero, considered the front-runner to challenge Mr.
Clinton in 1996, offering wary backing to a President regularly dogged for not serving in Vietnam.


French Government Offers New Concessions to Striking Workers
France's Government offered more concessions to striking workers today, suspending a planned overhaul of pensions for all public sector employees and agreeing to a so-called "social summit meeting" where unions could express their views on the Government's reform proposals.
At the same time, union leaders from the two principal organizations leading  the movement, the Workers Force and the General Confederation of Labor, called for another day of nationwide demonstrations this Saturday after the first call  brought some 1.7 million opponents of Prime Minister Alain Juppe's budget cuts onto the streets on Tuesday.


DU PONT AGREES TO SELL IN-VITRO DIAGNOSTICS BUSINESS
E.
I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company agreed yesterday to sell the in-vitro diagnostics business of its medical products unit to Dade International Inc. of  Deerfield, Ill., a medical diagnostic concern.
The terms were not disclosed.
Du  Pont, which is based in Wilmington, Del., said the sale was part of its plan to  divest itself of four medical products businesses.
The in-vitro business supplies chemistry analysis equipment and has annual sales of about $335 million.
Dade is a privately held company controlled by Bain Capital Inc., which acquired it from Baxter International Inc. in December 1994.


British Trim Key Interest Rate; Germany's Bank Meets Today
With economic growth apparently weakening and inflation restrained, Britain lowered its official lending rate today to 6.5 percent from 6.75 percent.
The reduction in the Bank of England's minimum lending rate to commercial banks came a day before policy makers at Germany's central bank are to meet and  six days before the rate-setting committee of the United States Federal Reserve  gather.
Like their British counterparts, they will consider whether to ease credit at a time when statistics indicate that their economies are losing steam  and inflation is under control.


Stressed-Out Koreans Use Shamans Too
To the Editor:
Re your Dec. 11 Hwahyangeeli Journal: Patronizing accounts of Korean shamans  foster misunderstanding and provoke unmerited embarrassment among the largely Christian Korean-American community regarding their own cultural traditions.


Advertising;A New York shop discovers the joys of licensing, thanks to a British cartoon character.
A FULL-SERVICE advertising agency that offers creative, media, direct marketing, public relations, sales promotion and licensing.
Licensing?
That's the way Launey, Hachmann &amp; Harris, a 30-year-old New York agency with  billings of about $10 million, is positioning itself these days.
And Launey has not only added licensing to the traditional list of services offered by most agencies, but has also developed it into the shop's primary revenue producer.


European Parliament Admits Turkey to Its New Customs Union
Turkey's long campaign to enter into a customs union with Europe ended in victory today, as the European Parliament voted by a wide margin to lift remaining trade barriers with Ankara.
The vote in Strasbourg, France went far beyond the economic benefits the trade union is expected to bring both sides, and was closely watched in Washington, where Turkey's bid had strong support.


COMPANY BRIEFS
J.
P.
MORGAN &amp; CO., New York, raised its dividend 8 percent and said it planned  to buy back as many as seven million shares, or about 3.5 percent of its outstanding stock.


Delinquencies Rise for Consumer Loans
The number of late payments on consumer installment loans rose in the third quarter as household debt burdens grew, industry figures show.
Delinquencies on a composite of several types of closed-end consumer installment loans rose to 1.98 percent in the third quarter from 1.95 percent in the second quarter and 1.66 percent in the third quarter of 1994, the American Bankers Association said today.
The ratio of consumer installment credit to disposable income stood at 18.9 percent in the third quarter, up from  18.2 percent in the second quarter.


The Stars Honor A Legend At 80
Frank Sinatra turned 80 on Tuesday.
Tonight at 9, ABC broadcasts "Sinatra: 80 Years My Way," an all-star salute taped on Nov. 19 at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles.
The loving birthday card, designed by George Schlatter Productions, is big, glossy and smoothly professional.
After standing briefly onstage for an opening ovation from the audience, Mr.
Sinatra joins his wife, Barbara, at a small, spotlighted table to watch the proceedings, gingerly limiting most of his reactions to a blown kiss or appreciative chuckle, though he gets to his feet to join standing ovations for performances by Ray Charles ("Ol' Man River") and Patti LaBelle ("The House I Live In").
As the camera occasionally pans the glittering audience, catching everybody from Angela Lansbury to Johnny Depp, there can be no doubting the enduring intergenerational appeal of Frank Sinatra.


Whitman Ties Cigarette Tax To Coverage For Children
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman announced today that she would seek to enroll nearly 100,000 uninsured children in a state-subsidized health insurance program financed in part by an increase in the state's cigarette tax.
The program now offers subsidized health insurance to 18,000 New Jersey residents who do not have employee-sponsored coverage and are not eligible for Medicaid.
Under the Governor's proposal, the state would enroll no additional adults but instead would sign up uninsured children in a program emphasizing preventive care.


Trying to Shut Out Crime


Clouds of Soot and Dust Descend On Commuters at Grand Central
Someone repairing the ventilating system in Grand Central Terminal hit the wrong switch yesterday, spewing a cloud of soot and dust into the air, forcing dozens of people to seek medical help and making it a bad day to be a vendor or  a commuter wearing a camel-hair coat.
The thick cloud made some people think there had been an explosion or fire, and firefighters, police and Emergency Medical Services crews went to the scene.
The E.M.S. said it treated 40 people for breathing difficulties and that, while no one was seriously ill, 9 of the 40 were taken for examinations to Bellevue Hospital Center at 29th Street and First Avenue.


Heisman Trophy Goes on Disabled List
EDDIE GEORGE returned home Monday with the Heisman Trophy -- or at least most of it.
George, the Ohio State tailback, was presented with college football's most coveted trophy last Saturday in New York.
But during the return trip, the Heisman got stuck in an airport X-ray machine and lost the tip of its right index finger.
The damage, which also included a bent middle finger, was hardly noticeable,  and George didn't care too much.
"I'm kind of mad about it," he said with a grin, "but it doesn't matter as long as I've got it."


Economic Scene;A lot of money spent on nuclear arms was wasted, a study shows.
NUCLEAR deterrence has worked for a half century: no atomic weapon has been detonated in anger since 1945.
But did America get its money's worth from 70,000 warheads, 67,000 missiles, 4,000 bombers, 59 strategic missile submarines and 1,041 test explosions, plus the equipment to keep track of enemy nuclear arms and to prevent accidental war?
The Central Intelligence Agency's disclosure last week that KGB disinformation had led Washington to overestimate the Soviet threat implies that not every last penny was well spent.
And a preliminary report by the U.S.
Nuclear Weapons Cost Study Project, excerpted in the fall 1995 Brookings Review, goes further.
A close look at the quarter of all defense outlays that has gone into nuclear weapons suggests that a good portion was wasted.


Saudi With Key Role in War Calls for End to Iraqi Sanctions
A senior member of the Saudi royal family who played a leading role in the war against Iraq in 1991 called today for ending sanctions on the country because, he said, they have only reinforced President Saddam Hussein's hold on power while starving the Iraqi people.
The criticism of the sanctions and a call for alternatives came from Prince Khalid bin Sultan, a nephew of King Fahd and son of Saudi Arabia's Defense Minister.


A U.S. Team Seeks Body of War Pilot
A Pentagon team is on a secret mission to Iraq, searching the desert for the  remains of the first American pilot shot down in the Persian Gulf war in 1991.
Undertaken with the approval of President Saddam Hussein, the mission represents a small but potentially significant step in Iraq's attempts to end its isolation.
It is the first official visit of American military officers there since the war.
Article, page A3.


Bausch Chief to Leave Soon; An Interim Leader Is Named
Daniel E. Gill, the executive who built Bausch &amp; Lomb into a thriving supplier of contact lenses and sunglasses before steering the company into turmoil, said unexpectedly yesterday that he would retire at the end of the year.
The 59-year-old Mr.
Gill, who had been chairman for 13 years, first announced his resignation at a board meeting on Tuesday, the company said.


Snowboarding Blazes New Trails;Traditionalists Give Way as a Fad Becomes an Olympic Sport
Backed by its potential for growth and revenue, and with an increasing number of enthusiasts on the nation's slopes, snowboarding has gained widespread acceptance by ski areas that shunned it only 10 years ago.
The raspy sound of a single, fat board on packed powder is now as much a part of the downhill experience as the whoosh of twin skis.
Resorts that recognize the activity as the fastest-growing segment of an otherwise stagnant ski market  have rolled back prohibitions against snowboarding, the sport has gained Olympic acceptance and the number of major manufacturers has increased to about 20 since the first popular boards were put out by a few pioneers in the late 1970's.


Finding Beauty In Troubled Urban Outposts
IN his new book, "The New American Ghetto," the photographer and sociologist  Camilo Jose Vergara documents the deep human need to shape space.
For almost 20  years, Mr.
Vergara has haunted some of America's most forgotten and reclusive urban neighborhoods, compiling a national photographic family album of loss.
Beauty is not the first word that leaps to mind when thinking about troubled  urban outposts -- including Camden, N.J.; downtown Detroit, and the South Bronx  -- that are Mr.
Vergara's metier.
Mr.
Vergara, who was born in Chile and is 51,  has chronicled the changing physical environment of some of America's most visibly forlorn neighborhoods.
He has focused not only on symbols of abandonment and destruction, like razed inner-city blocks turned to prairie, but on people's physical responses to living under siege, the way buildings "grow claws and spikes" when fortified with security measures, for example.


With Iraq's O.K., a U.S. Team Seeks War Pilot's Body
A Pentagon team is on a secret mission to Iraq, searching the desert for the  remains of the first American pilot downed in the Persian Gulf war in 1991.
The mission, undertaken with the approval of President Saddam Hussein, represents a small but potentially significant step in Iraq's attempts to end its deep isolation.
Since the end of the gulf war, Iraq has been an international pariah, subjected to strict economic sanctions.


Suspect Held in Killing of 2 Oregon Lesbians
Alerted by a telephone tip, the police went to a motel here early today and arrested a man suspected of killing two lesbian activists in Oregon.
The suspect, Robert James Acremant, 27, surrendered without incident.
He was  jailed pending extradition to Oregon on charges of murdering Roxanne Ellis, 53, and Michelle Abdill, 42, who were found bound, gagged and shot in the back of their pickup truck last week.


Liberties;Reversal Of Fortune
When I heard that Bob Packwood was becoming a lobbyist, I checked his diaries, trying to figure out who on earth might want to hire him.
An April 7, 1992, entry read: "Assuming it's safe and clean, a Motel 6 is perfectly adequate. . . . I was still perfectly satisfied with the new Oregon Motel in Eugene until we discovered that the Valley River Inn had the hot tub open all night."


Nigerian Executions Allow No Defense;Shell Isn't Bystander
To the Editor:
To suggest the Royal Dutch/Shell Group wishes to be seen as "merely a benign  bystander" to events in Nigeria demonstrates a misunderstanding (editorial, Dec. 3).


Changes at D'Arcy On P.&amp; G. Account
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in New York said yesterday that it had reorganized responsibilities among top executives on its important Procter &amp; Gamble account, with billings estimated at $600 million, and also said it had changed leadership at its New York office and Canadian operations.
Arthur Selkowitz, 52, president of D.M.B.&amp; B./Asia-Pacific in New York and worldwide director for P.&amp; G. assignments overseas, was named to assume the additional duties of overseeing the account in the United States.
Those duties had previously been divided between Norman Sherman, senior vice president and managing director of the New York office of D.M.B.&amp; B., and Richard V. Hopple, president of the North American operations of D.M.B.&amp; B. in New York.
Mr.
Hopple, 48, continues to supervise work for all North American clients including P.&amp; G.


Caught Behind the Wheel


The Republican Split on Bosnia
Whatever their squabbles over domestic policy, Republicans going back to the  Eisenhower Administration have been largely united on America's role in the world.
Under Presidents Eisenhower, Nixon, Reagan and Bush, they championed strong American leadership and stoutly defended the power of the President to shape foreign policy.
All that changed when the cold war ended, a new generation of Republicans was elected to Congress and the bedeviling issue of Bosnia came up.


Isuzu's British Venture
Isuzu Motor Ltd., Japan's largest truck maker, said yesterday that it would enter the British truck market next year through agreements with a local auto distributor and a truck manufacturer.
Isuzu, which is 37.5 percent owned by the  General Motors Corporation, agreed with Lex Service P.L.C. to set up a joint sales venture, while authorizing Leyland Trucks Manufacturing to assemble small  trucks on its behalf.
Isuzu is aiming at annual sales of 500 units in the first year and 1,000 units by the third year.
(AP)


No Clues in Nurse's Killing
Two days after a nurse was shot to death while walking her dog on a quiet street two blocks from her home, the police said they had no inkling why anyone  would have wanted to kill her.
The body of Ethel Duryea, 59, who worked at East Orange General Hospital for  30 years, was found Monday evening by officers responding to a 911 call.
"We do  not have a motive," said Lieut.
Mark Wegleski of the Glen Ridge police.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the investigation into the fire last week at a Harlem clothing store referred incorrectly to the Police Department's interest in a security guard there.
The guard, who was not identified, is considered a potential witness, not a target of the investigation.
The article also referred imprecisely to a report that the security guard had not carried his gun to work that day and had run from the store as a gunman  opened fire.
That assertion came not from Commissioner William J. Bratton but from Terry Waiters, an assistant store manager.


Adler Boschetto Forms Bell Venture
Adler Boschetto Peebles &amp; Partners in New York and Bell Communications Research in Livingston, N.J., a communications software and consulting company owned by the seven regional Bell companies, said yesterday that they would form  an alliance to develop marketing strategies for companies seeking to extend their business into interactive media.
The terms were not disclosed.
Bell Communications will work with the ABPI Interactive unit of Adler Boschetto, which is headed by Mary Olson as president.


Boss Bulger's New Job
Mention the phrase "machine-style politician" and a handful of colorful figures come to mind -- Richard M. Daley of Chicago, John J. McClure of Pennsylvania, Willie Brown of California.
State Senator William Bulger of Massachusetts fits easily into this class.
Lavishing patronage on friends and withholding it from enemies, Mr.
Bulger held the presidency of the Senate for 17 years, the longest tenure in the history of the Commonwealth.
Writing in The New Yorker, Richard Brookhiser once compared him to Aureliano Buendia, the rebel commander in the Gabriel Garcia Marquez novel "One Hundred Years of Solitude" whose orders were "carried out even before they were given, even before he thought of them."


CLINTON'S RATINGS OVER 50% IN POLL AS G.O.P. DECLINES
President Clinton has emerged from the Federal budget standoff with his highest public ratings in nearly two years, while House Republicans, particularly Speaker Newt Gingrich, have lost much of the good will they enjoyed after their sweep of Congress last year, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.
Virtually every finding showed striking evidence of renewed political strength for the President: Mr.
Clinton's job approval level has broken 50 percent for the first time in The Times's polling since February 1994.
Americans have begun to give him more credit for a healthier economy.
And they perceive Mr.
Clinton as far more earnest than the Republicans in trying to find a solution to the budget impasse.


Man Is Indicted in a 1977 Arson That Killed 4 Retarded Residents
A former chief of a volunteer fire company in Sea Bright on the Jersey Shore  appeared in Federal court yesterday after being indicted on a charge of arson growing out of a 1977 boarding house fire that killed four retarded men.


Edberg to Pass on the Atlanta Olympics
STEFAN EDBERG of Sweden will not play in the Olympic tennis tournament in Atlanta.
"Stefan told me he wants to give the younger Swedish players a chance to qualify for Atlanta," the Davis Cup captain, CARL-AXEL HAGESKOG, said yesterday.
Edberg, who turns 30 next month, won the singles title in the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics when tennis was an unofficial sport.
In the 1988 Seoul Olympics, Edberg lost in the semifinals to the eventual champion, MILOSLAV MECIR of Czechoslovakia.
Four years later in Barcelona, Edberg lost on clay in the first round to ANDREI CHESNOKOV of Russia.
(AP)


School Board Delays Moving Gifted Classes
Striking a partial compromise with angry parents, a Community School Board on the Upper West Side voted 5 to 4 last night to delay for a year a plan to move a program for gifted and talented children out of one of the district's highest-ranked schools.
Some parents of children at Public School 9 had objected to the plan to move  the program to Public School 166, a school five blocks away that has fared less  well in test scores and other measures.
Parents and teachers at P.S. 166, in turn, had raised questions of racism, suggesting that the objections were related to the fact that P.S. 166 has a higher black and Hispanic enrollment.


Acquisition Done, Kimberly Plans to Eliminate 6,000 Jobs
The Kimberly-Clark Corporation said yesterday that it would shed 6,000 jobs by next summer and sell as many as 12 plants, moving to reap the benefits of its $9.4 billion acquisition of the Scott Paper Company.
The Dallas-based maker of Kleenex tissues and Huggies diapers expects to take a $1.4 billion pretax charge in the fourth quarter to cover the moves, Kimberly-Clark's chairman, Wayne R. Sanders, told analysts.


Orange County Officer Indicted
A former Orange County budget director once praised for money-raising skills  was indicted today in the county's financial debacle.
The former budget director, Ronald S. Rubino, was indicted by a county grand  jury on two counts of aiding and abetting the former county treasurer, Robert L. Citron, who has pleaded guilty to six fraud counts involving the shifting of  tens of millions of dollars in interest due other agencies into county-controlled accounts.


Hospital Endangered
Gov.
George E. Pataki said he will call for closing Kingsboro Psychiatric Center in Brooklyn, one of the state's biggest mental hospitals.
Article, page B6.


Arafat Sets Jan. 20 as the Date For First Palestinian Elections
Yasir Arafat ordered today that elections be held on Jan. 20 in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
The elections are a result of the Israeli agreement with the Palestine Liberation Organization that gave the Palestinians self-rule, beginning with the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho in May 1994.


Vivian Blaine, the First Adelaide In 'Guys and Dolls,' Is Dead at 74
Vivian Blaine, who created the role of the ditsy "well-known fiancee" Miss Adelaide in the original production of "Guys and Dolls," died on Saturday at Beth Israel Medical Center North in Manhattan.
She was 74.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said Claire Chapman, a friend.


Beijing Sends a Strong Warning With Long Sentence for Dissenter
By convicting Wei Jingsheng in a closed trial today of "conspiring to subvert the Government" and sentencing him to 14 years in prison, China again silenced the most powerful pro-democracy voice in the country and sent a strong warning about the limits of dissent.
Mr.
Wei, 45, a onetime electrician at the Beijing Zoo who helped father China's democracy movement in 1978, was also denied his political rights for three years beyond the prison term.
The harsh sentence drew expressions of anger and indignation from members of Mr.
Wei's family, human rights organizations and governments around the world.


Radio Excerpts in Harlem Store Dispute
In the months before the fatal fire at Freddy's clothing store in Harlem, a boycott of the store was often a topic of rallies held by the Rev.
Al Sharpton and broadcast over WWRL-AM.
Among the speakers at the rallies were Morris Powell, head of a vendors' group in the neighborhood, and Sikhulu Shange, who was embroiled in a landlord-tenant dispute with the owner of Freddy's, Fred A. Harari.
Following are excerpts from the radio programs, which were taped by the Jewish Action Alliance and provided to The New York Times.
MORRIS POWELL Aug. 19, 1995


Red Guard Who Chose Democracy
Like millions of Chinese, Wei Jingsheng passed through the great disillusionment of China's modern political history, and it has profoundly shaped his politics and his destiny as an adult.
Born in 1950, Mr.
Wei grew up in a Beijing family steeped in the Communist revolution after its victory over the Nationalists the year before.
He grew up as a fervent believer in the teachings of Mao Zedong.


An Emergency Exit Had Been Blocked In Blaze in Harlem
The Harlem clothing store where eight people died in an arson fire last Friday had its only fire exit sealed off with bricks more than a year ago and had a basement sprinkler system that failed to operate during the blaze, Fire Department and law enforcement officials said yesterday.
Even though the door was blocked, the building that housed Freddy's clothing  store on West 125th Street passed its most recent fire inspection several months ago, because no emergency exit is required in a building that has a sprinkler system, said Marilyn Mode, a spokeswoman for the Fire Department.


Suit Against Philadelphia Police Will Be Delayed
After assurances by Mayor Edward G. Rendell of Philadelphia that the city would consider new ideas to fight corruption in the Police Department, two civil rights organizations and 10 other plaintiffs have agreed to delay filing a Federal lawsuit seeking reforms to combat police corruption and abuse.


Thrasher Injured in Training Session
CRAIG THRASHER of Steamboat Springs, Colo., suffered apparent ligament injuries to both knees yesterday when he crashed during the first training session for a World Cup downhill in Val Gardena, Italy.
Thrasher, who turns 25 on Saturday, the day of the race, crashed when he failed to clear the third of the three so-called Camel Bumps on the lower half of the course.
He was taken to a local clinic and American coaches said he would fly tomorrow to the Steadman-Hawkins Clinic in Vail, Colo.
His is the second major injury for an American downhiller in less than a week.
A J KITT of Boulder, Colo., a three-time Olympian, tore the anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee last Friday.
(AP)


Sports of The Times;Another Cameo Role For Tyson
IF he were an actor, Mike Tyson would be doing cameo roles.
Walk into the scene, say a few lines and leave, never to be seen again until he gets another part in another movie.
Other than remembering his face from the years when he was a young action-movie actor, the audience would hardly know or care.
But Mike Tyson is a boxer who was once the undisputed world heavyweight champion, who has been out of prison only nine months.
Even his cameos are events.


Boeing Strike Ends as Machinists Ratify a New Contract
Calling it a rare victory for organized labor, assembly workers at the Boeing Company tonight ended their strike after 69 days, voting by a large margin to approve a contract that gives them most of what they sought.
Boeing, the world's leading airplane manufacturer, had been under intense pressure from airlines in recent weeks as the strike, the second-longest in the  company's history, turned more militant and production slowed to a trickle.


Burlington Industries
Burlington Industries said today that it had agreed to purchase more than 3.4 million of its nonvoting common shares held by the investment firm of Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Inc. and affiliates for $45 million, or $13.125 a share.


Hemophiliacs Seek Aid
Representatives of the Hemophilia Association of New Jersey, seeking a compromise that will permit suits against companies that supplied H.I.V.-tainted blood in the 1980's, are to meet with top aides to Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman today.
Under the law now, an injured person has two years in which to file a civil suit, ruling out compensation for hemophiliacs who contracted the H.I.V. virus from blood transfusions many years ago.


Planned Cutback at Refinery Lifts Unleaded Gasoline Prices
Prices for unleaded gasoline jumped yesterday after the Tosco Corporation said that it expected to cut output by 20 percent at the 190,000-barrel-a-day refinery it planned to buy from British Petroleum P.L.C.
On other markets, soybeans and coffee rose.
The Commodity Research Bureau index gained 0.68 point, to 244.65.


Peacocks Finally Get to Stand Tall Against Pirates
St.
Peter's plan tonight was simple and effective: make Seton Hall's fast break operate under a caution flag, slow the running to an unaccustomed, uncomfortable jog.
The result was sloppy and inelegant, with St.
Peter's managing only one more  field goal (22) than turnovers (21), but the Peacocks strutted off the court at  Byrne Meadowlands Arena with a 61-59 victory as Seton Hall's drag-strip offense  idled listlessly for 40 minutes.


State Arts Funds Steady Despite Budget Cuts
The money that states give to the arts will decline only slightly in the current fiscal year, according to a report by the National Assembly of State Arts Agencies in Washington.
It is the fourth year in a row that state arts financing has held steady or risen in the face of budget-cutting.
The report, which was released on Tuesday, looked at appropriations for 50 state arts agencies and for the six arts agencies that serve the District of Columbia and Federal possessions and territories.
The total for the 1996 fiscal  year, which began on Oct. 1, was $264.6 million, down less than half a percentage point from the previous year.
New York reported a drop of 7 percent,  to $32.7 million from $35.2 million.


Mayor Delays Decision On Water Filtration Plant
Faced with intense opposition from Bronx residents, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has pulled back from a two-decade-old plan to build a large water filtration plant at the Jerome Park Reservoir, a pocket of open space in the crowded middle-class community of Kingsbridge.
Responding to criticism made by a panel of water experts convened by the city's budget office, Mayor Giuliani has also questioned the proposed design and expense of the $600 million plant.


Dollar Is Mixed Amid Sales Data And Interest-Rate Cut by Britain
The dollar rose slightly against the German mark yesterday after Britain lowered its official lending rate, heightening expectations that Germany might follow with a cut of its own today.
The dollar also drew some support from a stronger-than-expected report on retail sales, which could discourage the Federal Reserve from lowering interest rates.


Corrections
An article in The Living Section yesterday about the restaurateur Barbara Smith misidentified the magazine for which her house was being photographed in Independence Day decor.
It was House Beautiful, not House &amp; Garden.
The article also misspelled the surname of Ms.
Smith's husband.
He is Dan Gasby, not Gatsby.
In addition, the article misstated the name of a television show Time Warner Inc. is planning to star Ms.
Smith.
It is "B. Smith Style," not "Barbara Smith Style."


Corrections
A music review on Tuesday about a farewell concert by the Cleveland Quartet at Alice Tully Hall on Sunday afternoon referred incorrectly to the ensemble's performance of John Corigliano's first string quartet.
Sunday's performance was  the New York City premiere; the world premiere was on Oct. 26 at the Jane Mallett Theater in Toronto.
The work had its United States premiere at the Freer Gallery in Washington on Oct. 27.


Ford Says Earnings Won't Reach '94 Level
The Ford Motor Company's earnings for the fourth quarter and the full year will be lower than last year, because of a weakening of the United States automotive market and the costly introductions of replacements for the company's two top-selling vehicles, Ford's chairman, Alexander J. Trotman, said today.
In a year-end briefing that reinforced forecasts made in October by the company's vice president for finance, Mr.
Trotman and other top executives said  they did not expect year-over-year earnings improvements until the second half of 1996.
In 1994, the auto maker's profit was a record $5.3 billion.


Ruling on Police Pursuit
The New Jersey Supreme Court ruled unanimously yesterday that police officers can pursue a suspect into his home and seize evidence they find there as long as they know a warrant has been issued for his arrest.
A lower court had ruled that a 1989 raid by Hackensack police was illegal because the arrest warrant for the suspect, Lonzie Collier, had been issued for  a minor offense.
But in yesterday's decision, the high court held that officers  entering Mr.
Collier's home could not have been expected to know the details of  the arrest warrant, The Associated Press reported.
The police found evidence of  a burglary for which Mr.
Collier was later convicted.
TERRY PRISTIN


Latvia Gives K.G.B. Aide A Life Term
A court here sentenced an 87-year-old Stalin-era secret police official to life in prison today after finding him guilty of crimes against humanity.
Alfons Noviks, nicknamed the Great Slaughterer, was found guilty of deporting tens of thousands of Latvians to Siberia between 1941 and 1949.


AT HOME WITH: Al Hirschfeld;Anarchy Behind a Santa Beard
IN 1942, Al Hirschfeld was en route to City Hall with the German film star Dolly Haas when he panicked.
But it wasn't the usual bridegroom jitters.
"I said, 'You know, I don't remember getting a divorce,' " he recalled recently.
In 1927, Mr.
Hirschfeld had married Florence Hobby, a chorus girl, but the two had been separated for years.


CHRONICLE
CHRISTOPHER REEVE, the actor, who was paralyzed in a horseback-riding accident in May, was released yesterday from the Kessler Institute for Rehabilitation in West Orange, N.J., where he has spent the last six months.
He  returned to his home in Westchester County with his wife, DANA REEVE, and will continue his rehabilitation there.
In a written statement, Mr.
Reeve said: "As I leave Kessler Institute, I experience many profound feelings, most of all happiness to be going home with my wife and children. Thanks to my family, friends and the hundreds of thousands of people from around the world who have called, sent letters, cards and gifts of inspiration. You will never know how much your concern for my well-being has  helped me."


Nigerian Executions Allow No Defense
To the Editor:
While the campaign spokesman quoted in "Nigerian Group Defends the Executions of 9 Activists" (news article, Dec. 7) purports to offer "an accurate and concise account" of events that culminated in the brutal November execution of Ken Saro-Wiwa and eight other Ogoni activists, the account is selective and inaccurate on key points.


Paul B. Shore, 74, Producer of Cartons
Paul Bernard Shore, the founder, chairman and chief executive of one of North America's largest carton producers, died on Sunday at his home in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 74 and also had homes in Manhasset, L.I., and Manhattan.


ANGUISHED, SENATORS VOTE TO SUPPORT BOSNIA MISSION; CLINTON OFF TO PARIS SIGNING
At the eleventh hour, an anguished and deeply divided Senate handed President Clinton its reluctant support tonight for the deployment of American troops after he left for Paris to witness the signing of the Bosnian peace accord.
The Senate voted 69 to 30 to support the deployment on the condition that the United States lead an international effort to arm and train the Bosnian Muslims.
The resolution, hammered out by Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, and Senator John S. McCain, Republican of Arizona, passed with the support of 45 Democrats and 24 Republicans.
Voting against it were 29 Republicans and a Democrat.


The Pop Life
Not Solo This Time


Jordan Has Revenge; Bulls Have A Victory
Bulls 112, Magic 103 Michael Jordan avenged a poor performance against Anfernee Hardaway in their last meeting, outscoring the young Orlando star by 36-26 last night as the Chicago Bulls defeated the visiting Magic, 112-103.


Agents Raid a California Home For Clues in Amtrak Sabotage
In the first sign of progress in the inquiry into the sabotage of an Amtrak train in Arizona, Federal agents today raided the California mountain home of a  man considered a potential suspect, the authorities said.
The search was at the residence of John Ernest Olin, 32, who lives at Val Verde, a remote village 40 miles north of Los Angeles.
Agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, armed with a sealed search warrant, combed the house for several hours and removed numerous items as possible evidence.


More White House Papers Wanted by Senate Panel
Raising the stakes in their constitutional confrontation with President Clinton, Republicans on the Senate Whitewater panel said today that they would order the White House to turn over more documents and vowed to move swiftly to gain the support of the full Senate.
Last week, the White House forced a constitutional showdown with the Whitewater committee after refusing to comply with a demand for information about a 1993 Whitewater meeting involving President Clinton's senior lawyers and aides.
The White House has said the material being sought by the committee is protected by the lawyer-client privilege and executive privilege.


Sparing No Ornament For a Seasonal Favorite
True, this is short notice, but you might want to catch the second and last performance of Handel's "Messiah" at St.
Thomas Church this evening.
The first performance, on Tuesday, was a barely mitigated joy.
Gerre Hancock leads the church's choir of men and boys and the period-instrument group Concert Royal, with its artistic director, James Richman, at the organ.
Presumably, both men deserve credit for the vital rhythmic impulse underlying virtually the whole performance, which sustained involvement throughout.


Sanders Finds Prime Time in Two Locker Rooms;Cowboy Star Directs Tirade Against Critics
Deion Sanders said he had read enough, heard enough and had become full enough of disdain for the news media's scrutiny of the Dallas Cowboys and their  coach, Barry Switzer, that he wanted to let them know just how he felt.
And before the Cowboys practiced here today, he did just that.
Smack in the middle of the Cowboys' locker room.


FEDERAL-MOGUL TO CLOSE OPERATIONS AND TAKE CHARGE
The Federal-Mogul Corporation said yesterday that it would sell or close some operations and take a fourth-quarter charge of $52 million.
The company, based in Southfield, Mich., also said it would post a fourth-quarter gain of $10 million from the sale of its minority stake in Westwind Air Bearings Ltd., making the net effect of the charge $42 million, or 99 cents a share.
The company said it planned to sell its United States ball bearing manufacturer and its German BHW bearing division.
It will also close its St.
Louis research center, resulting in some job cuts.
The company's shares were up 25 cents yesterday, closing at $20.75 on the New York Stock Exchange.


U.N. Says North Korea Faces Danger of Famine
North Korea is in danger of a widespread famine, but so far most Western nations have been unwilling to pledge aid to prevent it, United Nations officials said today.
The World Food Program, a United Nations agency, said it would have to stop emergency delivery of food to North Korea if Western countries did not quickly pledge funds.


Flimsy Bosnia Mandate
The grudging Congressional acceptance of the involvement of United States troops in Bosnia gives President Clinton only the flimsiest political cover on an issue that could still torment him.
The day's debate exposed a broad vein of doubt and anxiety about the whole enterprise, and while neither the Senate nor the House of Representatives, both  deeply divided, was ready to try to thwart the President's will, they were equally unwilling to give his policy any ringing endorsement.


Cornerback Might Be Giant's Main Target
What is sometimes lost in the commercials, the dances in the end zone, the Prime Time image, is that Deion Sanders is one of the best cover cornerbacks ever to play the game.
He cannot rap, but the man can play football.
The question is: How do you beat him?
Many teams often go away from Sanders out of fear, but don't be surprised on Sunday if the Giants are bold and go right at him.


Mexico Asylum Cases Must Be Reduced
To the Editor:
Although there has been an increase in Mexican nationals granted asylum in the United States this year, after years in which such applications were routinely denied, the number is still small -- 55 -- and represents one-half of  1 percent of all asylum applicants from Mexico.


Welfare Clerk Sentenced
A 27-year-old woman was sentenced to prison Tuesday for illegally collecting  welfare benefits while she was working in a welfare agency.
Dana C. Johnson received welfare benefits for nearly a year while employed as a data entry clerk in a program run by Monroe County's Department of Social Services.


Douglas Corrigan, 88, Dies; Wrong-Way Trip Was the Right Way toCelebrity as an Aviator
Douglas Corrigan, a brash, errant aviator who captured the imagination of a Depression-weary public in 1938 when he took off from Brooklyn on a nonstop solo flight to Los Angeles and landed his improbable airplane in Dublin a day later,  died on Saturday at a hospital in Orange, Calif.
He was 88 and had been lionized for more than half a century as Wrong Way Corrigan.
The few people who were at Floyd Bennett Field when Mr.
Corrigan took off at  5:15 on the morning of July 17, 1938, were baffled when the 31-year-old aviator  turned into a cloud bank and disappeared to the east.


S.E.C. Says Marriage Counselor Profited on Inside Information
A California marriage counselor who learned from a patient about the secret merger talks between the Lockheed Corporation and the Martin Marietta Corporation was charged with using the information in an insider trading scheme.
The Securities and Exchange Commission said today that the counselor, Mervyn  Cooper, 57, of Santa Monica, Calif., and a friend made $177,235 through a large  purchase of Lockheed stock options ahead of the $10 billion deal, announced on Aug. 29, 1994.


Judges Uphold 'Must Carry' Cable-TV Rule
A three-judge Federal District Court panel here upheld Government rules that  require cable-television systems to carry local broadcast channels.
In a 2-to-1 ruling, the judges found that Congress had ample evidence that the broadcast industry needed to be protected when it adopted so-called must-carry rules in 1992.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Turning Away From Crime to Lead Productive Life
Juan Suarez cannot wait for the final countdown on the eve of the year 2000.
When the ball of electric lights begins its slow descent on the pole over Times  Square, and the assembled crowd begins to count backward in unison, he will finally be released from probation and enter the new century with a clean record.
He credits the programs of the Andrew Glover Youth Services center with giving him a second chance after he was arrested twice on charges of assault and attempted robbery and expelled from school by age 16.
Now 19, he has a steady job at a printing company where he was recently promoted from messenger to pressman, and he says he plans to enroll in evening classes to earn his high school equivalency diploma.


FOREST OIL TO BUY CANADIAN COMPANY FOR $135 MILLION
The Forest Oil Corporation agreed yesterday to acquire Atcor Resources Ltd.,  a Canadian oil and gas exploration and production company, for $186 million (Canadian), or about $135 million (United States).
Atcor, based in Calgary, Alberta, owns properties concentrated in Alberta and British Columbia.
The company is also engaged in gas processing and marketing in Canada and has an interest in undeveloped land.
The offer is valued at $4.88 (Canadian) a share.
Atcor's class A shares closed at $4.55 yesterday, up 45 cents, on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
To help pay for the acquisition, Denver-based Forest Oil plans to sell 60 million shares to the public.
About 5.3 million shares will be sold by Saxon Petroleum Inc., a Forest Oil shareholder.


No Action, But Rebuke From U.S.
The Clinton Administration criticized China today for imposing a harsh new prison sentence on its most prominent human rights campaigner, Wei Jingsheng, but stopped conspicuously short of threatening specific retaliatory action.
But some members of Congress, expressing unhappiness at President Clinton's failure to speak out before Mr.
Wei's conviction, warned that the dissident's imprisonment could lead to a restoration of the linkage that Washington once made between trade privileges for Beijing and its record on human rights.


U.N. Hopes Iraq Will Repay War Victims
A United Nations agency today awarded nearly $13.5 million to victims of the  Persian Gulf war, both those who were wounded and the families of those whose who died.
The agency, the United Nations Compensation Commission, said it had completed filing more than 4,000 injury and death claims that it had received, awarding a  total of $2.6 billion to as many as 800,000 people.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-21


Sumitomo Seeks to Acquire U.S. Operations of Daiwa
Sumitomo Bank Ltd. of Japan has asked the Federal Reserve for permission to buy Daiwa Bank's United States operations, a Fed official said yesterday.
Such a move could be a step toward a bigger alliance between the giant banks.
If approved, Sumitomo's purchase would resolve a Federal Reserve order that Daiwa Bank Ltd. shut its United States business as punishment for covering up a $1.1 billion trading loss at its New York office.


Corrections
The New Video Releases section of the Home Video column on Friday misstated the availability of the film "Smoke" on videotape.
Its release, originally scheduled for December, has been delayed until April.


Homeless in the Cold
If the weather remains frigid this winter, more homeless New Yorkers could freeze to death this year than last.
The shelter system reached capacity this year earlier than at any time in recent memory.
The impending shortage of shelter beds, combined with social welfare cuts -- and more restrictive rules governing shelter eligibility -- could easily force more people into the streets.
To avoid increased hardship, as well as costly legal battles with homeless-rights advocates, the Giuliani administration will need to keep pace with rising demand and abide by consent decrees already in force.
It will also need to make good on its promise of social services and drug counseling for homeless people who need them -- and broaden the array of permanent housing options, at least for those homeless who deserve and can manage the responsibility.


Breakfast and a Cigarette
A divorced, homeless and out-of-work computer programmer hijacked a Pepsi truck in Philadelphia yesterday morning, crossed into New Jersey, and led the police on a low-speed chase before agreeing to surrender at a rest stop in exchange for breakfast and a cigarette, the state police said.
Trooper Donald Burton pulled alongside the delivery truck on the Atlantic City Expressway and used his loudspeaker to talk Michael Henry, 37, into pulling over at a service area, said Trooper Al Della Fave, a spokesman for the state police.
Mr.
Henry told the police he had planned to drive off a bridge in Wildwood.


U.S. Reports A Rebound In Retail Sales
Retail sales rebounded last month, the Government reported yesterday, but analysts said consumers remained anxious and they continued to predict a brutally competitive Christmas for retailers.
According to the Commerce Department's early estimates, retail sales rose eight-tenths of 1 percent in November, more than expected, to a seasonally adjusted $197.9 billion.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL


Bonds Decline After a Surge In Retail Sales
Treasury bond prices retreated yesterday after the Government reported an unexpected surge in November retail sales.
The price of the Treasury's main 30-year bond dropped 14/32 of a point, or $4.38 for $1,000 in face value.
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction, rose to 6.07 percent from 6.05 percent.


Rangers Are Worn Down But Winning
The Rangers may not be losing games these days, but they're starting to lose  key players.
Jeff Beukeboom and Sergei Nemchinov left with apparently minor head injuries last night during a 4-2 victory over the Boston Bruins at Madison Square Garden.
The Rangers probably did not deserve to win this one, but what else can you expect from a team that is undefeated in its last 10 games (7-0-3) and in its last 14 at home (12-0-2)?


A Museum of Skyscrapers Soars in Conception
THERE is no icon more idolized in New York City than the skyscraper.
It stands, and stands tall, for qualities Americans love to cherish: optimism, technological superiority, glamour, success and shine.
So it was appropriate that the 20th floor of a 1907 skyscraper should be the  scene last Monday for proclaiming the creation of the first museum dedicated to  that traditional symbol of unrestrained capitalism.


In a G.O.P. Stronghold, Support, but Little Passion
There is no more celebrated breeding ground for Republicans than the gated subdivisions, opulent open-air malls and scenic coastal towns of Orange County.
Democrats on the liberal West Side of Los Angeles, in fact, refer derisively to  their neighbor to the South as "behind the Orange curtain."
But while this county remains one of the most reliably conservative bastions  in the nation, Republicans here no longer look up to their leaders with the passion they say they felt for past party stalwarts like Barry Goldwater, Richard Nixon, Ronald Reagan and even for George Bush.
In dozens of interviews around the county this week it became perfectly clear -- as Mr.
Nixon would say  -- that even many staunch Republicans are uneasy about the Republican Presidential field.
And many are downright hostile toward the man who personifies the Republican agenda in Congress, Speaker Newt Gingrich.


Political Memo;If the Yankees Leave, Mayor Faults Ferrer
They play baseball only from April through October, but politics lasts all year long.
With the fate of Yankee Stadium hanging in the balance, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Borough President Fernando Ferrer of the Bronx have spent much of the last few days attacking each other over the city's efforts to keep the Yankees in the Bronx, or at least in New York City.


Enron Is Resuming Arbitration on Plant
Enron said today that it was resuming arbitration proceedings to recover damages from the government of an Indian state that canceled a $2.8 billion power-plant project.


Girl Is Killed in Bus Accident
A 4-year-old girl was crushed under the wheel of a New Jersey Transit bus yesterday after the driver closed the door on her foot while her grandfather was hoisting her onto the first step, police said.
The bus pulled away, dragging her briefly before she slipped under the wheel, said Harold Keenan, assistant director of the Jersey City Police Department.
The child, whom the police did not identify, was on her way to pre-kindergarten classes at Our Lady of Victory Grammar School in Jersey City.
The bus driver, a part-time employee, had a "spotless record," said Jeff Maclin, a spokesman for the bus company.


NEW STUDY FINDS TREATMENT HELPS STROKE PATIENTS
After 40 years of trying, researchers have found a treatment for stroke that  can prevent irreversible brain damage in some patients.
The treatment did not lessen death rates in the stroke victims studied, but it could allow tens of thousands of the half-million Americans who suffer strokes each year to stay out of nursing homes and resume normal lives.


No Headline
Until today, stroke was an untreatable disease." -- DR. JAMES G. GROTTA, neurologist. [A1:1.]


Incaviglia Would Rather Be in Philadelphia
The slugging outfielder PETE INCAVIGLIA signed a one-year contract yesterday  with the Philadelphia Phillies' top minor league team, the Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre Red Barons.
Incaviglia, 31, who played for the Phillies' National League championship team in 1993, will be invited to spring training and will earn $300,000 a year plus performance bonuses if he makes the major league team.
He spent the 1995 season playing in Japan for the Chiba Lotte Marines, hitting .181 with 10 home runs and 31 runs batted in.
"I'm very happy to be coming back," Incaviglia said.
"When I came back from Japan, I let everyone know that I wanted to come back to Philly. I told my agent that I didn't want to hear offers from other teams until the Phillies tell me that they don't want me back."
(AP)


Packers' White Out for Year
Last year it was Sterling Sharpe. This year it's Reggie White.
Just when the Green Bay Packers (9-5) start looking like a formidable playoff contender, they lose a leader late in the season.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Scoring Leaders


Flyspeck on a Lobster Lip Turns Biology on Its Ear
Adhering to the mouthparts of a lobster like a suction-cup toy and sweeping up the lobster's errant food particles like a living napkin is a tiny animal whose anatomy and life cycle are unlike anything seen before, scientists have reported.
The creature is so unique in its style and appearance that the biologists who discovered it have given it not just its own species name, or its own genus or family, but have moved way up the classification scale and declared that it is an entirely new phylum.
The name of the new phylum is Cycliophora, Greek for "carrying a small wheel." The description refers to the creature's very striking circular mouth, which is surrounded by a ring of fine hairlike cilia and which bears a vague resemblance to the upholstery attachment for a vacuum cleaner.


A Son Plays a Tribute to a Father


Two Homeless People Die in Incidents Linked to the Cold
Two homeless people died yesterday in separate incidents related to the colder-than-normal temperatures that have settled across the region.
On Long Island, a 48-year-old man was found dead after he crept into a municipal trailer to escape the cold, authorities said.
And in the Washington Heights section of Manhattan, a middle-aged woman collapsed and died as she tried to protect her belongings in a shantytown fire started to warm the five homeless people living there.


Judge Stands By Ruling on Prodigy's Liability
Citing "a real need for some precedent" in the laws of cyberspace, a judge has declined to reverse his ruling that the Prodigy Services Company could be held liable for comments posted on its computer bulletin boards by subscribers.
Justice Stuart L. Ain of the New York State Supreme Court for Nassau County,  in Mineola, rejected a motion by Prodigy's lawyers to reargue a $200 million libel lawsuit filed against Prodigy by a Long Island investment bank and its president.


CHRONICLE
Sir Andrew is not the only celebrity branching out into new fields.
ALAN KING has become an announcer for fashion shows in department stores and shopping malls.
Today at 12:30 P.M., he will appear at Macy's on Herald Square to narrate a show by Chinawear, a women's sportswear manufacturer in which he has an interest.
The actor and comedian is the company's spokesman, and his picture is on the  tags for the clothes.
"I sign the tags as if I were signing books," he said.


Vast New Dreamworks Film Lot
Standing in a drizzle on an empty platform this morning, Steven Spielberg, David Geffen and Jeffrey Katzenberg did not look like three of the most influential people in the movie industry as they traded quips and considered their lonely position atop a muddy bluff.
"Who spent this money?" asked Mr. Geffen.


Court Draws Georgia Map Of Congressional Districts
In the first judicial interpretation of a new Supreme Court standard on redistricting, a Federal court today drew a Georgia Congressional map that scraps two of the state's three majority black districts.
In a 2-to-1 decision that is likely to be appealed, a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit broke up the state's black population, which had been concentrated in three districts, and dispersed  its influence around the state.
If upheld, the decision could throw Georgia's Congressional delegation into disarray, give Democrats a shot at recapturing several Republican seats and provide a redistricting road map for several other  states.


Indonesia Rebuffs U.N. Bid
Indonesia has agreed to let the United Nations open a human rights office in  its capital, but has blocked a request for one in the disputed territory of East Timor.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Jose Ayala-Lasso, was  allowed to visit East Timor last week, and said today that despite some improvements, the situation there remained bleak.
He said there were "very grave violations of human rights," including torture and illegal imprisonment.


Sanchez Being Investigated, Paper Says
Spanish officials are trying to determine whether ARANTXA SANCHEZ VICARIO has been violating the country's tax laws, according to a published report.


Civic Association Challenges Pataki's Lilco Breakup Plan
In a withering critique of Gov.
George E. Pataki's plan to break up the Long  Island Lighting Company, the Island's largest business and civic association today dismissed the Governor's promise of a 12 percent electricity rate reduction as inadequate.
The Long Island Association, a lobbying group of 3,000 members, said it feared that electricity rates could actually rise under the proposal to sell off Lilco's generators to private companies.


Lotus Is Ready to Introduce Major Changes in Notes Program
The Lotus Development Corporation, responding to competitive pressure caused  by new Internet technology, demonstrated major changes to its hallmark Notes program today that allow it to both read and create information for the World Wide Web.
Most of the changes will be in a new version of Notes that goes on sale Jan.  1.
Lotus also cut prices for the new version and other new Notes products.


BRISTOL-MYERS TO ACQUIRE HUNGARIAN DRUG MAKER
The Bristol-Myers Squibb Company agreed yesterday to buy Pharmavit Gyogyszer, a Hungarian drug maker and provider of health care products, for $110 million in cash.
Bristol-Myers, the New York-based pharmaceutical company, said it would offer $62.35 for each Pharmavit share and $12.47 for each global depository share, which represents one-fifth of a share.
The transaction requires regulatory approval.
Bristol-Myers said Pharmavit's products are sold primarily in Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Poland and Romania.


3 Top L.I.R.R. Executives Suspended on Charge of Suppressing Data onGrade-Crossing Risks
The president of the Long Island Rail Road has suspended three top executives, charging that they suppressed information about the risk of collisions at street crossings, then tried to conceal one such misdeed with a falsified document.
The president, Thomas F. Prendergast, has asked the Inspector General's office of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the L.I.R.R.'s parent agency, to determine whether any laws have been broken and whether the case should be referred to prosecutors.


Bolivia Skeleton Believed To Be Che Guevara Aide
A human skeleton has been unearthed on the outskirts of this small town in the mountains of southern Bolivia where a search is under way for the remains of Ernesto (Che) Guevara, the revolutionary killed 28 years ago.
Buried in a shallow grave on a local farmer's land, the unidentified remains, unclothed but still wearing black socks and leather boots, are believed to belong to one of the Marxist guerrillas who fought with the Argentina-born revolutionary in Bolivia in 1967.
Following a disastrous Cuban-backed guerrilla campaign, Mr.
Guevara was captured on Oct. 8, 1967, and executed by the Bolivian armed forces the next day.
Later, his body and those of two dozen Cuban, Peruvian and Bolivian comrades were secretly buried in Valle Grande.


House G.O.P. Leaders to Delay Any Rules Change on Royalties
Speaker Newt Gingrich and other Republican leaders plan to bottle up a proposed rules change that would prohibit House members from earning more than $20,400 a year in book royalties, a revision urged in reaction to the Speaker's  million-dollar earnings from his own book.
The proposal came on Tuesday from the House ethics committee,which suggested  that the Speaker had exploited his office for profit and recommended that all royalties earned after this Dec. 31 be subject to the current $20,400 limit on members' outside income.


INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: Gucci Gains Ground With Revival of Style;Belt-Tightening in the Work Force And Lavish Spending on Marketing
In a frescoed 16th-century palazzo in the narrow Via delle Caldaie near the center of Florence, the Gucci headquarters were humming again.
Leather handbags  with bamboo handles lined the shelves in one room, sturdy leather luggage stood  in another and silk ties formed a rainbow swirl in a third.
"We're now thinking about 1997," said Domenico De Sole, chief executive of Guccio Gucci S.p.A., eyeing the goods.
The company, a unit of Investcorp International, "used to collect orders, and sit on them." Now the hardest task is turning out products fast enough to meet a doubling of demand.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY


BUSINESS DIGEST
Dow Jumps 41.55 Points On Another Record Day Stocks rose to new records as computer-driven buy programs lifted prices in advance of Friday's triple expiration of options and futures contracts.
The Dow  Jones industrial average rose 41.55 points, to 5,216.47, eclipsing a record close of 5,199.15 set Dec. 6.
Two broader indexes also rose.


Vacco Seeks Death for Having A-Bomb Materials
Attorney General Dennis C. Vacco, worried by an article he saw in Popular Mechanics magazine, says state law should be changed so that anyone caught with  the raw materials for a nuclear bomb is executed.
The Republican official, spurred by a magazine article about how terrorists could construct a nuclear bomb, said he would not want to wait to act until after a disaster that dwarfs the magnitude of the Oklahoma City bombing last spring.


C.I.A. Mole Is Too Easy a Scapegoat
To the Editor:
Re "C.I.A. Chief's Report Says Moscow Duped Washington With Help From Double  Agent" (news article, Dec. 9):


Jordanian Has a Goal: Shirtmaker To the U.S.
Jad Maqdah, a shirtmaker, hopes that his "made in Jordan" label will find a place at the base of thousands more American necks.
In this resource-barren country, Mr.
Maqdah must import every button, thread  and shred of cloth that his Jordan Clothing Company needs to produce a simple cotton shirt.
But of the more than one million shirts cut and sewn this year in  his rudimentary factory here on the outskirts of Amman, more than one in four was destined for the United States.


Delta Ends Layoff Series
Delta Air Lines Inc. said today that it had ended layoffs for full-time employees, other than pilots, in the United States.
Eighteen months after beginning a cost-cutting program that has trimmed 11,000 jobs from its payroll,  Delta told employees that the size of the domestic work force had stabilized.
About 3,000 full-time workers at Delta have been laid off.
Thousands of others have opted for early retirement and other voluntary departure programs.


Market Place;For the cautious investor, three candidates for consideration.
DESPITE this year's fabulous rally in stocks, analysts say there are still pockets of value in the market.
But finding these opportunities can be difficult for investors.
And caution is recommended.
"Exercising investment discipline is very important after the run-up in stock prices we have enjoyed this year," said Joseph Battipaglia, managing director of Sterling Advisors, a New York money management firm.
"Rather than abandon the market, the smart investor should limit stock purchases to only those issues that meet pre-determined standards."


SBARRO TO SHUT ABOUT 40 RESTAURANTS BY MARCH 31
Sbarro Inc., a restaurant chain offering pizza and Italian foods, said yesterday that it planned to close about 40 of its underperforming restaurants by March 31 and to take a pretax charge of about $16 million.
The charge will reduce the company's net income by about $10 million, or 50 cents a share, for the fourth quarter, ending on Dec. 31.
The moves by Sbarro, based in Commack, L.I., were announced after the close of trading yesterday.
The company's shares fell 50 cents, to $22.375, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Try Again, Teachers Say
The delegate assembly of the United Federation of Teachers voted almost unanimously yesterday to send the union president back to try to negotiate a better contract than the one rejected by the membership last week.
The union president, Sandra Feldman, assured delegates from more than 1,000 New York City  public schools that she had "heard the message," but declined to discuss any potential new proposals.
The Giuliani administration insists on taking the dispute directly to nonbinding arbitration.


Romanian Jet Crashes in Italy; 49 Aboard Are Reported Dead
A Romanian airliner crashed today in a snowy orchard in northern Italy moments after takeoff, burning a black swath through the trees and killing all 49 people on board.
Romania's Transport Minister, Aural Novak, said the charter plane exploded three minutes into the flight.
Italian authorities did not confirm the explosion, nor did they venture to suggest a cause for the crash.


Pataki Seeking School Money To Trim Taxes
At a news conference he held today to announce his education initiatives for  next year, Gov.
George E. Pataki said he plans to take $100 million in state lottery money normally given to public schools and use it to reduce property taxes instead.
Mr.
Pataki said his proposal was aimed at reducing the burden of escalating property taxes that are used each year to finance local school districts across  the state.


Reston Helped Open a Door to Acupuncture
To the Editor:
The role of the New York Times columnist James B. Reston in introducing acupuncture to this country must not be underestimated (obituary, Dec. 7).


2 Oklahoma Bomb Suspects Appear Before New Judge in Case
The defendants in the bombing of the Federal Building here, Terry L. Nichols  and Timothy J. McVeigh, saw each other today for the first time since before the April 19 bombing.
They sat in a courtroom across the street from the blast site  as a new judge, who threw out their May 17 trial date as soon as he got to town, scheduled a hearing for Jan. 30 on a motion to change the site of the trial.
Judge Richard P. Matsch (pronounced MAYCH), the Federal judge from Colorado who was assigned to the case this month, declined to set a new trial date.
He flew in from Denver on Tuesday afternoon, wearing a big Stetson hat with his business suit.


For an Ailey Troupe Leader, a Tribute by Imitation
The Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater paid tribute to Masazumi Chaya, associate artistic director of the company, with typical familial warmth and humor on Tuesday night at City Center, where the troupe is in residence through  Dec. 31.
There were speeches and performances of two Ailey classics.
Best of all was a suite of excerpts from works danced by Mr.
Chaya during his 15 years as a  company member, which ended in 1986 when Ailey diverted him from incipient retirement to work with him as a rehearsal director.
The excerpts, from pieces by Ailey and George Faison, recalled a strong, committed dancer who stood out most for his endearing look of surprise and pleasure at finding himself onstage dancing with the company.
But the numbers also suggested the even more enduring legacy of his work with the Ailey dancers: first-rate performers who dance with their hearts as well as their bodies.


Hard Times and No Silver Lining
Bruce Springsteen showed his sense of humor when he asked his fans for "a lot of quiet" during his solo show at the Beacon Theater on Tuesday night.
"If you feel like laughing or singing along, you'll be led away in handcuffs," he said.
"It happened to some supermodels in L.A. and it wasn't a pretty sight." It was a rare light moment in what easily qualifies as the most earnest concert of the year.
For just over two hours, Mr.
Springsteen stood alone with his guitar, singing about people crushed by hard times and bad decisions.
He prefaced many songs with explanations, saying, for instance, that "Murder Incorporated" was about the idea that there is "an acceptable body count for a certain portion of our citizenry." His good intentions were plain.


Vote on Sending Troops to Bosnia
Following is the 69-30 roll-call today by which the Senate voted to support United States troops in Bosnia and Herzegovina but limit their deployment to approximately one year.
The measure was proposed by the majority leader, Bob Dole, Republican of Kansas, and John S. McCain, Rebuplican of Arizona.
A "yes" vote was a vote to approve the sending of troops; a "no" vote was a  vote to reject the sending of troops.
Voting "yes" were 45 Democrats and 24 Republicans.
Voting "no" were 1 Democrat and 29 Republicans.


Yankees Primping for a Date With Cone
Supposedly, the time and the place of George Steinbrenner's pivotal meeting with David Cone are still uncertain.
But it looks more and more as if the owner  will make his critical bid to persuade Cone to remain with the Yankees at a meeting this weekend in New York.
"We're waiting for David Cone to get his schedule cleared and for Mr. Steinbrenner to get his schedule cleared so that all four of us can sit down and hopefully hammer out the contract," said General Manager Bob Watson, who will attend the meeting.
Steve Fehr, Cone's agent, will also be present.


Senate Raises Stakes In Presidential Clash
Despite the White House's citation of executive privilege and attorney-client privilege in resisting a Senate committee's subpoena, the panel said it would order more documents turned over.
In addition, the Senate Whitewater panel said  it would seek the support of the full Senate in obtaining new materials, including some from the White House.
Article, page B16.


An Antidote for Stage Fright


When Today's Lesson Is Condom Instruction
To the Editor:
The New York City Board of Education's deputy chancellor for instruction, Judith A. Rizzo, is wrong when she asserts (front page, Dec. 9) that condom demonstrations in the schools would generate "jokes and a lot of embarrassment."


PCS WIRELESS AND ADC TELECOMMUNICATIONS IN ALLIANCE
PCS Wireless Inc. signed a letter of intent yesterday to form a strategic alliance with ADC Telecommunications Inc.
Under the alliance, ADC Telecommunications agreed to subscribe for five million PCS Wireless common shares, representing 15.1 percent of the issued stock.
PCS Wireless, based in Vancouver, British Columbia, also said an ADC Telecommunications appointee would join its board.
The companies will also establish a joint venture to be owned 50 percent by each company.
PCS Wireless said the new venture would be capitalized at $5 million in cash and cash equivalents.
ADC Telecommunications,  of Minneapolis, is a supplier of transmission and networking systems used to deliver voice, data and video services.


Donald Anderson, Medical Educator And Counselor, 82
Dr.
Donald Grigg Anderson, a professor emeritus of medicine at the University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry and a counselor on medical education nationally, died on Sunday at the Carol Woods retirement community in  Chapel Hill, N.C.
He was 82.


Trying to Solve the Mystery of Jesus
IN SEARCH OF THE BIRTH OF JESUS The Real Journey of the Magi By Paul William Roberts 384 pages.
Riverhead Books/G.
P.
Putnam's Sons. $24.95.


Inquiry Traces Sprinkler System Failure in Fatal Harlem Fire
A sprinkler system failed to operate at the Harlem clothing store where eight people died in an arson attack last week because the emergency water supply had  been disconnected, law enforcement officials said yesterday.
Fire marshals are still trying to determine who shut off the water to the sprinkler system and built a plywood box around part of the standpipe that supplied the system with water.
Fire Department officials were still gathering records on the property yesterday to determine the sprinkler system's condition  when it was last inspected, said Marilyn Mode, a department spokeswoman.


At Vatican, Capital Role For Jerusalem
Leah Rabin, widow of the slain Israeli Prime Minister, said today that in a private conversation with Pope John Paul II, he acknowledged Jerusalem to be the capital of Israel as well as the "capital" of three world religions.
In his remarks, Mrs.
Rabin said at a news conference, the Pope insisted that  Jerusalem has a "double role," a reference to the special status that the Vatican has long sought for a city held sacred by Christians, Muslims and Jews.
But it was apparently the first time the Pope accepted Israel's claim to Jerusalem as its capital.


Home Video
Santa Who?


David Marshall, 87, Opponent Of Singapore Authoritarianism
David Marshall, one of the founding fathers of Singapore and one of the last  Singaporeans brave enough to speak up against the authoritarian Government now running the city-state, died on Tuesday at his home in Singapore.
He was 87.
He had been suffering from lung cancer, a family spokesman said.


U.S. Suspects India Prepares To Conduct Nuclear Test
American intelligence experts suspect India is preparing for its first nuclear test since 1974, Government officials said today.
The United States is working to discourage it, fearing a political chain reaction.


Bright Lights, Carols, Dancing Sweets
Here is a sampling of holiday celebrations, including dance and drama events, in New York City.
Admission is free unless otherwise noted (churches accept donations).


It's Time to Reinvent Freud
There is a panic inherent in the anticipation of professional extinction that is the dread of Freud's disciples these days.
The announcement by the Library of Congress that it would shelve an exhibition titled "Sigmund Freud: Conflict and Culture" coincided with the winter meeting of the American Academy of Psychoanalysis, prophetically titled "Is There a Place for Psychoanalysis in Contemporary Culture?" -- thereby confirming the fear of many psychoanalysts that the answer may be "no."


Rate Outlook Keeps Bond Prices Steady
Bond prices were steady yesterday as economic reports failed to raise expectations that the Federal Reserve would reduce interest rates next week or early next year.
The Treasury's 30-year bond was little changed, as its yield edged up to 6.08 percent, from 6.07 percent Wednesday.


Women Inside and Outside the Grid
Are grids male or female?
If your answer is "neither," go sit at the back of  the class.
Art historians now tell us that the grids and cubes of 1960's Minimalists like Frank Stella, Robert Morris and Donald Judd were inherently masculine forms: thinly disguised symbols of the oppressive military-industrial  complex.
In contrast, Post-Minimalists like Eva Hesse, Lynda Benglis and Hannah  Wilke created a new, female vocabulary of organic forms evoking life instead of death.
This political, gender-specific version of history doesn't leave much room for female artists associated with Minimalism, like Agnes Martin, Judith Gerowitz, Jo Baer and Mary Corse.
These artists have followed different paths since the 1960's.
Ms.
Martin built a major reputation on her coolly sensuous grids.
Ms.
Gerowitz changed her name and her style, achieving fame as Judy Chicago, creator of "The Dinner Party," the 1979 installation considered a landmark of feminist art.


A City Cloaked in Indifference? Read This First
THIS is about a coat that Kenneth Piech got four years ago as a present from  either his wife or his mother-in-law.
Mr.
Piech could not remember which.
In any event, it was a three-quarter-length coat with a fake fur collar and a London Fog label, a sturdy if slightly soiled coat, which probably would have lasted him a long time if not for the fact that it no longer fit.
These things happen.


Inside Art
Art for the Olympics


Clash as Chechnya Votes
Rebels seized key buildings in Chechnya's second-largest city today and fought advancing Russian armored troops on the first day of elections to replace the republic's secessionist government.
As many as 600 rebels battled federal troops in and around Gudermes, 20 miles east of the Chechen capital, Grozny, Russian officials said.


25 and Under
Green Field and Mama's Food Shop could not seem more different.
Green Field,  a Brazilian churrascaria, which specializes in grilled meats, is enormous, the size of a soccer field, with seating for 400.
Mama's, with home-style American cooking, has room for maybe 20.
Green Field, in gritty Corona, Queens, reflects the area's ethnic diversity just as Mama's, in a smaller way, reflects the diversity of people attracted to the fringes of the gritty East Village by the neighborhood's legendary tolerance of artsy and rebellious attitudes.


Robbery Cited In the Killings Of 2 Lesbians
The father of the suspect in the slayings of two lesbian-rights advocates said his son snapped under business and personal pressure and shot the women in  a botched robbery attempt after killing another person.
The authorities converged on a motel in Stockton, Calif., on Wednesday and arrested Robert James Acremant, 27, on charges of murdering Roxanne Ellis, 53, and Michelle Abdill, 42, in Medford, Ore.
An extradition hearing will be held on Friday in San Joaquin County Superior Court, the Stockton police said.


Inquiry Into Carolina Slayings Turns to Meaning of a Tattoo
Shortly before a black man and woman were killed on a Fayetteville street last week, a Fort Bragg soldier with white supremacist leanings spoke of wanting to "earn his spider-web tattoo" by committing a murder, according to an affidavit filed by the police.
Law-enforcement authorities and experts on extremist groups said today that the spider-web emblem has, on occasion, been used in skinhead and gang circles to designate its wearer as a killer, sometimes in racially motivated crimes.
But the local police said today that they had no evidence that the tattoo was a badge of membership bestowed by an organized group of racists or extremists.
And tattoo artists and the experts on underground groups cautioned that the spider-web tattoo had taken on varied meanings over the years, including but not restricted to the commission of a murder.


Cardinals Get Shortstop
The St.
Louis Cardinals, worried about the status of 40-year-old shortstop OZZIE SMITH, acquired ROYCE CLAYTON from the San Francisco Giants yesterday for  three pitchers.
The Giants got the left-handers ALLEN WATSON and DOUG CREEK and the right-hander RICH DeLUCIA.
The Cardinals also will get a player to be identified, probably in the next few weeks.


A Few Strikers Return to Work in France, but Effect Is Small
One Paris subway line moved briefly today and some trains were rolling in a few French cities as some public employees returned to work on the 21st day of a strike that has immobilized public transport and severely curtailed plane travel and shipping as well as mail delivery and public utilities.
But Government officials and sociologists said it was too early to say France's worst labor unrest in a decade was over.


Art in Review
Richard Phillips Edward Thorp Gallery 103 Prince Street SoHo Through Jan. 6


Andrew Lytle, 92, Writer in Agrarian Movement
Andrew Lytle, an author, critic, teacher and raconteur and the last of the 12 Southern writers who banded together in the 1920's to form the Agrarian movement, died on Tuesday at his cabin in Monteagle, Tenn.
He was 92.
Although he was overshadowed by such Agrarians as Robert Penn Warren, John Crowe Ransom, Donald Davidson and Allen Tate, Mr.
Lytle is considered to have more than earned his chapter in "I'll Take My Stand," their 1930 manifesto warning of the perils of industrialization and urbanization.


Corrections
A picture caption on Tuesday with a dance review about a performance by Yoshiko Chuma and the School of Hard Knocks at the 92d Street Y misstated the given name of a performer and composer.
He is Robert Een, as noted in the review, not Richard.


Environmental Study Center Created to Honor Late Senator
The family of the late Senator H. John Heinz 3d has donated $20 million to establish a research center in his name where experts from universities, industry, government and advocacy groups will join to seek firmer ground for environmental policies in science and economics.
The sponsors said the gift was one of the largest single philanthropic grants ever offered in environmental circles.


A Gambling Boom Pits a Church Against Biloxi
Thirty-two years ago, Back Bay Mission waded into controversy when its staff  tried to help integrate this resort city's whites-only beaches.
Vandals broke the mission's windows, someone burned a cross outside, and members deserted its  church, which soon closed.
The mission itself, a church-affiliated provider of social services, survived, but controversy has found it again.
This time, in a sign of how much life on Mississippi's Gulf Coast has changed since the state legalized dockside  gambling in 1990, the issue is not race but real estate, and gaming's importance to this city.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE FOOTBALL


With Tapes, a Jewish Group Gains Notice
Before this week, the Jewish Action Alliance was noticed only occasionally by the mainstream news media, usually for its attacks on a wide-ranging list of targets, including Louis Farrakhan, Mayor David N. Dinkins and Attorney General  Janet Reno.
But this week, the organization emerged at the forefront of the controversy swirling around last week's fire at Freddy's clothing store in Harlem, which killed eight people.
The group had recorded the radio comments of the Rev.
Al Sharpton and Morris Powell, who are heard sharply condemning its owner, who is white and Jewish, for his plans to evict a black subtenant.


Kissinger and Nixon' Docudrama Assaulted Truth and History;Don't Blame Hollywood
To the Editor:
Re "What Does Hollywood Say Now?" (Op-Ed, Dec. 12), on the torching of a subway token booth, perhaps inspired by the movie "Money Train":


Massachusetts Abortion Practice Under U.S. Fraud Inquiry
Federal prosecutors are investigating whether the largest for-profit abortion practice in Massachusetts falsified ultrasound test results to steer pregnant women to more complicated -- and more expensive -- abortions than they needed.
On Nov. 30, the Federal Bureau of Investigation went to the Brookline office  of the practice, Repro Associates, and seized about 200 patient files, along with financial records, and the ultrasound machine.
No charges have been filed, and neither the Federal Bureau of Investigation nor the United States Attorney's office in Boston would discuss the investigation.


Verdict in 4 Gang Killings
Jurors in the trial of six men accused in the May 1993 quadruple murder that  destroyed the leadership of a Chinatown gang informed a Superior Court judge in  Bergen County yesterday that they had reached a verdict.
But Judge William C. Meehan ordered the verdict sealed until today, court officials said.
During the four-month trial, the defendants were depicted as members of a rival faction who ambushed the leaders of the Fuk Ching gang in a "safe house" in a quiet Teaneck neighborhood in order to wrest control of the organization's  smuggling of drugs and illegal immigrants.


Excerpts From the Diary of George Delury
Following are excerpts from the diary of George Delury, kept from Feb. 27 until the death of his wife, Myrna, on July 4.
FEB. 27 Myrna's on the lower side of a downswing.
It will get worse before it gets better.
She worries about every little thing, even denying the evidence of  the senses in order to express worry.
Basically she wants reassurance.
The big thing tonight was preparing for the appointment with Petito [Ms.
Lebov's doctor] tomorrow -- she wanted to pin down every detail in advance, including what he should recommend for her troubles, if he can recommend anything.
She expressed special concern about her incapacity to express herself well.
It is unclear whether this is an inability to hold onto a thought, an inability to find the words needed to express a thought, or both.


In Russia's Hinterland, Anger at the Status Quo
This is how the Government thought this year's parliamentary elections would  work: Russia's powerful regional governors would gratefully join Prime Minister  Viktor S. Chernomyrdin's party and recruit other local officials, who in turn would lean on factory directors who depend on Government credits to support the party that holds the purse strings.
That was the theory.


Japanese Stocks Lower
Stocks traded lower here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues  was down 152.75 points, or nearly eight-tenths of 1 percent, at 19,346.55.
On Thursday the Nikkei advanced 215.82 points, or 1.12 percent.


Samuel D. Ratcliffe, TV Scriptwriter, 50
Samuel D. Ratcliffe, an Emmy-winning scriptwriter, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 50.
The cause was AIDS, said David Ziff, a friend.


INSIDE
U.S. Fears India Nuclear Test


Two Veterans Join Forces On Bosnia
When Bob Dole argued on the Senate floor 25 years ago against cutting off funds for the Vietnam War, he was wearing a bracelet bearing the name of an American prisoner of war.
On Wednesday night, when Mr.
Dole, the majority leader, was arguing on the Senate floor for the need to deploy American troops in Bosnia and Herzegovina, he announced that the name on his P.O.W. bracelet was, by marvelous coincidence, that of John S. McCain, for the last few weeks his closest senatorial ally on the Bosnian peacekeeping mission.


CLOTHESTIME TO CLOSE UNPROFITABLE STORES
The Clothestime Inc. will close 137 unprofitable stores by Jan. 31, eliminating 600 to 800 jobs, as part of its bankruptcy reorganization.
Clothestime filed for protection from creditors last week, citing concerns about its ability to continue in a tough retailing environment.
In a bankruptcy court  filing late on Tuesday, the national retail chain said it expected its remaining 400 stores to generate $29.3 million in operating profit during the fiscal year ending Jan. 31.
By contrast, the stores to be closed lost $804,000 last year and would have lost $2.7 million this year at the current pace.


G.E. Chief's View: 'Who Better to Hang Around With?'
Just as success has a hundred fathers, successful young businessmen seem to have no shortage of adoptive fathers.
William H. Gates, the 40-year-old chairman of the Microsoft Corporation, is already fast friends with Warren E. Buffett, the billionaire investor.
And yesterday, Mr.
Gates won the affection of yet another elder: John F. Welch Jr., the 60-year-old chairman of General Electric.


Tip Leads to Murder Suspect
A teen-ager who was wanted for the killing of the sister of Gloria Gaynor, the singer, was arrested early yesterday at his girlfriend's house after the police received a tip, prosecutors said.
The suspect, Rasheed Wallace, 18, of Elizabeth, is accused of beating Irma Proctor, 45, into a coma when she tried to aid a friend he was attacking, said Edward M. Neafsy, Acting Prosecutor for Union County.
Ms.
Proctor never regained consciousness and died on Dec. 7.
Mr.
Neafsy said that at least 15 people must have seen the incident, but that none had come forward.


Bosnian Serb Warriors Are Haunted in Peace
Crushed by what he regards as betrayal at the negotiating table and thwarted  on the battlefield, Gen.
Ratko Mladic, the Bosnian Serb warrior charged with the massacre of thousands of Muslim men, now spends much of his time isolated in a mountain bunker surrounded by a coterie of officers.
His moods are said to swing from rage to uneasy calm.
His partner in the Bosnian Serb cause, Radovan Karadzic, the psychiatrist-turned-politician, had the foundation of his political program swept out from under him by the Bosnian peace accord.
Those who have seen him say that his speech is now often slurred, apparently by medication, and his robust physique has been withered by anxiety as he faces an uncertain future that includes an indictment for war crimes.


COMPANY BRIEFS
SEARS, ROEBUCK &amp; CO., Chicago, said it would open 100 Circle of Beauty cosmetics shops in Sears stores next year, adding to the 148 opened since September.


Sale Set for Treasures Left by Jackie Onassis
Much of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis's personal property, including the desk on which a nuclear test-ban treaty was signed in 1963 and a 40-carat diamond ring she received from Aristotle Onassis, is to be auctioned at Sotheby's over a four-day period beginning April 23, the auction house said yesterday.
The announcement of the highly anticipated sale, which is to be held at Sotheby's York Avenue salesroom, came after months of secrecy.
Experts at Sotheby's began cataloguing the contents of Mrs.
Onassis's Fifth Avenue apartment shortly after her death in May 1994.


Room for a Medicare Compromise
The Congressional Budget Office has lowered its estimate of the Federal budget deficits over the next seven years by about $135 billion.
That is too little to bridge every difference between the White House and Republican budgets.
But it is plenty more than the Republicans need to greatly improve their Medicare plan in a way that should be acceptable to President Clinton.
The Republican Medicare plan is odd, given its authors.
It promises to give the elderly the option of dropping traditional, fee-for-service coverage and joining a private managed-care plan that would offer better benefits or lower deductibles and other out-of-pocket costs.
The idea was to harness market competition to control costs and spur innovation.
But when the G.O.P. leadership released its plan, the notion of using competition to save money had all but disappeared.
Instead the plan relied on saving money by imposing price controls  on managed care -- thereby smothering competition.


Russia's Unruly Democracy
The course of reform in Russia has been disorderly, and there is no reason to think it will be less so after Sunday's parliamentary election.
A dizzying array of parties and candidates is competing for the 450 seats in the State Duma, or lower house.
Many of them are committed to slowing reform, some are sworn to ending it.
The Communist Party, so recently disgraced, seems positioned for a comeback.
Nationalist candidates look strong in many districts.
The centrist political party of President Boris Yeltsin and Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin seems as sickly as its leader.
This is not the straight line to stability that Russians might have wished for when the Soviet Union disintegrated four years ago, or that Americans might  have imagined as they watched Russia discard centuries of autocratic rule.


Searching for Answers in Yesterday's South Africa
The first major film to be made in the newly democratic South Africa, "Cry, the Beloved Country" carries a heavy sense of its own historic weight.
Proclaimed "a monument to the future" by no less a figure than Nelson Mandela, the movie, directed by Darrell James Roodt, is an exercise in solemn uplift that is touching despite an atmosphere that at moments becomes stiflingly reverential.
In adapting Alan Paton's classic 1948 novel for the screen, Mr.
Roodt, the young South African film maker who directed "Sarafina!," and his screenwriter, Ronald Harwood, have remained faithful to the hushed, semi-biblical tone of the  book, while using the cinematography and music to add a romantic gloss.


In This Final, No One Shakes Hands
The National Hockey League bills itself as "the coolest game on earth," marketing to families as its audience for the next millennium.
It has reduced on-ice violence and let the Walt Disney Company's imagineers create a team out of the kids' film "The Mighty Ducks."
But is the N.H.L.'s vigorous image makeover consistent with the approval it granted "Sudden Death," a carnage-filled action movie set during Game 7 of the Stanley Cup finals whose co-producer owns the Pittsburgh Penguins?


National Car Rental Selects New Agency
National Car Rental/Interrent in Minneapolis said yesterday that it had named Carmichael Lynch in Minneapolis to handle its account, which had been at the Southfield, Mich., office of W. B. Doner &amp; Company for two years.
The billings were estimated at $15 million to $20 million.
The account was awarded after a two-month review that was narrowed to Carmichael Lynch and two other finalists: BBDO Minneapolis, a unit of the Omnicom Group, and Martin/Williams in Minneapolis.


Target of Derailment Raid Cleared by Evidence, His Lawyer Says
The lawyer for a man whose home here was raided on Wednesday by Federal agents investigating the intentional derailment of an Amtrak train in Arizona said today that the items seized would clear his client.
"John Olin did not commit this act," the lawyer, Allan J. Sarkin, said at a news conference.


PFIZER TO SELL FOOD GROUP TO FINNISH COMPANY
Cultor Ltd. of Finland agreed yesterday to buy Pfizer Inc.'s Food Science Group business for $352.5 million.
Pfizer said on Oct. 24 that it was in negotiations to sell the group to the Finnish food-products company.
The New York-based drug maker first said Food Science was for sale in July.
Food Science provides specialty ingredients like flavors, reduced-calorie bulking agents, fat replacers and food protectants to the food industry.
It had 1994 operating profit of $31 million on sales of $304 million.
Shares of Pfizer were up $1.125, to $66.25, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Despite Soderstrom's Clinic, Islanders Fall in Overtime
The team bus never showed up to take the Islanders from their Annapolis hotel to tonight's game at the USAir Arena.
For more than 62 minutes in the game, though, Tommy Soderstrom showed up everyone else on the ice, making 41 saves in goal against Washington.


In a Flurry of Activity, Free Agents Choose Their Teams
The Cleveland Indians made their league-best pitching staff even better by signing Jack McDowell.
The Baltimore Orioles bolstered their bullpen by signing  Randy Myers.
The Boston Red Sox improved their offensive lineup by signing Mike  Stanley.
The Houston Astros signaled their competitive intentions by winning the Craig Biggio sweepstakes.
As intriguing as all of those moves were yesterday, Al Leiter executed the most impressive move of all, snaring a three-year, $8.6 million contract from the Florida Marlins.
It was the instant highlight of an injury-plagued career in which Leiter has produced 33 victories and 32 defeats.


Restaurants
The captain is pouring wine but he halts, his hand poised above a glass, to appreciate the person who has brought conversation at La Cote Basque to a standstill.
A voluptuous old woman swathed in yards of red satin and draped in diamonds stands near the front of the restaurant.
Her white-blonde hair is pulled back and her face is painted so that she looks like an 18th-century English portrait.
She smiles a little, enjoying the attention, inclines her head, gathers her dress in folds and slowly lowers herself onto a banquette.
As the conversational buzz resumes, I think, that is why people go to La Cote Basque.
I look around at the people seated in the soft light of the old-fashioned table lamps.
It is not for the classic French food or the fine service or even because this is one of the few restaurants where you can enjoy a comfortable seat and a quiet conversation.
People go to La Cote Basque because they know that if they want to make an entrance, attention will be paid.


SENSORMATIC ELECTRONICS SAYS SALES HAVE FALLEN
The Sensormatic Electronics Corporation, a maker of electronic security systems, said yesterday that it would take an unspecified charge to cover a restructuring because of a downturn in sales.
The company's stock tumbled $2 a share, to $18.125, on the New York Stock Exchange.
An official of the company, which is based in Deerfield Beach, Fla., said the charge might be taken "at one  lump or over a period of time," adding that no specific figures or timetables on the restructuring and charge would be immediately released.


President Plans Tougher Testing Policy After Federal Arrests
In what Clinton Administration officials describe as a new effort to attack the relationship between drug use and crime, President Clinton will soon order that all people arrested on Federal charges undergo drug testing or face the possibility of detention without bail, Justice Department officials said tonight.
The officials said Mr.
Clinton on Monday would sign an executive order that would require the Attorney General to implement the policy as soon as possible for the approximately 60,000 people arrested each year on Federal charges.


Man Gets Baboon Marrow In Risky AIDS Treatment
In a radical cross-species experiment fraught with risk but with implications for treating many diseases, scientists last night injected bone marrow removed from a baboon into a 38-year-old man with AIDS.
The hope is that the millions of transplanted marrow cells, which are believed to be resistant to the AIDS virus, will proliferate to rescue the man's severely damaged immune system.


No Headline
My Government is taking part in this agreement not with any enthusiasm, but  as someone taking a bitter potion of medication." -- ALIJA IZETBEGOVIC, President of Bosnia. [A1:6.]


Leaving Las Vegas' Is Voted Best Film by Critics Circle
Leaving Las Vegas," Mike Figgis's desperately sad, mordantly poetic film about an alcoholic falling apart, falling in love and drinking himself into oblivion, was voted the best film of 1995 yesterday by the New York Film Critics Circle.
Nicolas Cage was chosen as best actor for his improbably exhilarating performance in that downbeat role.
Jennifer Jason Leigh, who also plays a hard-drinking character on a downward slide, was voted the year's best actress for her tough, mercurial performance as the drastically less talented of two singing sisters in "Georgia."


Schroder Wertheim Names a New Chief
Schroder Wertheim &amp; Company, a unit of the Schroder Group of London, said yesterday that Steven Kotler would become its chief executive on Jan. 1.
Mr.
Kotler, 48, succeeds James A. Harmon, 60, who will remain as chairman of  Schroder Wertheim, a Wall Street investment banking company, until the search for a successor to that post is completed some time next year.
Mr.
Harmon would  then become senior chairman of Schroder Wertheim, devoting his time to the company's client relationships.


Senate Whitewater Panel Issues Ultimatum to Clinton's Lawyers
The Senate Whitewater panel today rejected the White House's new conditions for supplying information about a meeting in which President Clinton's senior lawyers and aides discussed Whitewater.
The panel ordered instead that the material be provided by Friday morning to keep the constitutional confrontation  between the President and the Senate from spilling into the courts.
If the White House defies that order, the panel's chairman said, the committee will immediately ask the full Senate to take the matter to the courts  and seek a judicial order enforcing the subpoenas.


Kissinger and Nixon' Docudrama Assaulted Truth and History
To the Editor:
The "Kissinger and Nixon" docudrama broadcast this week by TNT found me, as a direct participant in those times, riveted to my seat.
I had completely forgotten that President Nixon was a lush, nor had I realized what a cad I was or how brilliantly Henry A. Kissinger, then the national security adviser, was undercut by my machinations.


The Trucks of Cairo, Like Great Owls, Come to Life at Night
On the outskirts of this teeming city, where the living crowd for shelter in  the cemetery known as the City of the Dead, another kind of refugee has been relegated to the tombs.
It is the lowly truck.


Machinists End Boeing Strike, Declaring a Victory for Labor
Calling it a rare victory for organized labor, assembly workers at the Boeing Company ended their strike on Wednesday night after 69 days, having voted by a large margin to approve a contract that gives them most of what they sought.
Boeing, the world's leading airplane manufacturer, had been under intense pressure from airlines in recent weeks as the strike, the second-longest in the  company's history, turned more militant and production slowed to a trickle.


New York Is Fined Over Lead Hazard
For the second time in three years, New York City was found in contempt of court yesterday for failing to enforce the city law meant to protect young children from the hazards of lead-based paints.
Yesterday's ruling by Justice Louis York of State Supreme Court in Manhattan  was the latest step in a long-running legal battle between advocates for children and the city over the 1982 law that requires the removal of lead hazards from apartments occupied by children under age 7.


Tougher Laws Won't Curb Youthful Violence
To the Editor:
Re your Dec. 10 news article on the legislative plan of Gov.
George E. Pataki of New York to curb violent youth crime:


Roland Gittelsohn, 85, Rabbi and a Marine Chaplain on Iwo Jima
Rabbi Roland B. Gittelsohn, a scholar on religious and governmental issues who was a Marine Corps chaplain during the battle of Iwo Jima, died Wednesday at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston.
He was 85.
Rabbi Gittelsohn was rabbi emeritus at Temple Israel in Boston, where he served from 1953 to 1977.
From 1936 to 1953, he served the Central Synagogue of  Nassau County in Rockville Centre, L.I.


Art in Review
Lawrence Weiner 'Some Things Brought to Hand' Marian Goodman Gallery 24 West 57th Street Manhattan Through Jan. 13


Robert Shelton, 69, Music Critic Who Chronicled 60's Folk Boom
Robert Shelton, a former music critic for The New York Times who was a catalyst and chronicler of the 1960's folk boom, died on Monday at a hospital in Brighton, England.
He was 69 and lived in Brighton.
The cause was a stroke following complications from diabetes, said Liz Thomson, a friend.


Colombian Star Signs With U.S. League
CARLOS VALDERRAMA, the midfield playmaker and captain of Colombia in the 1994 World Cup in the United States and the 1990 World Cup in Italy, has signed to play with Major League Soccer when play starts in the spring.
SUNIL GULATI, the league's deputy commissioner, who announced the signing of Valderrama yesterday, said the league had narrowed its choices of allocating Valderrama to three teams -- the MetroStars, who will play at Giants Stadium, Dallas or Tampa Bay.
In addition to Valderrama, the league also announced the signings of DOMINIC KINNEAR, a veteran of the United States World Cup team, and  two members of the World Cup team of Cameroon, SAMUEL EKEME and VICTOR-AKEM N'DIP.


Budget Is Still $504 Million Short, Board Says
The Financial Control Board, the state agency that monitors New York City's finances, issued a report yesterday that said the city still faces a $504 million shortfall for the current budget year and will have to make additional cuts early next month.
But the board also praised Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani for taking steps to improve the city's budget straits.


Art in Review
Beth B. PPOW Gallery 532 Broadway (at Spring Street) SoHo Through Dec. 22


That Annual Hit: 'Messiah'
Here is a sampling of performances of Handel's "Messiah" and other oratorios  in New York City.
Admission is free unless otherwise noted (churches accept donations).


Senate Backs Cuts in Environmental Spending
The Senate today approved two spending bills that cut conservation and environmental programs deeply, but the White House remained adamant that both would be vetoed.
The measures, both of which have already passed the House, were approved by the Senate after relatively brief debate.
In both the House and Senate, each measure was approved with less than the two-thirds majority needed to override a veto.


Diner's Journal
There have been moments at Onieals (pronounced like Eugene and Tip) when I was certain that everybody in the room was smoking two or three cigarettes simultaneously, delirious to finally be in a restaurant where they were allowed  to smoke.
I have to admit that it did very little to enhance the atmosphere for  me.
It's a shame, because there is so much to like about this new restaurant on the edge of Little Italy.
For one, the room, with its intricately carved antique oak and mahogany ceiling, its lovely banquettes and artfully designed lamps.
For another, the attention to detail: a case in point is the caviar, which arrives in a gorgeous Art Deco server that would make anything taste better.


Judge Orders Delinquent Girl To Be Chained to Her Mother
A judge ordered a 15-year-old girl with a history of delinquency to remain chained to her mother -- 24 hours a day, seven days a week -- for a month.
Judge Wayne Creech of Family Court, who handed out the punishment on Dec. 7,  would not comment on the case on Wednesday, citing ethical reasons.
Under his ruling, if the girl is caught unshackled, her mother faces 30 days in prison.


Retiring at 37 to Travel and Write: It's Risky
INVESTMENT BIKER On the Road With Jim Rogers By Jim Rogers Illustrated. 402 pages.
Random House. $25.


THE FINE PRINT: A close look at the lobbying bill.;One Bill's Detour on the Way to the White House
One floor below the august halls of Congress, the U.S.
Capitol Historical Society sells a children's book called "Congress." It tells how laws are made and says, "If the bill passes both the Senate and the House of Representatives,  the bill goes to the President."
Not if it is the lobbying bill.


Balkan Foes Sign Peace Pact, Dividing An Unpacified Bosnia
In somber silence, the leaders of Bosnia, Serbia and Croatia signed a peace agreement today, even as scattered violence in Bosnia made clear that real peace was not yet at hand.
Today's ceremony, presided over by President Clinton and other international  sponsors, cleared the way for the deployment of 60,000 NATO peacekeeping troops  and the commitment of hundreds of millions of dollars to rebuild the country after nearly four cruel years of war.


And Voices Shall Ring Out, to Ring In the Holidays
This is a sampling of the musical presentations planned for the holiday season at churches and concert halls in New York City.
All are free unless otherwise noted (churches accept donations).
This selection, compiled by Alex Ross, represents what caught this critic's eye and excited his expectations.


Who Will Save the Children?
New Yorkers still shocked by the death of 6-year-old Elisa Izquierdo last month will find more cause for anguish in a lawsuit filed this week on behalf of other victims of abuse and neglect who are supposed to be protected by New York  City's Child Welfare Administration.
The cases cited, if accurately portrayed, offer more harrowing evidence that the agency is failing some of the city's most vulnerable children.
The class-action suit filed in Federal court by two child-advocate groups charges that the agency is so mismanaged, dysfunctional and resistant to reform that it should be placed in receivership and managed by an outsider.
That is a drastic remedy that would cede executive authority to the judiciary.
Responsibility for turning this agency around properly lies with Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, whose aides said yesterday that he was moving to resolve its problems.
His commitment to revitalizing the long-floundering agency is imperative.


Technology Issues Lead Stocks Down
Stocks fell sharply yesterday, led by technology shares, as investors ignored bullish economic news and aggressively sold their holdings to book year-end profits.
Traders attributed some of the loss to the expiration of options and futures  contracts today -- a so-called triple witching day -- which often adds volatility to the market in sessions leading up to the deadline.


Natural Gas Up on Volatile Day Amid Forecasts of a Cold Wave
Natural gas futures prices jumped yesterday on forecasts of cold weather next week in the Midwest and Northeast.
"It was an incredibly volatile day," said Drew Dickson, director of trading at GSC Energy in Atlanta.
"After prices soared higher, other market participants just wanted to jump on the bandwagon, afraid prices were going to go even higher."


Pataki Plans To Cut 3% Of State Jobs
Gov.
George E. Pataki announced today that he will propose reducing the state work force by 7,400 employees, mainly through buyouts and early retirement programs, in his new budget.
Mr.
Pataki said he would include $25 million in his budget plan to pay for severance packages, early retirement plans and retraining programs designed to encourage people to leave government service voluntarily.
The 7,400 workers represent about 3 percent of the state's 210,000 employees.


Also Of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows:
CATHERINE HOWE, Casey M. Kaplan, 580 Broadway, at Houston Street, SoHo (through tomorrow).
Posing art school nudes against overwrought splotches of abstract color, Catherine Howe layers irony on irony.
Beneath the intentional bad taste, there are glimmers of real talent, but the artist seems too hip to admit it (Pepe Karmel).
BOEM KIM, Arena Gallery, 313 Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights (through Sunday).
This solo debut by a Korea-born artist with a latter-day Fluxus sensibility features modest, amusing works on paper and raw canvas that are essentially written instructions for encounters of the esthetic, everyday and philosophical kind.
The appealingly awkward handwriting helps (Roberta Smith).


Accounts
*
Berlitz International Inc., Princeton, N.J., to Rapp Collins Worldwide, New York, a unit of the Omnicom Group, to handle advertising and direct marketing for the language services company in North and South America, which were previously handled by various agencies.
The billings were estimated at $7 million.


A Patient Wiling to Take Big Risks
Jeff Getty is known in San Francisco as one of the first AIDS drug smugglers.
One story goes like this: In 1988, United States Border Patrol agents stopped him from coming out of Mexico with unapproved drugs.
Although residents of the United States at the time were allowed to import medicines that lacked official approval for personal use, the guards demanded he tell them why he needed the drugs.
"Because I have AIDS!" he screamed at the top of his lungs.


For Children
'Miracle in Miami' Mazur Theater, Asphalt Green 555 East 90th Street Yorkville Recommended ages: 5 and up Tonight through Sunday


All Hairy and Scary After a Time of Rhyme
In "Jumanji," a movie based on a book about a board game, the players are endangered by evil monkeys, giant insects, rampaging jungle beasts and vines that shoot poison darts.
Children excited by the prospect of such perils would be well advised to get out the Candyland and forget about this.
But "Jumanji" isn't easily overlooked, as it has Robin Williams and runaway special effects to recommend it.
Mr.
Williams, giving one of his kindly performances rather than a funny one, plays a lad who has been held prisoner by  the Jumanji game for 26 years.
This lost boy returns to his hometown as a middle-aged man covered with scraggly hair, which may be the film's scariest effect of all.


Consumer Prices Flat In November
Consumer prices remained unchanged in November, the first time since the end  of the 1990-91 recession that American households suffered no inflation, Labor Department figures showed today.
The report, in contrast to one earlier this week that showed producer prices  surging last month, helped restore the confidence of a number of economists that the Federal Reserve would relax monetary policy next Tuesday at its final meeting of the year.


Giants Again Shut Out Of Pro Bowl Selections
In recent weeks the Pro Bowl was all Giants cornerback Phillippi Sparks had thought about.
To some extent he had become obsessed with it, talking about it for weeks with fellow players, coaches and some members of the news media.
Sparks had Hawaii on the brain.
Needless to say, Sparks was one of the more disappointed players in the National Football League today.
For the second consecutive season, no Giants player made the Pro Bowl.


Nonprofit Sector Needs Professionals
To the Editor:
Re "Woeful '95 Leads U.S. Charities to Introspection" (news article, Dec. 10):


AT&amp;T GETS CONTRACT FOR MILITARY TELEPHONE SERVICES
The AT&amp;T Corporation said yesterday that it had received a contract worth as  much as $2.5 billion to provide telephone services at Navy, Marine Corps and Coast Guard facilities.
AT&amp;T said the agreement would be worth at least $1.5 billion over 10 years.
If the military exercises five one-year renewal options,  the contract could be worth an additional $1 billion.
AT&amp;T is to provide residential phone services, pay phones, calling cards, prepaid debit cards and other services.
The contract is set to begin next year.


Gingrich Seeks Crackdown
Speaker Newt Gingrich said today that he would favor a mandatory death penalty for anyone caught entering the country with a commercial quantity of illegal drugs.
In wide-ranging remarks to the Economic Club of Chicago, Mr.
Gingrich said,  "You have to stop the drug trade. That should frankly be done at the borders and, to be quite correct, I believe we ought to protect our children at whatever level it takes to stop the drug trade."


Officer in King Case Freed
A former police sergeant who supervised the officers who were videotaped in the beating of Rodney G. King was released from Federal custody today.
The former sergeant, Stacey Koon, who has been in home confinement since he left a halfway house last month, served more than two years of his sentence and now begins two years of supervised release.
Many of the details of Mr.
Koon's confinement and release were kept secret since an apparent attempt on his life.


ADVANCED MICRO DEVICES TO BUILD PLANT IN GERMANY
Advanced Micro Devices Inc. said yesterday that its board had approved a 10-year plan to build a $1.9 billion microprocessor plant in Dresden, Germany.
The company, a semiconductor maker based in Sunnyvale, Calif., said it would invest $1.5 billion in the first five years.
Construction of the plant was expected to start by the end of 1996, with production beginning by the end of 1998.
The entire plant will employ more than 1,400 people, the company said.
The plan is subject to approval by German and European authorities.
Advanced Micro said in August 1994 that it was considering Dresden as a site for a new manufacturing plant.


A Chance to Connect


On My Mind;And Now the Trenches
And now it has come about.
As always, air bombardment has led to commitment of ground forces.
At any hour, American troops will enter winter trenches to risk their lives in Bosnia.
They will be there because of the arrogance, errors and misjudgments  of Western diplomacy, the murderous hatreds of the people they will be trying to lead to peace, and because of certain political personality traits of their Commander in Chief.


N.H.L. Hopes Oilers Aren't Next to Move
The National Hockey League's Board of Governors, concerned about two of the league's Canadian-based teams moving to the United States, is now fretting about the fate of a third one, the Edmonton Oilers.


In Schiaparelli's Hands, Women as Works of Art
When it comes to the intersection of high and low culture, the designer Elsa  Schiaparelli is one of the century's preeminent crossing guards.
Schiaparelli, who was born in Rome in 1900, gave the world shocking pink and was the first haute couture designer to use zippers (for decoration as well as function).
But  she mainly thought of herself as an artist and actively sought collaboration with other artists, be they Surrealists like Salvador Dali and Jean Cocteau, jewelry designers like Jean Clement, or Albert Lasage, who ran Paris's most prestigious embroidery house.
According to "A Slice of Schiaparelli," the small, delightful, aptly titled sampling of her strange and rich output at the Brooklyn Museum, Schiaparelli definitely favored surface over structure, usually approaching clothing as a kind of canvas on which to paint.
Her beautifully colored and detailed garments  are amazingly, amusingly and sometimes obviously representational, possessing a  flair and inventiveness that can be visually irresistible.


Work May Aid Search for AIDS Vaccine
In a step that may advance the search for an AIDS vaccine, researchers at the Mount Sinai Medical Center have found that a relatively mild strain of virus that causes AIDS can keep the more virulent strain from multiplying.
The inhibitory effect was found in the laboratory, said Dr.
Jay Rappaport, an associate professor of immunobiology at Mount Sinai and the principal investigator of the study, which is reported today in the Journal of Molecular Medicine.


History vs. History: Foes in Bosnia Invoke the Past
The Bosnian war was long sustained by the manipulation of history, used by the parties to justify acts of barbarism and by Western powers to explain their  prolonged inaction.
Today, as a treaty was signed here to end the worst conflict in Europe since World War II, history was once again a theme and the varied allusions to it suggested the fragility of the peace.
President Clinton, abruptly changing his views on Bosnian history, tried to portray a society long distinguished by understanding between different ethnic and religious groups.
"Bosnia," he said, "once found unity in its diversity," adding that the lives there of Muslims, Orthodox Serbs, Catholic Croats and Jews were "woven together by marriage and culture."


No Rise in Parkway Tolls
The New Jersey Highway Authority said yesterday that it did not need to raise tolls on the Garden State Parkway.
In the parkway's 40 years, tolls have increased only once -- in 1989, when they jumped to 35 cents from 25, said Dennis Ingoglia, a spokesman for the authority.
It said it expected to collect $172.5 million at the tollbooths this  year.
Mr.
Ingoglia said cost cutting and increased traffic made a toll rise unnecessary, The A.P. reported.


Extremist Army Group at War With U.S. Policy
An underground group claiming to be serving in the Army's elite Special Forces, headquartered at Fort Bragg, N.C., has been publishing a far right dissident newsletter that is virulently critical of the Federal Government, and  particularly of its use of soldiers in carrying out foreign policy.
Called The Resister, the publication, for example, was vehemently opposed to  American military involvement in Haiti, which it said was installing a Communist ruler at the behest of "racists" and "tribalists" in the Congressional Black Caucus.


Sony in Venture With Chinese Companies
The Sony Corporation plans to invest $410 million in a joint venture with two Chinese companies to make Trinitron color televisions and computer displays.
The venture's annual production will constitute 11 percent of Sony's total TV output by 1998.
Sony will take a 70 percent stake in the joint venture, Shanghai Suogang.
The Shanghai Video and Audio Electronics Company will have a 20 percent stake and the Shanghai Vacuum Electron Devices Company will hold 10 percent.
Production at the plant, which will begin in late 1996, is expected to reach three million units annually by the year 2000.
Sony plans to export 70 percent of the factory's production despite surging demand for televisions and other consumer electronics items in China.(AP)


Lee Zhito, 77, Dies; Billboard Publisher
Lee Zhito, a former editor in chief and publisher of Billboard, the music-industry trade magazine, died last Friday near his home in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 77.
He was struck by a car, said a spokesman for the family, Joel Brokaw.


THOMSON TO BUY STAKE IN STARSIGHT TELECAST
Thomson Multimedia, a unit of the French electronics giant Thomson S.A., will invest $25 million in Starsight Telecast Inc. under a long-term strategic relationship, the companies said yesterday.
Starsight has developed an on-screen interactive television program guide with one-button videocassette recorder programming.
Under the agreement, Thomson will receive 3.33 million Starsight common shares at $7.50 apiece.
It also has the right to buy up to 1 million more Starsight shares over the next two years at $7.50 apiece and up to 1 million more shares over three years at $10 apiece.
Starsight's stock soared $2.875, or 85 percent, to $6.25, in Nasdaq trading.


Mary Bruce, 95, Tap Dance Teacher
Mary Bruce, a teacher to generations of young tap dancers in New York and Chicago, died on Tuesday at Goldwater Memorial Hospital on Roosevelt Island in New York City.
Miss Bruce, who lived in Manhattan, was 95.
A small, sweet-faced woman with a gimlet eye for lapses in technique and general deportment, Miss Bruce taught for a half-century in a small loft studio  on West 125th Street in Manhattan.
Her students included Josephine Premice, Ruby Dee, Martina Arroyo and Marlon Brando.
Miss Bruce's "Starbud" recitals for new talent, some of them held at Carnegie Hall, were a popular feature of her teaching.


Foreign Chip Share In Japan Sets Record
The share of the Japanese computer chip market held by foreign companies hit  a record high in the third quarter, the United States Government said today.
Foreign chip makers gained 26.2 percent of the Japanese semiconductor market in July through September, up from 22.9 percent in the second quarter, the United States trade representative's office said.
The performance beat a previous record of 23.7 percent in the fourth quarter of 1994.


No Bowl for Receiver
The wide receiver and return specialist NILO SILVAN, exonerated on rape charges Wednesday, will not play for Tennessee in the Citrus Bowl against Ohio State on New Year's Day.
The decision was announced yesterday by Coach PHILLIP FULMER.
Silvan was second in the nation in punt returns in 1994 and second this  year in kickoff returns entering the Florida game Sept. 16, the third game of the season.
He suffered a bruised shoulder in the game and was accused of raping a high school student at his apartment the next day.
A day later he was formally charged and the next day dismissed from the team. (AP)


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-21


Schools Urged to Regionalize
After a yearlong study, a task force appointed by Governor Whitman has concluded that New Jersey's 611 school districts ought to voluntarily consolidate.
Larger districts, the panel said, would give students a broader curriculum and enable the schools to get the equipment they need for computer and other technical courses.
But the task force, known as the Commission on Business Efficiency of the Public Schools, said that school districts now lose money when they consolidate.
That policy needs to be reversed, the panel said.


2 Sides Map Their Strategies For Last-Ditch Budget Talks
White House officials and Republican leaders in Congress met separately in closed sessions today to plan strategy and develop new opening bids for last-ditch budget negotiations that are supposed to begin on Friday.
After three weeks of shadow boxing, the two sides announced on Wednesday night that they had agreed to swap new long-term budget proposals on Friday and  to negotiate through the weekend in an effort to resolve their differences by Christmas.
But they could not even agree today on what they had decided on Wednesday.


When the Magic of Oz Materializes in Midtown
CONVENTIONAL metaphor has it that Rockefeller Center is a city within the city; after all, it has boundaries and a central square, it has commerce, entertainment and recreation, it has its own security force and internal phone system and, of course, it has financial problems.
And perhaps for the 65,000 or  so people who make their livings there, the metaphor is sound.
But for a visitor, particularly at this time of year, Rockefeller Center seems more an artificial or even imaginary city than part of a real one.
Its aura is more Emerald City than New York, as if the 63-year-old site -- perhaps the world's most famous urban development, the first of whose 14 original buildings opened in October 1932 -- were not in midtown Manhattan between Fifth  Avenue and Avenue of the Americas, but at the end of the Yellow Brick Road.


German Bank Drops Deal for Oppenheimer
Bayerische Vereinsbank A.G. said today that it had scrapped plans to buy the  Oppenheimer Group because it was not prepared to meet strict American requirements that would govern the deal.
"We did not get a decision from the Federal Reserve that would have given us  the necessary security for planning," a spokesman for the Munich-based bank, Germany's fourth largest, said.


Paper, Scissors and the Rock
The Sacramento Kings are on another coat of paint, but they actually might let this one dry.
The arena is full, the owner has a jump shot and the standings are upside down.
Their five-year plan took 10, but that's life on the other side of the Ping-Pong ball.
They have played the lottery every season since 1986, hit the jackpot in an off year (Pervis Ellison) and missed the jackpot in an on year (Shaquille O'Neal).
Vice versa, and this team could have been Orlando West, and don't think the Kings' executives haven't cried themselves to sleep.


In San Francisco, Murder or Accident?
To the Editor:
Re "A Man Dead, a Man Jailed, a City Divided" (news article, Dec. 11):


Infant Deaths Tied to Poverty, Study Confirms
A study released today by Federal health officials found that infant mortality rates were 60 percent higher for women living below the poverty line than for those above it.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said a survey of 21,583 mothers found mortality during the first year was 8.3 per 1,000 infants for women with incomes above the poverty level and 13.5 for those living in poverty.


Reminder of Glory Past At Revival in Garden
Madison Square Garden was looking for another attraction and found it tucked  away in a basement: the ring.
The frame for the ring in which Joe Louis, Sugar Ray Robinson and Jake LaMotta once enhanced the building's boxing reputation will be back in the main  arena tonight for a seven-bout program that features the unbeaten Oscar De La Hoya.


Germans Reduce Both Key Interest Rates
Germany's central bank cut its main lending rates to their lowest levels in more than seven years today, taking a step that could help sputtering European economies and make it easier for the Federal Reserve to ease credit in the United States.
The Bundesbank said it lowered the discount rate and the Lombard rate half a  percentage point each because growth in the German money supply had fallen far below the bank's target, there was no danger of rekindled inflation, and the mark was strong.


Men in Tutus, Seriously
There's something new about Les Ballets Trockadero de Monte Carlo, the all-male company in which men perform women's roles wearing tutus and point shoes.
The Trocks, as the dancers are familiarly known, were in fine spirits on  Wednesday night at the Kaye Playhouse, where they danced sometimes on their own  toes and occasionally on one another's.
As usual, the program featured broadly comic spoofs of familiar ballets.
But  not everything was in jest.


Higher Speed Limits Mean More Highway Death
To the Editor:
Re "With Speed Limits Untied by U.S., Montana Reverts to the Fast Lane" (news article, Dec. 9), on the law allowing states to resume setting their own speed limits:


Racing Purses Rising Slightly
The New York Racing Association announced its 1996 stakes schedule for Belmont and Saratoga yesterday, including a slight increase in total purses and  a delayed date for the Travers.
Including purses for the Aqueduct winter meeting, which had already been announced, total purses for stakes events will be about 4 percent more than in 1995.
Terry Meyocks, chief of operations, said the increase reflects a desire to attract only the top horses for the lush racing season that runs from Belmont in the spring to Saratoga in the summer and back to Belmont in the fall.
The increase brings the total to $24.4 million.


F.A.A. Wants to Cut Jetliner Pilots' Hours
The Federal Aviation Administration today proposed cutting the number of hours airline pilots may work, a change long sought by Federal safety experts, and put in force new regulations that are meant to make small commuter planes as safe as big jetliners.
The series of air safety changes, described by the Secretary of Transportation as the most comprehensive in more than 25 years, also set a firm  retirement age of 60 for pilots of all passenger planes, large and small.
Efforts had been made to raise the age.
Most of the new rules on commuter planes that were made final today were proposed earlier this year.


A New Scholarship For Black Students
The foundation of the American Advertising Federation is creating an annual four-year scholarship fund at the University of Illinois in Champaign for black  students pursuing careers in advertising.
The scholarship will be named after Representative Cardiss Collins, Democrat of Illinois, for what the foundation called her efforts to encourage greater participation in the advertising industry among members of minorities.
Plans call for a dinner to be held in Chicago in November, with proceeds going to the  fund.


Ex-Executive Of Daimler Is Called Suicide
Adding tragedy to a series of troublesome developments over the last year, Daimler-Benz A.G. said today that Gerhard Liener, its former No. 2 official and  once one of Europe's most influential executives, was found dead in his apartment on Tegern Lake in southern Germany, having apparently killed himself.
Mr.
Liener, 63, the driving force behind getting Daimler-Benz, Germany's largest industrial company, listed on the New York Stock Exchange, apparently left a handwritten note.
But the police in the city of Rosenheim, near Mr.
Liener's home, did not disclose the contents of the letter.


PART OF BELGIAN PHONE COMPANY IS PRIVATIZED
A consortium headed by the Ameritech Corporation won a 49.9 percent stake yesterday in the Belgian state-owned telephone company Belgacom with a $2.5 billion bid.
The Belgian Telecommunications Minister, Elio di Rupo, said the bid from Ameritech and partners from Singapore and Denmark beat a rival offer for the stake from a Dutch-Swiss consortium.
The Ameritech offer was chosen unanimously by the state privatization commission and by Belgacom itself.
Within the Belgacom consortium, Ameritech has a 35 percent share; Tele Danmark A.S. 33 percent; Singapore Telecommunications Ltd. 27 percent, and a group of institutional partners 5 percent.


Packers' White Might Be Back
Reggie White's season may not be over, after all.
The Green Bay Packers said today that surgery on the defensive end's left hamstring has been postponed and the league's leading sack man was listed as questionable for Saturday's game against New Orleans.


Jesse Jackson Jr. Sworn In as House Member
Jesse Jackson Jr., son of the civil rights leader, was sworn in today as a member of the House as his father and family watched.
Mr.
Jackson, who won a special election on Tuesday in a heavily Democratic district that includes Chicago's South Side and neighboring suburbs, replaced Mel Reynolds, also a Democrat.


Art in Review
Bruce Connor '15 Beautiful Mysteries' Curt Marcus Gallery 578 Broadway, near Houston Street SoHo Through Dec. 22 Bruce Connor 'Prints, Multiples, Illustrated Books, Films: 1957 to 1991' Susan Inglett 100 Wooster Street SoHo Through tomorrow


EXTENDED STAY AMERICA STOCK UP ON FIRST DAY OF TRADING
Shares of Extended Stay America Inc. more than doubled in price on their first day of trading, as investors bet on the management strength of H. Wayne Huizenga and the need for low-priced, extended- stay hotels.
Extended Stay shares, which were first priced at $13 but opened at $20.25, closed at $27.50 on Nasdaq after almost 5.5 million shares were traded.
The company, started at the  beginning of the year by Mr.
Huizenga, founder of the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation and owner of the Miami Dolphins football team, and George Johnson, raised $57.2 million.
So far, it has opened one hotel but it planned to begin construction on 40 more hotels in 1996.


Devils Will Get 2 Starters Back
Although they have only one victory in their last five games, the Devils (13-14-3) could turn things around quickly because they are close to being at full strength for the first time this season.
Although Stephane Richer is still nursing an injured wrist, two other regulars will return to the lineup.


Fiat Selects Its Next Chief
Fiat S.p.A., Italy's largest company, said yesterday that Paolo Cantarella, the head of its car division, would become chief executive of the whole company.
He will replace Cesare Romiti, who in turn is replacing its chairman, Giovanni Agnelli, who announced earlier this week that he would retire next year.
Mr.
Cantarella has led a turnaround at Fiat's main division and was favored to take  over from Mr.
Romiti.
Fiat also said that Mr.
Agnelli had proposed that an age limit of 75 for board members be reinstated.
Mr.
Agnelli will turn 75 on March 12.
Mr.
Romiti is 72.
Mr.
Agnelli has said in the past that his 32-year-old nephew, Giovanni Agnelli, will take over Fiat one day. (Bloomberg Business News)


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;Alvin Chereskin, a longtime force in beauty advertising, gives up retirement for Fresh Carats.
AN agency creative executive who dominated beauty and fashion advertising for more than three decades before retiring a year ago is back at work.
Alvin Chereskin, the linchpin of the Estee Lauder account at AC&amp; R Advertising, where he served in capacities including chairman, chief executive and executive creative director, is opening an advertising and marketing consulting company in New York with clients that include the designer Vera Wang.


Conviction in Killing of Child
A Passaic County jury yesterday convicted a former mental patient, Conrad Jeffrey, of kidnapping, raping and murdering a 7-year-old Passaic girl in 1993.
Mr.
Jeffrey will not face execution, because the jury could not agree on whether he should be eligible for the death penalty, but he could face a life sentence without parole, The Associated Press reported.


CHRONICLE
For GLORIA STEINEM, it could have been "This Is Your Life."
A parade of friends and colleagues showered Ms.
Steinem, the feminist leader, with praise at a tribute given by the Veteran Feminists of America on Wednesday  night at the Seventh Regiment Armory on Park Avenue.


Genetic Engineering Creates Rice Resistant to Destructive Blight
Using genetic engineering, scientists have made rice plants resistant to bacterial leaf blight, a disease that routinely destroys rice crops around the world.
It is the first time that a disease-resistance gene has been put into rice and the first such gene isolated in a cereal crop, agricultural experts said.
Cereals provide three-fourths of the calories consumed by the human race.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 4 about the retirements of 12 United States senators misstated the previous record for voluntary retirements.
Ten senators retired in 1896, not 12, as stated by the Senate Historian's Office.
Ten also retired in 1904.


The Nurturing of Tiny Techies
NEW YORK CITY children often become jaded even faster than their parents.
As  one little girl approached another children's museum, her mother wasn't sure whether her reaction would be boundless enthusiasm or I've-seen-it-all ennui.
The first good sign was that she began running as soon as she entered the new Hudson Valley Children's Museum.
The second was that she promptly disappeared.
And in this most frenzied of seasons, there is much to be said for a public place where you can safely lose a 7-year-old.
The museum formally opens Phase I of its space tomorrow. (Phase II is scheduled for 1997.) Situated in Nyack, N.Y., a picturesque town probably best known as the birthplace of the artist Edward Hopper, the museum stands on a gently sloping street where signs advertise live bait and homemade pie (not together, of course).
The museum isn't nearly as pretty as the harbor nearby: it occupies 5,000 square feet of warehouse space rented from the Nyack Seaport Corporation.
But inside, it offers opportunities for children to mingle, move and make noise while receiving an impromptu education in topics ranging from physics to geography.


Transactions
Baseball


MORE ON THE BALKANS
Serbs Near Sarajevo Pack and Curse Peace


4 Presidents With but a Single Thought: Preserving the Peace in the Balkans
Following are excerpts from remarks by President Clinton and Presidents Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia, Franjo Tudjman of Croatia and Alija Izetbegovic of Bosnia at the signing of the Balkan peace accord in Paris yesterday.
Mr.
Clinton's remarks were transcribed by The Associated Press.
Those by Mr.
Milosevic, Mr.
Tudjman and Mr.
Izetbegovic are official translations transcribed by the Federal Document Clearing House, a private transcription service.
President Clinton


Good Results Reported for Early Laser Treatment for Glaucoma
Laser therapy is a safe and effective option for treating the pressure that builds up in the eyes of patients with newly diagnosed glaucoma, according to a  nationwide study released today.
After more than seven years of following hundreds of patients at many medical centers, the researchers said that glaucoma patients who started out with laser  treatment did as well as or better than those treated only with medicines.


Ruling Assailed On State Farm
California's Insurance Commissioner, Chuck Quackenbush, said yesterday that he had rejected a judge's decision that the State Farm Insurance Companies did not owe a refund to customers as a result of Proposition 103.
The Insurance Department has contended that State Farm, the largest insurer in the state, owes $172 million.
Proposition 103, passed by voters in 1988, calls for refunds that vary according to each insurance company's profits.
The proposition gave the Insurance Department broad new powers to control insurance  prices.


Hospitals Never Knew Past Of Patient in Stabbing Case
The homeless man charged with stabbing a child with a hypodermic needle on a  subway train earlier this month spent time at two psychiatric institutions after escaping from a third hospital upstate.
But officials at those two institutions  never figured out he was an escapee, the Manhattan District Attorney said yesterday.
The homeless man, Angel Coro, 51, who has a record of petty crimes and escapes from mental institutions, was indicted yesterday in the Dec. 2 attack on Colete Lopez, a 6-year-old from Queens who was riding the subway with her mother in Manhattan.
Prosecutors said Mr.
Coro's history raised questions about whether psychiatric institutions are doing enough to keep track of potentially dangerous patients.


Tougher Laws Won't Curb Youthful Violence;A Better Investment
To the Editor:
None can be unconcerned about the increases in violent youth crime (news article, Dec. 10).
But even if we fund more prisons and fill every cell we build, we won't solve the problem until we acknowledge that youngsters who have  productive alternatives do not commit violent crimes.


Reviews Are Mixed For Mayor On Road
It happens these days at every town meeting and on every radio show, and on a cold night in Bensonhurst this week, it happened when Sheldon Hyman took the microphone.
"You just took for yourself a $35,000-a-year increase," the high school vice  principal told the chief executive of the city, raising the subject that everyone in the room was waiting for.
"At the same time, all the municipal employees out here were asked to take a zero-zero raise for the next two years.  Now with all due respect, this just is not fair. This is just an in-your-face type of attitude."


Feminine Falsetto Isn't Unique to Japan
To the Editor:
Sayori Iwata, a spokeswoman for Mitsukoshi Department Store, says "it may be  hard for Americans to understand, but in Japan, it's considered beautiful to sacrifice yourself for the service of others" (Tokyo Journal, Dec. 13).


Austrians Are Baffled By Letter-Bomb Attacks
Trying to solve recent letter-bomb attacks in Austria, the authorities acknowledged today that they were baffled by the technical expertise displayed in the devices and by the cryptic historical allusions that have accompanied them.
"The culprit is toying with us, playing a deadly game," said Robert Sturm, the Interior Ministry's chief inspector.
"It is a provocation. He confronts the  experts with ever more difficult and constantly new challenges."


Colombia Panel Backs President In Campaign Gifts of Drug Cartel
The threat of impeachment for President Ernesto Samper was eased today when a Colombian congressional committee voted against opening a formal investigation into charges that the President personally approved the acceptance of millions of dollars in contributions from the Cali drug cartel to help him win election last year.
"There are no merits to open a formal investigation," said Jorge Humberto Mantilla, a member of the Colombian House of Representatives, whose committee voted 14 to 1 against the inquiry.
"But if definitive proof arises, the investigation will be reopened. This does not mean that he is guilty or innocent."


U.S. Again Tries a Trade Issue as a Carrot and Stick for Beijing
With pressure growing to respond to China's imprisonment of its best-known dissident, Clinton Administration officials said today that it would be politically impossible to support Beijing's demands for admission to the new World Trade Organization while it continues to repress dissent and to ignore a key trade accord with the United States.
In interviews today, a day after the one-day trial of Wei Jingsheng, who was  sentenced to 14 years in prison for his advocacy of democracy, Administration officials continued to defend their policy of "constructive engagement" with China.
They insisted that their decision not to link trade issues to an improved human rights record last year remains the best hope for influencing China's behavior over the long term, although that policy has come under renewed attack  in Congress.


Japanese Law to Force Religious Cult to Disband
The Japanese Government decided today to apply an anti-subversion law against the Aum Shinrikyo religious cult, a move that will outlaw the cult and force it  to disband.
Aum Shinrikyo, which is accused of carrying out a deadly gas attack on the Tokyo subway in March, can appeal today's decision by the Justice Department but will remain disbanded during the expected legal battle.


Christopher Offers Israel-Syria Shuttle
Secretary of State Warren Christopher offered today to undertake an open-ended shuttle next year between Syria and Israel in an effort to make peace between them.
"I am sure the President would want me to do it, and I would want to do it,"  Mr.
Christopher said as he began a four-day visit to the Middle East, flying here from the signing of the Bosnian peace treaty in Paris.
"I don't think the present moment is the time for that."


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Nov. 22 about the business strategy of Wells Fargo &amp; Company referred incorrectly to the company's involvement in money management.
Although Wells Fargo did sell its interest in a money-management firm in June, a separate Wells Fargo unit continues to manage $40 billion in assets; the company said it was not withdrawing from this field.


Vehicle Slams Into Crowd
A soldier rammed a speeding vehicle into a crowd of people fighting outside a convenience store early today, killing two, the authorities said.
The sport-utility vehicle was traveling about 50 miles per hour when it hit the crowd at the Max Fuel Express store about 1:30 A.M., the police said.
At least three people were injured, one seriously.


An Ugly Duckling and Her Men 41 Years Later
The guilty pleasure of this holiday movie season is "Sabrina," Sydney Pollack's kamikaze remake of a 1954 romantic confection that has never stopped winning hearts.
Mr.
Pollack's new film runs straight up against a snobbish and dated story, Billy Wilder's status as a national treasure and Audrey Hepburn's heart-stopping way of purring the word "Paris" with music in her voice.
Mr.
Pollack's film runs into these obstacles so hard, in fact, that it runs right over them without difficulty.
His "Sabrina" succeeds as a breezy, lighthearted throwback, made without benefit of the Hepburn magic but with much  else in its favor.
Blossoming into radiant color, this film has picture-postcard charms that the black-and-white earlier version could only hint at.
It has also  been improved by a newly sharpened sense of humor.
And as far as casting goes, Julia Ormond (as Sabrina) can't match Miss Hepburn's gift for glowing in the dark, but she charmingly handles what is now a less critical job.


Forgetting a Merger, Wellpoint and Health Systems Work to Avoid CostlyLegal Battle
Preparing to break off their star-crossed marriage plans, Wellpoint Health Networks and Health Systems International said yesterday that they had been discussing "mutual termination" of their agreement to create a giant managed health care company with $6 billion of annual revenues.
With at least six investment banking firms and 10 law firms involved in aspects of the disintegrating deal, analysts said there would be a rush to find  new merger or acquisition partners for the two California-based companies.
Under the deal, Wellpoint would have acquired Health Systems, its neighbor in the Los  Angeles suburb of Woodland Hills, for $1.89 billion in stock.


Accord Near on Communications Bill, a Win for Baby Bells
House and Senate negotiators are close to an agreement on legislation to let  the regional Bell telephone companies enter the long-distance market, resolving  the most intractable dispute over a bill to overhaul the nation's communications laws.
The deal, proposed by House Republicans and considered likely to be accepted  by the Senate, would make it comparatively easy for the Bell companies to offer  long-distance service and would be a big defeat for companies like AT&amp;T, MCI Communications and Sprint that have fought hard for numerous restrictions on the local phone companies.


Out of the Fever Dreams of a Child
It is a cozy Christmas Eve, and a toy soldier on the windowsill of a little boy's bedroom comes to life and begins beating on his cymbal.
Moments later, a Santa Claus plops into the fireplace, brushes himself off and steps into the room.
He is followed by another Santa Claus and another until the place is teeming with ominously jolly Santas.
So begins the provocative but impossibly convoluted cinematic fantasy "The City of Lost Children." As the boy's excitement turns to apprehension, the walls begin to crinkle and everything becomes wavy and distorted.
Suddenly the child,  named Denree (Joseph Lucien), finds himself on the streets of a murky harbor city peopled with carnival characters, among them his adopted brother, a half-witted circus strongman with Munster features named One (Ron Perlman).


Microsoft and NBC News Hold a Little Satellite Chat
The imagery that accompanied yesterday's announcement of the joint venture between NBC and the Microsoft Corporation to create a new all-news cable channel was indeed dazzling.
In a scene reminiscent of "Casablanca," the NBC News anchor, Tom Brokaw, appeared on a movie-sized video screen live from an airfield in Ramstein, Germany, a fleet of C-130 transport planes arrayed behind him as snow gently fell.
Across the room, on another enormous screen, the scene was high-tech contemporary, as William H. Gates, the Microsoft chairman, appeared live by satellite from Hong Kong.


A Simple Gift Restores The Pleasure of Reading
When a visitor comes calling -- and that is rare -- Alma C. goes down to the  entrance of her Bronx apartment building to wait.
The outside buzzer is broken,  and Ms.
C. frets that a guest might be stranded in the cold.
The characters loitering in the lobby do not faze her.
Neither does her failing eyesight.
Or her unsteady legs, on which she must walk slowly, ever so slowly, bolstering each hesitant step with the tap of a cane.
Ms.
C., a former waitress whose husband died many years ago, is a proud, defiant woman of independent ways, and no amount of trouble is too much for common courtesy.


Pro Bowl Eyes 49er Defenders
Nothing like this has ever happened to the San Francisco 49ers.
On a team known for its offense, a club-record six defensive players were selected yesterday to the National Football Conference Pro Bowl squad, including cornerback Eric Davis, free safety Merton Hanks and linebacker Lee Woodall, all  starters.
Linebacker Ken Norton Jr., strong safety Tim McDonald and defensive tackle Dana Stubblefield made the team as reserves.
The N.F.C. squad plays the American Football Conference on Feb. 4 in Hawaii.


THEATER REVIEWAdvice From an Authority: Laugh!
Probably nobody knows the troubles Dick Gregory has seen.
The 63-year-old barrier-shattering comedian and self-styled political pundit  -- whose one-man show, "Dick Gregory Live!!," opened at the Samuel Beckett Theater last night -- has a curriculum vitae that includes front-line action in  the Southern desegregation movement, assorted arrests for civil disobedience and a flashy bid for the Presidency in 1968.


Jury Rejects Insanity Defense in Westchester Case and Convicts Man in Three Slayings
A former probation officer who was accused of faking insanity for almost seven years was convicted yesterday of murdering his father and two elderly aunts in their Westchester County home.
The suspect, Ray J. Macaro Jr., 52, went on trial in White Plains six weeks ago and mounted an insanity defense against charges that he beat to death his father, 80-year-old Raphael Macaro Sr., an aunt, Sylvia Bennett, 86, and shot and killed another aunt, Regina Deine, 73, before setting fire to the family's Eastchester home.
The three were killed in September 1988.


Abroad at Home;Confession Of Weakness
In a cynical time, we Americans long for heroes.
If we were less parochial, less culture-bound, we would see one: a man of extraordinary vision and courage.
On his own, alone, he has challenged the greatest tyranny on earth.
Though he had little formal education, he brilliantly expounded the meaning of freedom.
Imprisoned, brutalized, silenced, he will not yield.
Wei Jingsheng is his name.
Because he is Chinese, relatively few Americans recognize his heroism.
But he is as remarkable a figure, in his way, as Andrei Sakharov was in the years of Soviet tyranny or Nelson Mandela under apartheid.


Company's Buyout: Was It That Good?;Rush to the Doors at an Insurer Shows Pitfalls in Cutting Staff
What if a company made a buyout offer to its employees and everybody took it?
That is nearly what happened here at the Connecticut Mutual Life Insurance Company, which is in a hurry to trim its work force before its merger early next year with the Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company.
In recent weeks, after more than two-thirds of the 1,650 employees at Connecticut Mutual's home offices said yes to the offer -- a reflection of dismal morale and jitters about the future, many workers said -- the company found itself wooing those it wanted to stay.


Dollar Falls on Profit Taking After German Interest-Rate Cuts
The dollar fell yesterday in what was regarded as a round of profit taking, after the German central bank reduced its key interest rates, a move many traders had anticipated.


Heavyweight Requiem: Short and to the Point
With only two shopping days left until the Mike Tyson-Buster Mathis Jr. fight, fans showed up with their cameras at a downtown hotel today for a little  bargain hunting.
Who could blame them?
The weigh-in was a lot cheaper than Saturday's fight, and it may end up lasting longer.
Tyson arrived in a black bombardier jacket and hat, complete with flaps, as the full-throated promoter, Don King, talked about punches that would carry the  force of nuclear explosions.
If there was a feeling that Tyson might carry Mathis a few rounds at the Spectrum, simply to work some of the rust off, King's bombast suggested otherwise.
He projected that the fight would be brutally short, a fistic haiku.


From the Bosnia Peace Plan, Handshakes, Anxiety and Leave-Taking


Six in Family Killed in Fire
A woman and her five grandchildren died in a fire that swept through their home early today, the authorities said.
The cause was not determined, but investigators suspected an electrical problem, perhaps involving a Christmas decoration, said Detective Radames Gil of the Police Department.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY


Hospital Care Bill Is Stalled
A bill backed by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman that would have financed hospital care for indigent patients was stalled yesterday in the Assembly Budget Committee when Democrats opposed raising cigarette taxes by 25 cents.
Republican committee members had enough votes to pass the bill, but they wanted  to share responsibility for a tax increase, said Assemblyman Walter Kavanaugh, a Republican of Somerville, who heads the panel.
The Legislature has until Dec. 31 to find a way to pay for charity care, which is now financed by diverting money collected through the unemployment insurance fund.


Market Place;Nokia drops a bombshell, and pays for it on Wall Street.
THERE may be any number of hot conference calls today, but none is likely to  be hotter than the discussion officials of Nokia are scheduled to hold with a bunch of irate investors and analysts.
Wall Street is upset with Nokia, Finland's largest publicly held company and  the world's second-largest cellular phone maker after Motorola, because it feels it has been sandbagged.


Serbs Near Sarajevo Pack and Curse Peace
The signing of the peace agreement in Paris descended on the bleak and frigid Serb suburbs of Sarajevo like an ax blow today, sending dispirited families to back rooms to root out large vinyl suitcases.
Several men went to the cemetery,  where they somberly unearthed the bones of relatives to take with them.
"I have lost my brother and six uncles in this war," said Sladana Trivunovic, fighting back tears as the early sunset blanketed the street in darkness.
"And now with this agreement I must find a way to dig them up and take them to a new  place. Our whole world has been shattered. Our communities and families will fall apart. We will be cast adrift without support or friends. We have been abandoned by the world and our leadership."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Corrections
An article on Nov. 22 about a study that found that doctors ignored or misunderstood the wishes of terminally ill patients included an erroneous comment from a medical ethicist about Medicare's coverage of home care and hospice care.
Both services are indeed covered for such patients.


Corrections
Because of a computer entry error, a front-page caption yesterday, with a picture of Senator Bob Dole during the Senate debate on sending American troops  to Bosnia, was omitted from some copies and replaced by sample typography.
The caption should have consisted of this quotation from Mr.
Dole: "The decision's been made, the deployment started. And our goal should be a Bosnia that is self-reliant, able to defend itself without depending on the United States."


Mexico City Journal;The Poet's Medallion: A Case of Finders Keepers?
Sooty walls of volcanic rock still shield the 17th-century convent from the trespasses of the outside world.
Cats sun themselves on the patio.
The chapel hums with quiet.
But not even such venerable walls or guarded tranquillity were enough to keep controversy from engulfing two powerful Mexican women who once worked there, or  to safeguard the kind of hero a troubled Mexico desperately seeks.


On Stage, and Off
Two Weddings and a Dispute


JUSTICE DEPARTMENT DROPS INVESTIGATION OF CATERPILLAR
The Justice Department has closed an antitrust investigation of Caterpillar Inc. without challenging the company's policies on spare-parts sales, the company said yesterday.
The Government had been investigating whether Caterpillar used illegal tactics to control the spare-parts market, because several lawsuits that were filed against the company accused Caterpillar of shutting out dealers who would not cooperate with its policy.
A Justice Department spokeswoman, Gina Talamona, said the department had halted an antitrust investigation of the construction industry but would not specifically  discuss Caterpillar.


When Oakley Aches, the Knicks Feel the Pain
There were plenty of trouble spots for the Knicks last night at Madison Square Garden.
Denver's disruption of New York's halfcourt offense and Patrick Ewing's inability to make a crucial basket in the fourth quarter quickly come to mind.
But the Achilles' heel that pained the Knicks the most never made it on the floor.
Charles Oakley sat out the game.
Dikembe Mutombo flourished.
The Knicks lost, 103-94, to the Nuggets.


A Minor but Messy Storm Frazzles Many a Commuter
Although yesterday's storm probably was not the kind that breeds stories to tell grandchildren, it offered commuters a foretaste of just how frazzling winter could be.
Even though only an inch or two of snow fell in most parts of the metropolitan area, turning to rain in many places by early afternoon, commuters  faced a slog.
Though there were fender-benders, the roads were passable.
The trains did run, though sometimes slowly.
Most of the day-care centers, nursery schools and other educational institutions were open.
But there were plenty of cars that failed to start.


STANDARD FEDERAL BANK TO BUY BELL BANCORP
Standard Federal Bank agreed yesterday to acquire Bell Bancorp Inc. for $37.50 a share in cash, plus payments related to outstanding stock options, in a transaction valued at about $354.1 million.
Bell Bancorp is the parent of Bell Federal Savings and Loan Association, based in Chicago.
Bell has total assets of $1.9 billion and $1.6 billion in deposits.
Standard Federal, which is based in Troy, Mich., had assets of $13.3 billion and deposits of $9.1 billion.


McGraw-Hill Settles Book Destruction Case
The McGraw-Hill Companies said yesterday that it would receive $1 million from a book-destruction contractor and related parties it accused of reselling McGraw-Hill textbooks rather than destroying them.
The settlement ends McGraw-Hill's lawsuit against Guaranteed Destruction Inc. of Parsippiany, N.J.; its owner, Michael Emposimato, and others.
None of the parties admitted any wrongdoing.


Suicide's Husband Is Indicted; Diary Records Pain of 2 Lives
On March 28, George Delury wrote in his diary about the onerous life he led nursing his chronically ill, deteriorating wife.
He had four basic options, he figured: Keep taking care of her -- but then "I will either die or go mad"; kill himself; abandon her, or "4) Kill her -- that too remains an option, though far more difficult without her cooperation."


Mets Fill Leadoff Gap By Signing Center Fielder
The off-season wish list of the Mets, short but to the point, was pared down  in a major way yesterday when the club signed outfielder Lance Johnson, a multitalented leadoff batter who will serve as a veteran role model for the club's host of young players.
Johnson, a 32-year-old free agent who established himself as a steady hitter, base runner, base stealer and outfielder during eight years with the Chicago White Sox, signed a two-year contract.
No other terms were announced or reported.


Campbell's Trophies Are Lost in Fire
John Campbell, the leading money winner in harness racing history, lost most  of his trophies and a good portion of his home during a fire Wednesday evening at his residence in River Vale, N.J.
"The house isn't doing too good, but my family is safe and that's the No. 1 priority," said Campbell, who has amassed $140 million in purse earnings and more than 7,000 victories during his 20-year racing career.


Lemons to Hasbro And Paddington
Advertisers including Hasbro Inc. and the Paddington Corporation were among those singled out for criticism yesterday at the 11th annual Harlan Page Hubbard Lemon Awards ceremony in Washington.
The awards, sponsored by the Center for Science in the Public Interest on behalf of a coalition of consumer, environmental and health advocacy groups, are named after a 19th-century adman who helped create sensational methods to peddle patent medicines.
Hasbro was bestowed a Lemon for a 15-second television commercial by Griffin  Bacal in New York, owned by the Omnicom Group, for the Play-Doh Cookie Lovin' Oven.
The Lemon citation said the spot, aimed at children, implied that the oven could bake real cookies when it only heats make-believe cookies made from Play-Doh.


An Injured Robitaille May Be Lost 3 Weeks
Like snow in Buffalo, injuries are a virtual certainty in a long hockey season.
As the Rangers take their 10-game unbeaten streak into Buffalo tonight,  they are experiencing their first flurry of multiple medical problems.
When they face off against the Sabres at the Auditorium, they will be without at least one key player, and the status of two others is uncertain.
So the Rangers have brought up two forwards from Binghamton just in case.


Arts Center in Bankruptcy
Staggering under hundreds of thousands of dollars of debt, the William Carlos Williams Center for the Arts recently filed for bankruptcy protection in Federal court in Newark.
Richard J. Theryoung, the president of the center's board of trustees, said one creditor, Public Service Electric and Gas, had demanded $50,000 by last Monday.
"We had no other choice if we want to keep the center moving forward," Mr.
Theryoung said yesterday.
The center is continuing to operate, however, and will present a children's program and art exhibit this weekend.
TERRY PRISTIN


Spindler Appreciates Ups And Downs of Being a Jet
For a team with a 3-11 record, the Jets are winners in other ways.
They are upbeat, playing hard and trying to win rather than just survive the day.
One example is Marc Spindler, a defensive tackle who has been filling in on a banged-up front four.


Pacino Confronts De Niro, and the Sparks Fly
Al Pacino makes an unusual, not to say traffic-stopping entrance in Michael Mann's "Heat," in which he plays a police detective in the grip of strong passions.
Mr.
Pacino is first seen in bed, making heartfelt love to a woman the  viewer can't quite see.
The sight of his face conveys intensity, naked emotion,  and something even more interesting: Mr.
Mann's rare ability to reel in his audience with ingenious visual hooks.
"Heat" offers nearly three hours' worth of such carefully offbeat glimpses, sights that explode ordinary expectations and do for visual imagery what the sound bite does for words.
But three hours is a long time.
It's long enough to shape a "Godfather"-caliber crime story, or long enough for an overly polished veneer to wear thin.
And as "Heat" progresses, its sensational looks pale beside storytelling weaknesses that expose the more soulless aspects of this cat-and-mouse crime tale.
Extraordinary actors, clever settings, a maze of a plot and a screenplay with nearly 70 speaking roles don't change the fact that "Heat" is fundamentally hollow and its characters haven't much to say.


Sports of The Times;Revisiting A Voice In the Rough
BEN WRIGHT's fat head has popped up again, like the gopher's in "Caddyshack," and once again there are cries it should be offed.
Yesterday, the National Organization for Women and the Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation called on CBS Sports to fire its longtime golf commentator, based on new information about some old quotes.
I think CBS should give him a raise and more  air time.
Lulled by the uptick in women's college basketball, we need him more than ever.
Sodden old boys like Ben remind us we're still in the rough.
It has been seven months since Wright was quoted by a Wilmington, Del., reporter as saying that "lesbians in the sport hurt women's golf" and that "women are handicapped by having boobs. It's not easy for them to keep their left arm straight, and that's one of the tenets of the game."


Not a Settlers' Group
To the Editor:
You mention Women in Green in your Dec. 11 news article on the New York memorial service for Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel.
However, we are not a "settlers' group." We are representative of all Israeli citizens who believe the Oslo agreements do not stand for a just peace.
We yearn for peace, but not the kind that will lead to Israel's destruction.


Police Arrest 18-Year-Old In Subway Fire
An 18-year-old Brooklyn man was arrested yesterday for last month's fatal attack on a subway token clerk in which the killers set fire to his booth after  spraying it with a flammable liquid.
As many as four others are still being sought in the fiery assault.
Investigators and elected officials had suggested that the Nov. 26 attack was inspired by the recently released movie "Money Train." But last night, the police said the suspect, James Irons, told them that at the time of the assault, he knew nothing of the film and its scenes of a pyromaniac setting fire to subway token booths.


The Spoken Word
JANE ALEXANDER, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
The actress, who is also chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Arts, will be interviewed by Wendy  Wasserstein, the playwright, and Michael Kinsley, a television moderator for CNN.
Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $18.
Information: (212) 996-1100.


Port Authority Rejects Hiring Private Manager for Newark Airport
The Port Authority, which had been evaluating a plan to turn Newark International Airport over to a management company, decided yesterday to retain  direct control of the airport and increase private contractors' role in its operations.
The proposal to retain a private manager was rejected after a consultant to the authority's board of commissioners said there were no companies with experience in running an airport as large and complex as Newark.
The consultant, Leigh Fisher Associates, said the largest airport in the United States now operated by a private manager is Burbank-Glendale-Pasadena Airport, with four million passengers a year, in contrast to 28 million at Newark.


Fixed Mortgage Rates Fall
Thirty-year fixed-rate mortgages averaged 7.15 percent this week, down from 7.18 percent last week, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
It was the lowest since Feb. 17, 1994, when rates averaged 7.11 percent.
On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 5.55 percent, up from 5.53 percent last week.
Fifteen-year mortgages averaged 6.71 percent this week, down from 6.74 percent a week earlier.


Protester Is Caught In Fatal Fire's Glare;New Look at a Harsh Message
Morris Powell, a vendor of pies and oils on 125th Street in Harlem, has long  cried out to be heard.
In language that veers between reason and polemic, he has stressed the need for Harlem's black community to embrace its own, to support black-owned businesses and to seize control of its destiny.
In recent years, Mr.
Powell, 55, has developed a small but potent political base among some Harlem street vendors, and his "buy black" message carries resonance in the community, including with the Rev.
Al Sharpton.
But others, especially those in the Harlem political and business establishment, consider his style too threatening, his message too strident.
Some merchants are too frightened to speak about him publicly.


Arrests in Jewelry Thefts
A man accused of being a smooth-talking burglar who stole jewelry from dozens of apartments on the Upper East Side of Manhattan has told the authorities that  a jewelry store in the Diamond District helped him sell the stolen items, the police said yesterday.
After his arrest, the suspect, Randy Hayes, 38, pointed investigators to Max Jewelry on West 47th Street, the police said.
Three store employees were arrested on charges of possession of stolen property.


An Intensive-Care Ward For the Fabric of History
AMONG clean, well-lighted places in New York, a high rank -- if not the highest of all -- should henceforth be assigned to the Antonio Ratti Textile Center, which opened yesterday in the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The center takes its name from the Italian manufacturer, connoisseur and collector of textiles whose major grant to the Met has made the center possible. (Other substantial grants were made by the Toyota Motor Corporation, the David H. Koch Charitable Foundation and the National Endowment for the Humanities.)


Alantec Agrees to Fore Systems Link
The Alantec Corporation announced today that it had agreed to be acquired by  Fore Systems Inc. in a stock swap valued at about $716 million.
Alantec, which is based in San Jose, will become a wholly owned subsidiary of Fore Systems, based in Warrendale, Pa.
George Archuleta, chairman and chief executive of Alantec, will become a member of Fore's board after the merger.


Senators' Votes on Bosnia Mission
Following is the 69-30 roll-call by which the Senate voted on Wednesday to support United States troops in Bosnia and Herzegovina but limit their deployment to approximately one year.
The measure was proposed by the majority leader, Bob Dole, Republican of Kansas, and John S. McCain, Republican of Arizona.
A "yes" vote was a vote to approve the sending of troops; a "no" vote was a vote to reject the sending of troops.
Voting "yes" were 45 Democrats and 24 Republicans.
Voting "no" were a Democrat and 29 Republicans.


One Modern Fairy Tale Is Wrapped in Another
Richard Paul Evans's "Christmas Box" is the kind of publishing phenomenon that gives sophisticated editors the jitters.
Written in 1992 as a Christmas yarn for the author's children and privately printed, the slim volume was initially sold in a bookstore owned by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day  Saints.
Word of mouth took over, and 500,000 copies have been published in paperback.
And now, inevitably, this Sunday on CBS, comes the television-movie version, made in association with Bonneville Producers Group, a Salt Lake City company owned by the Mormon church.
Changes have been made.
Television executives rarely can resist tinkering.
The story now unfolds in the present instead of in 1928.
And the core character, the elderly widow, is for a while considerably less warm and lovable.
But the pervading sweetness, occasionally slopping over into stickiness, remains dominant as "The Christmas Box" delivers its traditional holiday messages, not least the reminder to take good care of your family.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a performance at the Bank Street School for Children referred incorrectly in some editions to a participant.
The boy at the  center was Alexander Ames, not Matthew Patrick.


Kurds Wanting Self-Rule In Turkey Declare Truce
The leader of rebel Kurds fighting for self-rule in southeast Turkey today announced the start of a unilateral cease-fire but warned that guerrillas would  fight back if attacked.
"As long as the security forces do not attack us, we will not attack anyone.  The cease-fire will be under this condition," Abdullah Ocalan said in comments broadcast on MED-TV, a Kurdish station licensed in London and broadcast via satellite.


Feminine Falsetto Isn't Unique to Japan
To the Editor:
"Japan's Feminine Falsetto" (Tokyo Journal, Dec. 13) gives the impression that this odd vocal phenomenon is confined to Japanese society -- not so!
Since  I've become aware of my own high-pitched voice, I've had to train myself to keep it within a natural alto range.
Otherwise, when I want something, I unconsciously affect the little girl's voice I imagine I need to counteract the  assertiveness of my request.


Macy's Marks Down Some Workers' Holiday Sales Commissions
In this season of gift-giving, Macy's has decided that some members of its sales staff should give the company a Christmas present -- as much as half of their commissions.
Macy's has reduced the percentage of commission for sales representatives during the five-week holiday selling season, cutting deeply into the biggest paychecks many employees receive all year.
The reduction hits most sales employees in 15 stores, many of them in the New York suburbs, as well as those who work in commissioned departments at other Macy's stores on the East Coast.
A spokesman for Federated Department Stores Inc., which acquired R. H. Macy &amp; Company in 1994 after it emerged from bankruptcy, estimated that about 3,000 sales associates were affected by the change.


Surprise in Haiti: A Listless Presidential Race
For days, loudspeakers and posters had been announcing that Rene Preval, presidential candidate of the ruling Lavalas movement and close friend of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, would be coming.
But when the nominee actually finally arrived here, only a few hundred people turned out to hear him speak.
Covered with dust and visibly tired from a two-day swing through the interior, Mr.
Preval delivered his stock campaign speech through a megaphone today, doing his best to imitate Mr.
Aristide's call-and-response style of oratory.
A few of his campaign workers handed out calendars, sample ballots and  posters, and then the caravan was off again, speeding its way back to the capital, a two-hour drive to the south.


Feminine Falsetto Isn't Unique to Japan
To the Editor:
Fascinated as I was with your Dec. 13 front-page article on Japan's feminine falsettos, I attempted to talk for an hour in my own falsetto voice.
I found I could not express anger or any other strong emotion in a convincing manner.
I couldn't project my voice and felt mildly breathless when speaking.
Some may see beauty in such personal sacrifice, but when taken to the point of victimization, it is ugly indeed.


Fidelity to Cut Some Fund Fees
Fidelity Investments said yesterday that it would cut by as much as 42 percent the up-front fees that investors pay to buy shares in some of the company's Advisor mutual funds, which are sold only through brokers.
In addition, Fidelity, a unit of the FMR Corporation, will reduce the Advisor funds' annual distribution expenses, known as 12b-1 fees, by up to 23 percent.
In the last two years, as the amount of money invested in mutual funds has grown sharply, industry critics have contended that fund companies have not passed the economies of scale along to investors through lower fees.


CHRONICLE
Perhaps they will equip the cradle with a computer.
BILL GATES, the founder and chairman of the Microsoft Corporation, and his wife, MELINDA FRENCH, an executive at Microsoft, are expecting their first child in late May, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
The couple married in 1994.
"Bill and Melinda are very excited about the baby," said Erin Carney, a Gates spokeswoman.
"They both come from close families and have been looking forward to having children."


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in Manhattan that are to close soon:


European Union Backs Subsidy for Iberia
The European Union commission said yesterday that it had approved Spanish Government plans to inject 87 billion pesetas ($707 million) into the ailing state airline Iberia.
The commission said it was also willing "to assess a request" for Iberia to receive up to 20 billion pesetas ($162 million) in additional subsidies in 1997 "on the basis of the achievements of financial and  other indicators" in 1995 and 1996.
The commission confirmed that to balance the receipt of the funds, Iberia had agreed to reduce its Latin American interests, which include a majority stake in Aerolineas Argentinas. (AP)


China Circles The Wagons
Suddenly, it seems as if it's China against the world.
At no time since the Tiananmen massacre of 1989 has the Communist Party leadership here been more bellicose and uncompromising toward its adversaries, or seemed as self-congratulatory that its toughness is paying off.


BUSINESS DIGEST
GERMAN CUT OF 2 KEY RATES COULD AID AN EASING BY FED The Bundesbank, Germany's central bank, cut its main lending rates to their lowest levels in more than seven years, a step that could help sputtering European economies and make it easier for the Federal Reserve to lower rates in  the United States.


Santa' and Police Tangle
The District of Columbia police have been accused of roughing up a man dressed as Santa Claus who was leading carolers outside a holiday party for the  disabled.
The man playing Santa, Salvatore Gonzalez, was arrested for disorderly conduct on Tuesday night after leading a group singing outside a dinner for the  handicapped.


New York Union Fund to Pay $1 Million in AIDS Bias Case
In a groundbreaking settlement of discrimination charges against a health plan that limited medical payments to people with AIDS, a construction workers'  union welfare fund in New York agreed yesterday to pay a total of about $1 million for medical bills and emotional distress.
The Mason Tenders District Council Welfare Fund agreed to the payments in a case involving 14 workers who had AIDS or were H.I.V.-positive.
Eleven of the 14 have died since the first complaints were filed in 1992 with the New York office of the Federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.


Man's Death Sets Off Riot In London
Hundreds of black and white youths attacked the police, ransacked shops and burned cars in the inner London area of Brixton after the death of a black man in police custody.
Paul Condon, the Metropolitan Police Commissioner, said today that a small group of thugs and criminals were responsible for the rioting in Brixton late Wednesday night in which 12 people were injured.


State Regents Battle Schools Chief's Hiring
When the State Board of Regents began to assemble a panel of educators last summer to rescue the troubled Roosevelt School District, the name Lottie L. Taylor surfaced immediately.
A respected educational consultant, Dr.
Taylor was considered a brilliant and demanding educator who had turned around a New York City high school.
Her 10-page resume says she has been honored by three Presidents and won dozens of state and national awards for her dedication to poor and minority-group students.


A Bountiful Season for New York City Hotels
The Samuelson family, visiting from Boston, had set aside an entire week to see friends in New York and go to the theater.
But they were not able to get reservations for either of the weekends they planned to be in the city.
So they  have been splitting their time between the Marriott Marquis in Times Square on the weekdays and hotels in Stamford, Conn., on the weekends.
"It wasn't a big deal," said Robert Samuelson, a 25-year-old graphics designer who is in town with his parents, about the inconvenience.
"We know people in Connecticut. I probably wouldn't do it again, though."


Who Is Really Cooking the Books?
As the battle over the budget goes into extra innings, issues of economic analysis and forecasting have become central to any deal.
The Republicans have kept up a steady drumbeat against the Clinton Administration, calling for "honest scorekeeping" by the Congressional Budget Office and accusing the Administration of cooking the books with their own economic forecasts.
But the public should not be fooled.
The Administration's economic forecasts are in the mainstream of all such projections, including those of private and corporate economists.


Rationing Health Care Is Good Business;Should Medicare Pay?
To the Editor:
I have visited several Senators and Representatives in Washington to clarify  Medicare's liability for medical bills, as opposed to private or employer-paid insurance.
From information in the Medicare Handbook, it is clear Medicare often remains the primary payor with regard to group insurance provided by employers.
It does not seem to be clear when, or if, Medicare ever becomes secondary to non-employer coverage.


Constitutional Fight With Clinton Grows
A constitutional fight between the Senate Whitewater committee and the White  House intensified when the panel voted along party lines to ask the full Senate  to seek a court order to gain documents that President Clinton has refused to turn over.
The Republicans said the papers they seek may show that senior White House officials improperly used confidential Government information about Federal investigations into the Arkansas dealings of the Clintons and their associates.


Corrections
A report by Reuters in the Company News column of Business Day on Tuesday about the proposed acquisition of Hogan Systems Inc. by the Continuum Company referred incorrectly to the domestic marketing rights to Hogan's software.
Hogan repurchased the exclusive marketing rights in 1994; the International Business Machines Corporation no longer owns them.


A Call to Patronize 125th Street Stores
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday urged people of all races to do their holiday shopping on 125th Street in Harlem to rebuff demonstrators who have protested against white-owned stores in the predominantly black neighborhood.
Continuing his crusade against demonstrators who he has suggested inspired the fiery attack on Freddy's, a white-owned clothing store, that killed eight people last week, the Mayor specifically urged people to shop at Bargain World, another white-owned store that has been a target for protests.


Christopher Meets Syrian and Sees Progress on Israel Talks
Secretary of State Warren Christopher met for four hours today with President Hafez al-Assad of Syria and reported "substantial progress" toward opening peace negotiations with Israel.
Mr.
Christopher did not reveal the substance of his talks in Damascus, but his unusually upbeat tone gave the sense that Mr.
Assad had responded positively to the appeals for new talks issued by Prime Minister Shimon Peres of Israel in  the month since he succeeded the assassinated Yitzhak Rabin.


Trafalgar House Posts a Big Loss
The British conglomerate Trafalgar House P.L.C. announced yesterday that it had lost nearly L321 million and said it would undertake sweeping changes aimed  at restoring its fortunes.
The losses were far worse than even the most pessimistic estimates, and the company's stock fell 8.5 percent.
The chairman, Simon Keswick, said Trafalgar would pull out of the United States home-building market and focus on large-scale industrial and civil engineering projects.
The company wants its Cunard shipping business to focus on the luxury passenger market.
Mr.
Keswick took over as chairman about a year ago.
The company, which did not pay dividends this year, said none would be paid until Trafalgar returned to sustainable profitability.(AP)


POP
A 60's Teen-Age Star, Grown-Up and Gritty Lesley Gore Rainbow and Stars


Authority Bars Subway Use For Filming A TV Scene
With the Transit Authority operating in what one official called a mode of heightened sensitivity over subway violence, the makers of the television series "Law and Order" found themselves shooting a subway scene on an Upper West Side street yesterday instead of on a subway platform.
The scene, for an episode drawn from the gas attack in the Tokyo subway system a year ago, was supposed to be shot at the Transit Museum in Brooklyn, a site often used for film and television crews.
A standard contract for the shooting was signed last week; but the transit agency, which oversees the museum, subsequently revoked its permission.
So yesterday, the film makers shot  the scene at an ersatz subway entrance fashioned from a basement stairwell on 106th Street between Broadway and West End Avenue.


Bouncing, Dangling And Diving
Why do Elizabeth Streb's dancers keep throwing themselves against walls?
Perhaps for the same reason some people are compelled to climb mountains: because the walls and the mountains are there.
Ms.
Streb, who combines dance with athletics, made the audience gasp on Tuesday night when her company, Streb/Ringside, offered "Popaction," a program of short works, at the Joyce Theater.
But my own gasps soon turned to yawns, for almost everything this group did seemed both terribly difficult and totally pointless.


COMPANY NEWS
GENERAL SIGNAL CORP.  agreed to sell the last of its Leeds &amp; Northrup unit to Honeywell Inc.'s Industrial Control division, noting the sale will complete the  divestiture of its discontinued operations.
Terms were not disclosed.


Domestic Poverty Is a Human Rights Issue
To the Editor:
Re "The New Attack on Human Rights" (editorial, Dec. 10): You correctly chastise Indonesia, China and Singapore for accepting only those rights that suit their cynical purposes, and find it "patronizing, indeed almost insulting to Asians and others, to suggest that citizens in developing countries should not have the same rights as those in more developed lands."


Roussel Uclaf Charge
Roussel Uclaf S.A. said yesterday that it would set aside 450 million French  francs ($90 million) to 500 million francs in its current fiscal year to pay for reorganization of its drug operations.
The charge will cover costs relating to integrating its drug operations with those of its parent company, Hoechst A.G.,  and Marion Merrell Dow, which Hoechst recently bought. (Bloomberg Business News)


Bonds Little Changed in Budget Uncertainty
Treasury prices ended a quiet trading session with little change yesterday, as the breakdown in the Federal budget negotiations added to the bond market's uncertainty over whether the Federal Reserve would cut interest rates next week.
The price of the Treasury's main 30-year bond slipped 5/32 of a point, or $1.56 for $1,000 in face value.
Its yield, which moves in the opposition direction, rose to 6.09 percent from 6.08 percent late Thursday.


Robert I. Williams, 82, Devotee Of Accounting and World Tours
Robert I. Williams, an accountant, founding board member of the Joyce Theater and enthusiast of world travel, died on Tuesday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
A lifelong resident of Manhattan, he was 82.
Mr.
Williams, who worked as an investment consultant until his death, was a founding partner in 1945 in the accounting firm of Schutte &amp; Williams.
The business merged in 1970 with what is now Pannel Kerr Forster.
He became a partner of the firm and later a consultant to it.


Palestinians Greet Arafat As Candidate
Arriving to a tumultuous welcome in the latest West Bank city to come under Palestinian self-rule, Yasir Arafat, chairman of the P.L.O., hit the campaign trail today for Palestinian Authority elections next month.
"From liberated Nablus, allow me to propose myself as a candidate," he declared to the thousands who greeted him.
Using Mr.
Arafat's nom de guerre, the throng roared back: "With spirit and blood we will redeem you, Abu Ammar."


Yeltsin Warns Sunday's Voters Of the Ex-Communists' Menace
Breaking weeks of silence about Russia's critical parliamentary elections, President Boris N. Yeltsin came out of his medical seclusion tonight with a dramatic last-minute warning to voters that a Communist victory on Sunday would  inexorably return Russia to the cruelest excesses of its Soviet past.
"This is not the light at the end of the tunnel," Mr.
Yeltsin said in his 12-minute televised speech taped at the hospital where he is recovering from a heart ailment.
"Most probably it is a reflection of new and more horrible fires  of a civil war."


Tiny Strike At Restaurant Has Epic Tone;At Box Tree, 4 Workers Take Fight Into 3d Year
It is enough to spoil the poignant aftertaste of the sweetbreads with truffles and Madeira.
As diners depart the ornate gilding, warm hearth glow and tinkling piano of the regal restaurant where they have just feasted on snails in Pernod butter or  blini with caviar, they are confronted by shivering strikers lambasting them for crossing the picket line.


Franchises In Canada Are Likely To Get Aid
The National Hockey League took a major step today toward establishing a form of revenue sharing for financially ailing teams in Canada.
The Board of Governors' eight-person committee on revenue and currency recommended the use of league-generated funds to help qualifying Canada-based teams deal with a disparity in the Canadian and United States dollars.


Copper Prices Off Nearly 5% On Signs of Growing Supply
Copper futures prices plunged nearly 5 percent in New York yesterday on signs that near-term supply problems were easing.
The London Metal Exchange reported a sharp increase in warehouse inventories  of copper, particularly in the United States, prompting speculation that the bull market in copper was over.


Celebrating the Bible With Words and Music
Bible Live," a free presentation of music, dance and readings based on biblical texts, will take place on Monday at 7:30 P.M. at the Cathedral of St. John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street.
Among those to participate are Ellen Burstyn, Van Cliburn, Ossie Davis, Ruby Dee, Jesse Jackson, Odetta, Pete Seeger, James Taylor, the Voices of the Hope Gospel Choir, the Parparim Israeli Folk Dancers and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.


Pilot Plan on School Vouchers
The move toward state subsidies for private schools gained momentum yesterday.
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's advisory panel on school vouchers agreed to send to the Legislature a $5 million pilot plan in which qualified students would receive vouchers worth up to $3,500, The Associated Press reported.
If the Legislature approves the plan for the 1996-97 session, one school district in each county would be selected for participation, but students outside those districts could apply for vouchers.


Sheldon Green; Theoretical Chemist, 51
Dr.
Sheldon Green, a theoretical chemist for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration in Manhattan, died on Tuesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center.
He was 51 and lived in Greenwich Village.
The cause was a heart attack, said the Goddard Institute for Space Studies, a NASA laboratory in Morningside Heights where he worked.


BRIDGE
To make one's first call in a three-card major suit is a very rare event, and to rebid that suit might seem weird.
It happened on the diagramed deal, and helped Bob Blanchard and Jim Krekorian, both of Manhattan, to win the New York area final of the North American Open Pairs, Flight A, played last Sunday at the Vanderbilt Club in Lake Success, L.I.
Blanchard as South had a responding problem when his partner opened one diamond.
His methods ruled out a diamond raise, and one no-trump, perhaps ending the bidding, seemed likely to be a poor contract with a heart lead impending.
So, he ventured one spade.


Girl's Surgery Is Performed For a Smile, Doctors Hope
A 7-year-old girl born with a perpetually grumpy look underwent the first round of surgery today in a two-step procedure that could literally bring a smile to her face.
The surgery for the girl, Chelsey Thomas, lasted 11 hours, said a spokeswoman for Kaiser Permanente Medical Center, Linda Quon.


Peacekeeping Logistics: Trains Are Ready But Most Won't Be RollingUntil Christmas
The peace treaty has now been signed and the peacekeeping mission is set to begin, but United States Army officials say there will no large massing of American troops in Bosnia for several days.
And the first wave of the actual peacekeeping soldiers may not reach the area until well after Christmas.
Army officials insisted today that they were not behind schedule in their plan to move 19,000 troops, 7,000 vehicles and thousands of tons of other equipment into Bosnia by train from American bases in Germany.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball National Basketball Association VANCOUVER GRIZZLIES -- Activated Doug Edwards, forward, from the injured list.
Placed Kenny Gattison, forward, on the injured list.


Observer;Guys Here Need an Idea
Is anybody else puzzled about the Army and Navy these days?
What in the world are these heavily armed and richly financed people supposed to do anymore?
Congress obviously doesn't want them placed in harm's way.
That's why President Clinton has just had a tough time getting the flimsiest Republican support for putting Army units into the Balkans.
Not so long ago President Bush had trouble getting Democratic support for using the Army against the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.


TV Ownership Rules Stall Communications Bill
House Republicans are trying to insert a provision in the telecommunications  bill that would block Federal regulators from plugging loopholes in television ownership rules that have greatly benefited CBS, the Tribune Company and the News Corporation's Fox television network.
The provision, being pushed in a House-Senate conference, would also block the Federal Communications Commission from challenging two television deals -- one by the News Corporation and one by the Tribune Company -- that have attracted heavy scrutiny from regulators and are considered in at least some danger of being overturned next year.


Tunnel Named For Williams
Ted Williams made it clear today that the tunnel bearing his name is no memorial.
"Every place I go, they're waving at me, sending out a cheer, sending letters and notes," Williams, the 77-year-old Hall of Fame Red Sox outfielder, said at a ceremony in Boston to dedicate the tunnel.
"And I thought, I've only seen it happen to somebody who looks like they're going to die. And I'd like to say this one thing today: I'm a long ways from that."


THEATER IN REVIEW


Tuberculosis Exposure Alert
As parents clogged county phone lines with questions yesterday, Burlington County health officials said they were testing for tuberculosis exposure to 125  infants under the age of six months, the group considered most vulnerable.
Walter A. Trommelen Jr., the county's public health coordinator, said that an unidentified infected male worker had contact with 950 youngsters at 12 county clinics between June and November.
JOE SHARKEY


20% STAKE IN CIT GROUP SOLD TO DAI-ICHI BANK
The Chemical Bank Corporation said yesterday that it had sold 20 percent of CIT Group, half of its interest in the commercial and consumer financing company, to Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank for about $430 million.
Tokyo-based Dai-Ichi Kangyo, which was already the majority shareholder in CIT, increased its stake to 80 percent with the transaction.
CIT said Chemical retained the other 20 percent, but Dai-Ichi Kangyo has a five-year option to buy Chemical's remaining interest.
Chemical said it would record an after-tax gain of about $25 million on its fourth-quarter earnings from the CIT transaction


EUROPEANS AGREE ON NEW CURRENCY
In their landmark attempt to create a single, unifying currency for the 21st  century, Europe's leaders today officially named it the Euro and agreed on a timetable for introducing it by 2002.
By putting aside months of bickering and indecision, today's agreement, while mostly symbolic, reflects a growing momentum among many European leaders to forge a single currency and a broader economic and political integration of the  Continent that they hope will invigorate its flagging economy and insure greater political stability and peace.


Restrictions Lifted on Lawmaker's Husband
A Federal judge today dropped travel and other restrictions on Joe Waldholtz, who with his estranged wife, a Republican Congresswoman from Utah, is at the center of a criminal investigation into whether her 1994 campaign illegally accepted nearly $2 million in contributions.
In recent weeks, the couple's relationship has unraveled in a string of news  conferences and court appearances involving the possible financial improprieties.
Representative Enid Greene Waldholtz, of the state's Second District, has attributed her troubles to her husband, saying she had been blinded by love and had only recently realized that he was not a wealthy political insider but a crook.


Trucking Employee Kills 3 In Shooting at Ohio Company
A truck driver walked into his employer's office this morning, shot three people to death and then calmly waited to be arrested, the police said.
Employees at Trans-Continental Systems Inc. hid under their desks or ran screaming from the building as the gunman, carrying two pistols, opened fire.


5 Islamic Soldiers Die in Shootout With Croats
Five Islamic fundamentalist soldiers, foreign volunteers who came to fight alongside the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Army, have been killed in a shootout with Croatian militia at a roadblock here, Bosnian police officials said today.
Two Bosnian Croat police officers were wounded.
The attack, which occurred at the same time as Thursday's signing of the Bosnian peace accord in Paris, was the worst confrontation yet between the fundamentalists and Croats, who are in the majority in this town.


U.N. Clears Way for NATO Troops
The Security Council formally ended the United Nations peacekeeping role in  Bosnia and Herzegovina tonight in a unanimous vote and turned over authority to  a NATO-led force.
The Council's action was the last requirement before NATO can  officially send troops to Bosnia.
Russia had sought to retain as much United Nations influence in Bosnia as possible so Russian troops would not seem to be serving only NATO.
The Clinton Administration had been trying to distance itself as much as possible from the United Nations, in part to sell the mission to Congress, where there is intense  opposition to having Americans serve under international command.


QUARTERLY DIVIDEND UP 12% AND STOCK BUYBACK IS RAISED
The General Electric Company said yesterday that it had raised its quarterly  dividend by 12 percent and increased its stock buyback program to $9 billion from $5 billion.
G.E. raised its dividend to 46 cents from 41 cents a share, in  its 20th consecutive annual increase.
So far G.E. has bought $3 billion of its stock under the buyback program adopted in December 1994.
The increased authorization by G.E.'s board will allow it to buy $3 billion more shares through 1997, it said.
G.E. said the repurchases were expected to raise the rate of growth in its earnings per share and return on equity by one to two percentage points.


Breeders' Cup Will Be Earlier
In a decision that improves the prospects of good weather and the chance of an increased handle, officials of the Breeders' Cup announced yesterday that the date of the 1996 event at Woodbine Race Course in Toronto had been moved up one  week, from Nov. 2 to Oct. 26.
The switch had been eagerly sought after this year's event at Belmont Park was held in wet weather on Nov. 4, at a time when clocks had been turned back an hour for Eastern standard time.
As a result, the program, which began at 11:30 A.M. in the East, was simulcast to California before 9 A.M., and the handle plummeted.
The 1996 cup will be broadcast by NBC Sports starting at 1:30 P.M.
Eastern daylight time.


Rough Times Ahead in Albany
Gov.
George Pataki has now provided an early preview of New York State's budget battles of 1996.
It all looks depressingly familiar.
The Legislature will again confront a demand for deep and harmful cuts in health, welfare, education  and mental health programs to help pay for the tax cut enacted in the last session.
It should re-evaluate the tax cut, hard as that is in an election year.
It should also seek to moderate Mr.
Pataki's reductions in support for children, the elderly, the disabled and the poor.
Mr.
Pataki can legitimately claim that his election in 1994 came with a mandate to rethink the social and health programs enacted during the New Deal and Great Society.
He is right, most importantly, to point out that welfare and  Medicaid are likely to be drastically revised or cut back by Congress, and that  the state must start now to carry out reforms and efficiencies.


CHRONICLE
Prof.
EVERETT FOX, who spent nearly three decades translating the Five Books  of Moses from Hebrew into English, will hear some of his work read by actors, opera singers, writers and theologians on Monday at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
The readings from the first volume of "The Schocken Bible," recently published by Schocken Books, will be part of an evening of music and dance celebrating Hanukkah and Christmas.


Cambodia Pursues Its Democratic Goals
To the Editor:
"Outsiders Gone, Cambodia Unravels" (Week in Review, Dec. 3) depicts my nation as slipping back into a morass of corruption and lawlessness -- a description I do not recognize.


Acer Joint Venture
Acer Inc. of Taiwan and Texas Instruments Inc. have agreed that Texas Instruments will not take a majority position in their joint venture, an Acer official said yesterday.
The Dallas-based Texas Instruments currently holds 26 percent of the joint venture to make computer chips.
Their original agreement allowed it to expand that interest to 51 percent by Jan. 15.
The new agreement would limit Texas Instruments' ownership to 40 percent.
The venture, T.I.-Acer,  is expected to account for 60 percent of Acer's profits this year. (Dow Jones)


BUSINESS DIGEST
Europeans Choose Name And Timetable for Currency


Report Faults PATH Engineer In Mishap That Killed 2 Workers
The engineer of the train that killed two PATH employees working on a track near Harrison, N.J., on Dec. 2 had plenty of time to stop, according to a report released yesterday.
Yet investigators have found no evidence that he applied the brakes and have concluded that he was not paying attention.
The report by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey also said workers who were struck by the train apparently did not follow proper procedures to obtain permission to work on the track.


Big Board Sets Volume Record; Dow Slips 5.42
Expiring stock options, year-end portfolio adjustments and a big selloff in the shares of the Kmart Corporation combined to spur volume on the New York Stock Exchange to a record of 653.2 million shares yesterday, eclipsing a mark that had stood since the market crash of October 1987.
But the heavy volume had relatively little effect on overall share prices, which finished moderately lower.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


CHRONICLE
SARA LEE SCHUPF is not a scientist, nor did she major in science in college,  but she wants to make sure that the doors to science swing wide open for women.
Ms.
Schupf, for whom the Sara Lee Corporation was named, announced on Wednesday evening that she and her mother, TILLIE LUBIN, have endowed a professorship at Skidmore College in Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
It will be called the Charles Lubin Family Chair for Women in Science.
Charles Lubin, her father, founded the Kitchens of Sara Lee and named his first special cheesecake  for his daughter in 1949, when she was 8.


Plume of Hope Rises From Factory Ashes
The wind-blown fire that destroyed much of the Malden Mills textile complex here on Monday night and put 1,400 people out of work barely two weeks before Christmas was a reminder that in some parts of America, a factory and its workers are still everything to each other.
In Methuen and in the surrounding blue-collar towns of the Merrimack Valley near the New Hampshire border, this has been a week of heartbreak and heroism, of hopes dashed and raised.
And no one knows the ups and downs better than Jeffrey Marks, a 23-year-old machine operator from Derry, N.H., who works on the Malden Mills flocking line.


Baldwin Maull Is Dead at 95; Banker and Advocate for Poor
Baldwin Maull, a former president and board chairman of Marine Midland Banks  Inc. who took a leading role in a host of civic commissions and educational organizations in New York and New Jersey, died on Thursday at his home in Hightstown, N.J.
He was 95.


JAZZ
Tunes by Wayne Shorter In a Contemporary Manner Eric Reed, pianist Iridium


Corrections
An article on Dec. 8 about the wedding of Lieut.
Gov.
Betsy McCaughey and Wilbur L. Ross Jr. misidentified the contingent of sailors who saluted the couple.
They were cadets from the State University Maritime College in the Bronx, not Navy sailors.


So Far, So Good for Baboon Marrow Patient
Jeff Getty, the 38-year-old man who received a bone marrow transplant from a  baboon on Thursday night in an extremely risky experiment to fight AIDS, is in good condition at a hospital here, his doctors said today.
Mr.
Getty said in a telephone interview that he was feeling "a little rough and a little weak" from the radiation treatment he received on Thursday morning  in preparation for the transplant.


If Giants Tweak Aikman, Cowboys Are Vulnerable
Some Giants players couldn't help chuckling when they saw highlights of Dallas quarterback Troy Aikman throwing the ball at offensive lineman Erik Williams in anger.
He had just been sacked and Aikman isn't used to kissing the  turf.
The best way to rattle the Cowboys is to rattle their quarterback.
Aikman is  the key to the Dallas offense.
Get him out of rhythm and the Cowboys are out of  sync, too.
Many teams have tried and few have succeeded.
On Sunday in Dallas, the Giants will be the next team in line to try to shake, rattle and roll Aikman.


Hubert L. Will; Federal Judge, 81
Judge Hubert Louis Will, who sat on the bench of Federal District Court in Chicago for 34 years, died on Saturday at his vacation home in Oconomowoc, Wis.
He was 81 and lived in Chicago.
The cause was cancer, said Kevin Feldis, his law clerk at the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois.


India Denies Atom-Test Plan But Then Turns Ambiguous
The Indian Government denied today that it was planning its first nuclear test since 1974, then recast its position a few hours later to describe as "highly speculative" a report in The New York Times today that quoted American intelligence experts as saying they suspected an Indian test was being prepared.
The Government offered no explanation for the change in its statements.
But the effect was to leave open the possibility that an underground test is being prepared or that the Government wants to keep alive the impression that it has the option to conduct a test.


Domestic Poverty Is a Human Rights Issue;Protecting Children
To the Editor:
As a children's rights agency participating in the creation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, we applaud Clyde Haberman's "NYC" column of Dec. 10, Human Rights Day, as a reminder of our nation's shame in failing to recognize the basic human rights of our children.


Frosty the Peacekeeper


TALISMAN ENERGY IN BID FOR GOAL PETROLEUM
Talisman Energy Inc. of Calgary, Alberta, said yesterday that it would make a takeover bid for Goal Petroleum P.L.C., a London-based oil exploration and production company, for $274.7 million (Canadian), or about $200 million (United States).
Talisman, an oil and gas company, said the purchase of Goal was part of its strategy for growth in North Sea exploration.
Goal's board has recommended the offer to shareholders, and holders of about 29 percent of Goal's shares have agreed to tender their stake.
According to Talisman, during the six months  ended June 30 Goal had pretax profit of almost L6.9 million ($10.6 million), up  from L3.5 million a year earlier.


A Call to Shop On 125th Street
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday urged people of all races to do their holiday shopping on 125th Street in Harlem to rebuff angry protests against white-owned stores there.
Continuing his crusade against demonstrators who he has suggested inspired the fiery attack on a white-owned clothing store that killed eight people last week, the Mayor specifically urged people to shop at Bargain World, another white-owned store that has been a target for black protesters.
"There's no better way to drive cowardly people out than if we get hundreds  and hundreds of people to go shopping in those stores," Mr.
Giuliani said on his weekly radio call-in show.


ITT WILL SPLIT INTO THREE COMPANIES ON TUESDAY
The ITT Corporation set a date of Tuesday for its breakup into three separate companies after receiving a favorable tax ruling on the spinoffs, its chairman,  Rand V. Araskog, said yesterday.
The $25 billion conglomerate announced in June  that it planned to divide itself into three parts: an insurance company, an industrial products manufacturer, and a casino, hotel and sports company.
Its shareholders approved the breakup in September, but the deal was contingent on obtaining a ruling from the Internal Revenue Service that the spinoffs would be  tax free for shareholders.
The company has now received the ruling from the I.R.S.
Shareholders will get one share in each new company for every share they  own in ITT.


New Testimony About Simpson Brings Surprise
Providing surprising information that the jury in O. J. Simpson's murder trial never heard, the model Paula Barbieri testified on Thursday that she ended her romance with Mr.
Simpson just hours before the killings of which he was later acquitted, a lawyer said today.
Ms.
Barbieri gave her testimony as the first witness deposed in wrongful-death suits that the families of the murder victims have brought against Mr.
Simpson.
In that testimony, she told of having called him at 7 A.M.  on June 12, 1994, and having left a voice-mail message telling him their relationship was over, said the lawyer, Michael Brewer, who represents Sharon Rufo, the mother of one victim, Ronald L. Goldman.


Cone Signals That Yanks Have an Edge
David Cone and George Steinbrenner finally met yesterday in Tampa, Fla., to discuss the potential return of the marquee pitcher to the Yankees.
After four hours of talks, both sides offered indications that an agreement would be reached soon and that Cone has apparently made the Yankees his top choice.
Cone, whom the Yankees desperately need to sign to stabilize their staff, and his agent, Steve Fehr, negotiated during lunch with Steinbrenner and General Manager Bob Watson.


Serb Chief Painted as Warmonger by Ex-Aide
A book based on the diary of one of President Slobodan Milosevic's closest political colleagues has created a sensation here because, contrary to the official propaganda, it depicts the Serbian leader as deliberately provoking war in the former Yugoslavia.
The author, Borislav Jovic, was President of Yugoslavia until just before the outbreak of the conflict in 1991, with battles between Serbia and the former Yugoslav republic of Croatia.


Sports of The Times;Boxing's Triumphant Return
SHANNON BRIGGS had just knocked Calvin (Concrete) Jones down for the count.
Briggs, the Brooklyn-born heavyweight with blond dreads, stormed out of his corner and showered Jones with a barrage of punches.
A sharp right hook landed on top of Jones's head and sent him reeling into the ropes.


$487 MILLION CHARGE AGAINST EARNINGS IS PLANNED
The Mobil Corporation said yesterday that it would take a $487 million charge in the fourth quarter to adopt a new accounting method on depreciation of some assets.
Mobil joins Texaco Inc., the Marathon Oil Company and other oil companies that have already said they will take similar charges in the quarter to adopt an accounting change required by the Financial Accounting Standards Board.
The rule change requires that long-lived assets and associated good will be written down to fair value.
It must be adopted no later than the 1996 reporting year.
Mobil's non-cash charge will amount to about $1.23 a share.


Company Admits to Bribes
Alan I. Gitlin and George P. Mahler, owners of a company that administered health plans for Teamsters Local 125 in Passaic County, admitted in court yesterday that they paid more than $250,000 in bribes to the union's former president, The A.P. reported.
The former president, Charles V. Giordano, pleaded guilty last year to embezzling and accepting kickbacks.
Local 125, which is based in Little Falls, represents beer and soda truck drivers and warehouse workers at several bottlers and distributors.
It is now under control of a union-appointed trustee.


Federal Government Starts Another Shutdown
For the second time in a month, the Federal Government began shutting down some operations today.
This shutdown is expected to be less disruptive than the  first one, at least as far as most Federal employees are concerned, but for the  public, it's another matter.
Congress has approved and the President has signed several spending bills since the first shutdown, in mid-November, so this shutdown is expected to mean  furloughs for only 280,000 workers, instead of the 800,000 let off last month.
While the shutdown began today, its full effects will not be felt until Monday.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Shanahan Lifts Whalers Brendan Shanahan had two goals and an assist last night to lead the host Hartford Whalers to a 4-2 victory over the Colorado Avalanche.


Repairman Is Electrocuted
A mechanic was electrocuted on Thursday while repairing a transformer, the Niagara Mohawk Power Corporation said.
The worker, Lance Parker, 46, of Buffalo, was trying to restore power to the  Shoreline Apartments at 6 P.M. on Thursday.
He was pronounced dead at Columbus Hospital.


Troops Headed for Germany
About 1,000 National Guard and Army Reserve troops mostly military police, public relations specialists, postal clerks and other administrative workers --  will begin refresher training on Monday before flying to Germany to support the Bosnian mission.
Some of the troops will fill vacancies in Germany left by soldiers who are serving in Bosnia.
Others may go on to Bosnia, an Army spokesman said.


Murray Mogel; Judge, 68
Judge Murray Mogel, an acting State Supreme Court justice sitting in Manhattan, died at his apartment on the Upper East Side on Dec. 8.
He was 68.
The cause was congestive heart failure, his family said.
Judge Mogel, whose term would have expired at the end of 1998, took disability retirement in October because of ill health.


Beliefs
Miracles are threatening to become the latest form of fast-food religion.
They may even replace angels.


Anderson Sits as the Nets Sag on the Road
Kenny Anderson was more spectator than participant tonight during a decisive  fourth quarter when the Detroit Pistons took command of what had been a close game and turned it into an easy 105-98 victory.
The Nets losing on the road is nothing new.
But the fact that Anderson did not play at all in the fourth quarter has the point guard thinking his days with the Nets are drawing to a close.


Journal;Springtime For Nixon
Now let me get this straight.
A festive American family has just finished decorating the tree or lighting the menorah and wonders what it might possibly do to round out the evening's holiday fun.
A Yuletide feast?
A glass of eggnog?
A little caroling while chestnuts roast  on the open fire?


Of Gaps Between Ages and Sexes
Imagination and creativity color two new works for the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater at City Center.
Coincidentally, both pieces define relationships through symbolic decor, although they come from strikingly different types of choreographers.
In "Fathers and Sons," a world premiere given on Thursday night, the husband-and-wife team of Danial Shapiro and Joanie Smith, known professionally as Shapiro and Smith, inventively use Chris Muller's structural frame, part treehouse, part jungle gym, as a base.
As its title suggests, the piece explores the gap between generations.
Refreshingly, it deals with love as well as conflict.
The house onstage is lived in and finally abandoned: "Fathers and Sons" is about growing up, a theme treated seriously through playful movement.


Dollar Up in Light Trading, Aided by Europe Rate Cuts
The dollar moved higher against other leading currencies yesterday, benefiting from interest rate cuts in Europe, where more signs of an economic slowdown are emerging.
Trading was relatively light, as many traders were waiting for a resolution of the budget dispute between the White House and Congress.


INSIDE


Cardinal's 50th Anniversary


It Takes Six Months For Red Wings to Win
The Devils and the Red Wings have been headed in different directions since New Jersey's four-game sweep of Detroit in the Stanley Cup Finals last June.
Detroit's 3-1 triumph at Joe Louis Arena tonight confirmed the notion that the Devils are still far from the team they were last spring.
Though the Red Wings, who lead the Western Conference with a record of 21-7-2, had more to prove, the Devils had just as much to prove to themselves.


Woman Pleads Guilty in School Corruption Case
A suspended teacher faces the loss of her job after pleading guilty to official misconduct and political corruption in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn  on Thursday.
The teacher, Myra Abramowitz, 50, of Staten Island, was accused of collaborating with a school principal to pressure school employees in Brooklyn to join a local Democratic club, attend its meetings and help the school board president win re-election and seek a City Council seat.


F.C.C. Removes Final Barrier To Foreign Investment in Sprint
The Federal Communications Commission removed the last domestic regulatory obstacle today for the Sprint Corporation to sell a 20 percent stake to two foreign telephone companies.
Sprint shareholders are expected to vote on the deal at a meeting set for Jan. 12, a company spokeswoman said.


Utilicorp Said to Be in Talks To Buy Kansas City Power
Utilicorp United Inc., a utility based in Kansas City, Mo., with businesses in natural gas and independent power, is in merger talks with Kansas City Power  and Light, an industry official familiar with the discussions said yesterday.
The official, speaking anonymously, said that a merger announcement could come in the next few days.
Sally McElwreath, a spokeswoman for Utilicorp, said yesterday that the company would not comment on rumors about mergers and acquisitions.
Officials of Kansas City Power could not be reached for comment.
Turner White, Kansas City Power's senior vice president for retail services, said, "We never comment on these kinds of things."


Rebel Attacks Disrupt Chechen Vote
An early round of Russian parliamentary elections was severely disrupted today by fierce rebel attacks in two major Chechen towns, and federal troops seemed to suffer severe casualties in each of them.
The fighting broke out only days after the leader of the Chechen secessionists, Gen.
Dzhokar M. Dudayev, promised not to interfere with the voting.


CENTOCOR SHARES UP SHARPLY ON DRUG REPORT
Shares of Centocor Inc. soared 68.4 percent yesterday after the company said  its drug Reo Pro sharply lowered the risk of heart attacks and death in people getting balloon angioplasty to unclog diseased heart arteries.
The results of the tests, on 1,500 patients, were so consistent that they were suspended by the company well ahead of schedule.
The results also showed the absence of a major side effect -- dangerous internal bleeding that had prompted Federal regulators to restrict Reo Pro's use only to patients at a high risk of heart attacks.
Centocor's shares rose $9.75, to close at $24.


Ex-Cardinal Is Wanted
An arrest warrant was issued yesterday for the former Arizona Cardinals lineman LUIS SHARPE after he failed to show up for a court hearing.
Sharpe, 35, was scheduled to be arraigned on drug charges before Superior Court Judge MICHAEL RYAN.
When Sharpe didn't show up, the judge issued a bench warrant for his arrest.


DRESDNER BANK TO ACQUIRE TRAVELERS GROUP UNIT
Dresdner Bank A.G., Germany's second-largest bank, said yesterday that it would acquire RCM Capital Management from Travelers Group Inc. in a deal valued  at $300 million.
Dresdner said RCM would become the major institutional investment management subsidiary of the Dresdner Bank Group.
RCM, founded in 1970, has about $26 billion of assets under management in the areas of equity, fixed-income and asset allocation products.
Dresdner will acquire Travelers' majority stake in RCM and the remaining stake owned by the RCM partners.


McGee Rejoins Cards
WILLIE McGEE, who played on three pennant-winning teams for St.
Louis in the  1980's, returned to the Cardinals yesterday when he agreed to a $500,000, one-year contract.
McGee, 37, is a three-time All-Star.
He spent last season in Boston, hitting  .285 with two home runs and 15 runs batted in in 67 games.
He has also played with Oakland and San Francisco.


Soldier Charged in 2 Killings Had Been Cited for Racism
One of the soldiers accused of killing a black couple here last week had lost his security clearance and been disciplined for an expression of far-right views, according to records made public by the Army today.
The disclosure indicated that Army officials here at Fort Bragg knew for at least 10 months that the soldier, Pvt.
James N. Burmeister 2d, was an active white supremacist.


Rangers' Streak Ends With a Thud
The end of the undefeated streak was bad enough, but something to be expected.
It concluded at 10 o'clock tonight when the Rangers lost to the Sabres by 5-4 in a grotesque affair at the Aud.
There was nothing wrong with that, at least on the surface.
Instead of ending with a heart-breaking defeat, the 7-0-3 run concluded with a lack of composure by an injury-depleted, overworked bunch who have played 12 games in 21 days.


Restitution Bill Is Signed
Parents can be forced to pay restitution to victims of crimes committed by their children, under a bill signed yesterday by Governor Whitman.
The bill was  part of a package of provisions to revamp the state's juvenile justice system.


Murrell's Neck Injury Puts Moore in Lineup
Ronald Moore will start at tailback for the Jets (3-11) Sunday when they play the Houston Oilers (5-9) in the Astrodome.
It is not because of anything Adrian  Murrell has done, but because what has been done to him -- a collision against the New England Patriots on a swing pass last Sunday that left him with a pinched nerve in the neck.
The injury has left him with a numb right shoulder.
He has been held out of practice all week, but Coach Rich Kotite said if Murrell's progress continued, then he would play some.


De La Hoya Supplies Power on an Electric Night
Big-time boxing returned to Madison Square Garden last night after a two-and-a-half-year absence, and the stylish and powerful Oscar De La Hoya used  the occasion for his East Coast coming-out party.
A star-studded crowd of 16,027 watched the 22-year-old former Olympic gold medalist score a second-round technical knockout over Jesse James Leija to retain his World Boxing Association lightweight title.


New Push for Budget Accord Dissolves in Finger-Pointing
Stepped-up negotiations between the White House and Republicans to balance the budget by 2002 ended in acrimony only hours after they began yesterday, with each side angrily criticizing the other's proposal.
Within hours of the breakdown, efforts to work out a deal for a temporary spending bill to replace one that expired at midnight also fell apart, and various Government agencies prepared to shut down today for the second time in a month.[Page 12.]


What Pataki's Budget Will Do
The Governor's budget proposal includes spending reductions in most areas of  government and increases in a few of them.
Overall, the share of the budget that is financed by state taxes would decline from $33.1 billion to $31.22 billion.
Following are some examples of the changes in major areas of government, in most cases not including capital spending.
WELFARE


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Soprano With a Big Voice And Strong Breath Control Camellia Johnson Alice Tully Hall


No New Hits but Many Old Favorites
High tech is old hat. This Christmas, Americans seem to yearn for tradition.
Sure, computers will still show up under the tree, experts say, but the hottest products mostly involve cuddling up, soft candlelight and sitting around the table playing board games.
Cashmere and Gucci are popular again with the affluent set.
And then there is the perfume inspired by Kermit the Frog.


Investigating Palisades Police
The acting Bergen County Prosecutor, Charles R. Buckley, said yesterday that  his office and the Federal Bureau of Investigation were investigating whether police officers in the borough ran a residential burglary ring.
In August, Sgt.
Edward W. Shirley pleaded not guilty to charges that he burglarized a home  and stole $85,000.
Investigating that case, the prosecutor's office determined that burglaries might have been committed by other officers.
An F.B.I. spokesman yesterday confirmed an investigation into potential Federal civil rights violations during "burglaries allegedly committed by Palisades Park police officers," The A.P. said.


Things Just Go From Hot to Hotter
The program presented by Jawole Willa Jo Zollar and her Urban Bush Women company on Thursday night at Playhouse 91 was like too large a portion of holiday plum pudding.
One was satiated by about half way through the evening with dance, theater and performing that started out very strong and stayed that  way.
"Vocal Attack," a new improvisational piece, got the program off to an inspired start and was also the perfect introduction to this company of fearless, triple-threat performers.
Dance improvisation can be deadly in its hopeful jabs at connectedness.
But the Urban Bush Women seem to have worked together long and intensely enough so that each moment of "Vocal Attack" sent off sparks that ignited what came next.


Child-Abuse Deaths Prompt Concern
Thirty-three children, 29 of them under age 5, were killed in child-abuse cases in New Jersey from 1992 through 1994 while under the jurisdiction of the state's child-welfare agency or soon after being discharged from its supervision, according to official figures.
A state review board reported that 18 of the children had lived in families with histories of drug or alcohol abuse.
It urged the agency, the Division of Youth and Family Services, to give its caseworkers better training to detect drug-abusing parents.


Mexico to Bail Out Its Biggest Bank
Mexican officials have agreed to a $2 billion bailout of the country's largest bank, Banamex, as part of an increasingly costly bid to save the troubled banking system from collapse.
Mexico's Government-run Bank Insurance Fund, known as Fobaproa, will take over some 15 billion pesos ($2 billion) of Banamex's loans, the bank said late on Thursday.


For Professors, the Rule Lives: Publish or Perish
To the Editor:
In the Dec. 9 obituary of the educator Ernest L. Boyer, you note that "College: The Undergraduate Experience in America," his 1987 book, "stimulated the present college movement that holds that much research is pointless and even harmful insofar as it distracts teachers from students."


Cubans Ready for Tour Of Interested Teams
While major league free agents continued to find jobs at a hectic pace, two free agents who are Cuban defectors became eligible yesterday to negotiate with  major league teams for their services.
Their agent said they would visit interested clubs, beginning with the Texas Rangers tomorrow.
Joe Cubas, the Miami-based agent, said he and pitchers Osvaldo Fernandez and  Livan Hernandez would leave the Dominican Republic and fly to Miami today, then  take off on a four-city tour that will be expanded as they go.


Mbabane Journal;Tradition-Bound Swazis Chafing Under Old Ties
Tucked between green, rolling mountains, this tiny, landlocked kingdom still  has the sleepy look of a gentler time.
It is a place where African traditions hold forth: chiefs distribute the land, wealth is measured in cattle and hundreds of bare-breasted maidens pay homage to the Queen Mother each year by gathering reeds to repair her home.


Regaining the Promise of Youth and the Trust of Parents
A little over a year ago, a typical morning for Maya V. meant waking up, getting dressed and barely uttering a word to her parents before leaving her Brooklyn home to meet her friends.
Her parents thought she was going to school, but instead the 15-year-old Ukrainian immigrant was leading a double life.
She started cutting classes at school and in six months, she dropped out altogether.
She spent her days smoking and drinking with friends, and her nights in dance clubs.
Sometimes, she would not return home at all.


HIGH SCHOOL REPORT
Decisions, Decisions


RICKEL HOME CENTERS MAY FILE FOR BANKRUPTCY
Rickel Home Centers Inc. said yesterday that it might have to file for bankruptcy and expected to report a $15 million loss for the quarter that ended  on Oct. 28.
The privately held company, based in South Plainfield, N.J., said it would not make an interest payment that was due yesterday on its senior notes and said those notes would be in default if the payment was not made within a 30-day grace period.
The company said it was exploring "various alternatives."


Rationing Health Care Is Good Business
To the Editor:
Re "Give Me Therapy -- or Else" by Kate Walter (Op-Ed, Dec. 9), describing her recent experience in the surrealistic world of mental health coverage:


Nokia Cuts Its Stake In Dutch Cable Concern
Nokia is cutting its stake in the Dutch cable company NKF Holding N.V. to 49  percent and selling the company its own cable operations.
The news came a day after Nokia announced that it expected lower profits in the final four months of the year and that it planned to reorganize its consumer electronics business.
Tonn Van De Laar, an NKF board member, said he did not expect Nokia to sell its  remaining interest in NKF anytime soon.
Nokia had held about 56 percent of NKF.
NKF hopes the acquisition of Nokia cable will make the company a more global player.
Nokia's cable operations, employing close to 1,100, are expected to have 1995 revenues of 450 million guilders ($280 million).(AP)


No Word Yet on Muller's Fate
With his self-imposed Saturday deadline rapidly approaching, Mike Milbury was noncommital about what he was going to do with Kirk Muller.
"We'll either call him back or make a deal," Milbury said after today's practice.
"We still have hopes of making a trade. But I didn't promise you a trade. I promised you an action."


Corrections
An article in The Living Section on Wednesday about new cookbooks omitted the co-author, with Edward Brown, of "The Modern Seafood Cook." He is Arthur Boehm.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-7


THEATER IN REVIEW
A Coarse, Bullying Bad Cop With a Flair for Sophistry 'The Coyote Bleeds' Worth Street Theater


Holiday Symbols in Legal Wrangle


An Era Is Fading in Greece
The curtain is drawing on an Aegean melodrama, featuring Greece's aging lion, Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou, and his second wife, Dimitra Liani, a former  airline hostess.
The 76-year-old Prime Minister is hooked to a respirator, deferring key decisions to his wife, whom he has named chief of staff.
He has yet to propose a successor and has rebuffed calls for his resignation, while Mrs.
Papandreou tries stoically to ignore a tabloid barrage of old photographs in which she appears topless.
It is a sad, undignified twilight for a leader who has dominated Greek politics for a generation.
Despite high unemployment and a potentially worrying  budget deficit, these have been good times for most Greeks.
Sobered by Balkan turbulence, Athens this year wisely tempered its fervid nationalism.
It recently lifted a self-injuring trade embargo against Macedonia, or Skopje, as Greeks call the former Yugoslav republic.
Moreover, Greece threw no roadblocks against  Turkey's bid for a customs union with the European Community.


North Korea Signs Pact To Halt A-Arms Program
North Korea signed a $4.5 billion accord yesterday that gives it two nuclear  reactors in exchange for an agreement to freeze its nuclear program.
The accord aims to replace North Korea's nuclear reactors with ones that are  safer and produce far less plutonium, a key ingredient in some atomic weapons.
Western officials say North Korea now has enough plutonium to make at least one nuclear bomb.


Albany Seeks School Control In L.I. District
With a state official calling the Roosevelt school system an "educational and financial failure," the State Board of Regents voted unanimously today to proceed with the first state takeover of a school district in New York history.
Meeting in Albany, the regents decided to hold a public hearing on ousting Roosevelt's five-member school board, the final step required by law before a takeover can begin.
Board members vowed to resist removal.


Fog and Slick Pavement Create Big Pileup on Palisades Parkway
Clumps of heavy fog, bursts of sunshine and a slick roadway brought chaos to  the Palisades Interstate Parkway today, sending at least 74 cars smashing into one another in three separate, extended collisions that strewed wreckage over three miles.
No one was killed and none of those hurt had life-threatening injuries.
But it took a while to determine that, as emergency crews inched their way through the mangled cars because they could not penetrate the thicket of trees lining the scenic highway.


News Analysis;Behind the Budget Deadlock: '96 Election Strategy
The stakes in the last-ditch budget negotiations that began today could hardly be higher.
They involve such momentous questions as whether the place of the American Government in the lives of its citizens will be substantially diminished, whether social policies developed over the last three decades will be reversed and whether middle-income families and wealthy investors will have their taxes cut.


Can Good Cheer Alone Sell More Cashmere?;Lands' End Sales Are Down In Tough Season for Retailers
It's the busiest day of the year at Lands' End Inc., but the hundreds of sales agents seem in no hurry to rush people through their orders.
They chat at  length with callers about what size their children's feet are, what color sweaters they prefer and what type of jacket might be best for a trip to the Arctic.
Peddling charm and patience along with brightly colored turtlenecks and sensible bathing suits has made Lands' End one of the biggest catalogue retailers in the country.


Ruling on Venue Change
Prosecutors who charged Jesse K. Timmendequas in the rape and murder of Megan Kanka, 7, in 1994 will learn next week whether they can try their case in Mercer County, where the crime was committed.
At a hearing yesterday on an appeal of his October decision to move the trial to Camden because of defense concerns about prejudicial local publicity, Superior Court Judge Andrew J. Smithson said  he would announce on Thursday whether he would reconsider the decision.
Jury selection is scheduled to begin Feb. 19.


A Buyer for 47th St. Photo
The Tuttnauer Company said today that it had bought the bankrupt Manhattan electronics retailer 47 St.
Photo.
Terms were not disclosed.
Tuttnauer, which is based in Jerusalem, said it was one of the retailer's creditors and took over the company and its operations on Thursday.


Nancy LaMott, 43, Pop Singer Of a Clear, All-American Style
Nancy LaMott, a cabaret singer and recording artist whose unadorned, heartfelt interpretations of songs epitomized the best of what could be called an all-American style of traditional pop singing, died on Wednesday at St.
Luke's Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 43.
The cause was cancer, said her manager, Scott Barnes.


U.S. Team in Iraq Fails To Find Pilot's Remains
A Pentagon team left Iraq today after searching without success for the remains of a Navy pilot missing since the Persian Gulf War in 1991, Government officials said.
The team, led by the Red Cross, spent the week combing a remote desert site in western Iraq where an FA-18 fighter-bomber piloted by Lieut.
Cmdr.
Michael Scott Speicher crashed on Jan. 16, 1991.


Metro Digest
NEW YORK CITY Subway Film Permit Revoked The makers of the television series "Law and Order" had to shoot a subway scene, involving a fictional attack by terrorists, on an Upper West Side street after the Transit Authority revoked their permit to use a subway station. [25.]


No Need to Kill
To the Editor:
Re Frank W. Donovan's Dec. 13 letter: There are thousands, if not millions, of vegetarians and vegans who would differ with the premise that we need to eat  animal flesh.
There is no real need to kill another living creature for our food.


Life After Met Goes On For Battle, Next Door
Although Kathleen Battle remains persona non grata at the Metropolitan Opera, at nearby Avery Fisher Hall on Thursday night she was received enthusiastically  in her appearance with the New York Philharmonic, conducted by Leonard Slatkin.
In recent years, more attention has been given to Ms.
Battle's diva dramas than  to her singing.
Though some of the rosy bloom of the sound has faded, her lyric soprano voice retains some impressive qualities.
It is understandable that at 47 she cannot navigate the two arias she sang from Handel's "Alcina" with the ingenue freshness and agility she once had.
Her  sweet, clear tone has acquired a more dusky coloring, and some breathiness has crept into her mid-range singing.


Ex-Chief Pleads Not Guilty
Robert Spina, the suspended police chief of West Orange, pleaded not guilty yesterday to charges of beating his wife, warning a drug suspect about a raid and lying under oath.
A judge scheduled a hearing for Wednesday on a request for a change of venue by Mr.
Spina, who remains free on a $50,000 bond.


Cardiologist Answers a Raphael Question
For five centuries, art historians, theologians and other scholars have been  mystified by Raphael's last and greatest painting, "The Transfiguration," a huge altarpiece hanging in the main picture gallery of the Vatican Museum in Rome.
Why, they have wondered, did the great master of psychological realism and rival of Michelangelo combine a scene of the Transfiguration of Christ with another Biblical scene showing the failure of the disciples to cure an epileptic boy, placing one scene on top of the other?


O'Neal Returns at Full Speed
Magic 111, Jazz 99


THEATER IN REVIEW


Candiotti to Stay in L.A.
The right-hander TOM CANDIOTTI returned to the Los Angeles Dodgers yesterday, agreeing to a two-year contract said to be worth $6 million.
Candiotti, 38, was 7-4 with a 3.50 earned run average last season and filed for free agency following the World Series.
He pitched at least seven innings in 19 of 30 starts and walked two batters or fewer in 22 starts.


Before Facing Tyson, Mathis Takes Punches to His Ego
He had been teased all week for his high voice and low punching power, and finally, as if the words hurt more than a thudding right from Mike Tyson, Buster Mathis Jr. stopped talking.
"Put some bass in it, baby," someone jeered at Wednesday's press conference,  referring to Mathis's soprano voice.


TOKEN BOOTH FIRE ATTACK SEEMS UNRELATED TO MOVIE
The arson attack that killed a clerk in a Brooklyn subway token booth last month had nothing to do with the movie "Money Train," the District Attorney of Brooklyn said yesterday, after two more teen-agers were arrested and denied that it was a copycat crime.
One of the youths arrested yesterday, Vincent Ellerbee, 17, of 260 Herkimer Street, is accused of squirting the flammable liquid that exploded, destroying the booth and burning the clerk as he begged to be spared, officials said.
The role of the second, Thomas Malik, 18, of 139 Herkimer Street, is being investigated, detectives said.


Budget Sails Before Federal Winds
Both politically and substantively, Gov.
George E. Pataki has tied the fate of his deep-cutting budget to proposed changes in Federal welfare and health-care programs that are at the heart of the budget battle in Washington.
In the $63.8 billion spending plan he unveiled today, Mr.
Pataki asked the Legislature to reduce welfare grants and set time limits on eligibility, sharply cut spending on hospitals and nursing homes and create block grants that would give local governments unprecedented freedom to run an array of social service programs.


Apple Expects To Post Loss This Quarter
Apple Computer Inc. said today that it expected to show a loss for its current quarter, usually its strongest period of the year, and the company hinted that substantial layoffs might be imminent.
The announcement deepens the  atmosphere of crisis that has hovered over Apple all year.
Apple's stock plunged 8 percent on the news, losing $3, to $34.25, which is close to its 52-week low in Nasdaq trading.


Panel Votes to Pursue Court Order for White House Notes
The Senate Whitewater committee intensified its constitutional fight with a defiant White House today, voting along party lines to press its subpoenas for documents that President Clinton has refused to turn over.
The committee voted, 10 to 8, to ask the full Senate to seek a court order requiring Mr.
Clinton to turn over the material.
The Republicans say the papers  they seek may show that senior White House officials improperly used confidential information about Federal investigations into the Arkansas dealings of the Clintons and their associates.


HARDEE'S IS SET TO SELL ITS ROY ROGERS RESTAURANTS
Imasco Ltd. said yesterday that its Hardee's Food Systems unit would sell its Roy Rogers restaurant chain, resulting in more than 270 layoffs and a charge of  $239 million.
Imasco said it would sell 45 of its Roy Rogers restaurants in New  York to Wendy's International Inc. and was in talks to sell the remaining 24 units in the area.
Buyers will be sought for the remaining 178 company-owned Roy Rogers restaurants.
Imasco also said the number of its Hardee's restaurants will fall by 3 percent to 4 percent in 1996 as the company sells underperforming properties.
Imasco plans to take a charge of $239 million against its fourth-quarter earnings to cover these actions.


Surgery to Keep Graf Out of Australian Open
STEFFI GRAF, who shares the No. 1 world ranking with MONICA SELES, will miss  the Australian Open next month after undergoing foot surgery yesterday.


For Owner of Harlem Clothing Store, a Collision of Two DifferentWorlds
Fred A. Harari works in a world of amazing savings and blaring sidewalk hawkers, where store owners with stamina can make a decent living in the city's  poorer neighborhoods.
He lives in the insular neighborhood of Brooklyn's Orthodox Sephardic Jews, where children attend yeshivas and even the hardest-charging businessmen shut off their cell phones and beepers for the Sabbath.


PATAKI BUDGET HAS SHARP CUTS IN AID TO POOR
Pressing forward with his plan to pare down state government, Gov.
George E.  Pataki proposed a $63.8 billion budget today that seeks steep reductions in spending on Medicaid, welfare and higher education to close a projected deficit  and pay for the tax cuts that he pushed through the Legislature earlier this year.
About to enter his second year in office, Mr.
Pataki issued a fiscal blueprint that continued his effort to revamp a state government that had long been dominated by Democrats.
Themes that he has trumpeted for months helped shape the document: the need to control costs, put welfare recipients to work, crack down on criminals and prepare for an era of shrinking Federal aid.


3 Parties in Mexico Close To Pact on Political Change
After nearly a year of secret meetings at the former Emperor Maximilian's castle, the leaders of Mexico's three major political parties have come close to an accord that will have a profound effect on the political system and the next  presidential election in the year 2000.
Participants say the agreement, which is expected to be announced in a few weeks, would for the first time allow independent candidates to run for office.
That would be a clear opening for disenchanted members of the existing political parties to undertake their own candidacies and siphon votes from other parties,  especially the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party, which has not lost a presidential election in 66 years.


About New York;A Woman's Crusade for Christmas Runs Into Wariness About the Season
T. (SAM) PARRISH always felt a bit out of step whenever she walked along bustling holiday streets where store windows beckoned with twinkling lights and  glittering Christmas trees.
Something was lacking, she felt, but it wasn't because of her past work helping design elaborate displays with animated creatures and fancy backdrops for the likes of Saks Fifth Avenue and Lord &amp; Taylor.
It was her faith, not her  artist's eye, that nagged her.
Christ, she thought, was missing from Christmas.


Union's Lawsuit Says Company Made $580,000 Payment to Mob
Lawyers for a teamsters' union local contended yesterday that an air-freight  company in New York made a $580,000 payoff to mobsters in the early 1990's in a  deal to cut the company's labor costs by $2 million a year.
In a civil racketeering lawsuit, the lawyers said former officials of Thyssen A.G., a German industrial company, authorized the payments by a subsidiary, the  Amerford International Corporation, in a scheme to dismiss about 30 Amerford employees at Kennedy International Airport.


No Headline
This is not the light at the end of the tunnel.
Most probably it is a reflection of new and more horrible fires of a civil war." -- BORIS YELTSIN, warning against a Communist election victory. [1:3.]


6 From Chinatown Convicted in Gang Killings
A jury convicted six men from Chinatown in Manhattan on Thursday of killing four gang rivals in an assault on a house in Teaneck.
The defendants were found guilty of murder, attempted murder, burglary and weapons charges.
They were found not guilty of arson and kidnapping.


Children in the Line of Fire
As the United Nations ends its celebratory 50th anniversary year, one of its  member agencies offers a sobering report on the state of the world's children.
The United Nations Children's Fund concludes that, despite great progress, many  children live a marginal existence, their aspirations choked by war, poverty and disease.
The Children's Fund counts 149 major wars between 1945 and 1992.
These conflicts, whether between or within nations, have had a particularly devastating effect on children.
In the last decade, child victims of war include 2 million killed, 4 to 5 million disabled, 12 million left homeless, 10  million psychologically traumatized, and more than 1 million orphaned or separated from their parents.


Life for Killing Co-Worker
Three mill workers have been sentenced to life in prison for throwing a co-worker to his death in a vat of wood pulp with a 50-pound weight tied to his  neck.
The three, Keith Kutska, Dale Basten and Michael Johnson, had been convicted by a jury of killing Thomas Monfils, 35, after accusing him of telling the police about Mr.
Kutska's plan to steal an extension cord from a mill of the James River Corporation.
All four were employed at the mill.
At the sentencing on Wednesday, Judge James Bayorgeon of Circuit Court said Mr.
Kutska  must serve 20 years before being eligible for parole, Mr.
Basten 17 years and Mr.
Johnson 15.


Guns for the Holidays
Enemies of gun control are readying a perverse holiday gift for the nation.
Led by Representative Bob Barr, Republican of Georgia, they are trying to get the House to repeal the landmark 1994 ban on assault-style weapons and large-capacity ammunition clips.
House Speaker Newt Gingrich, who is under pressure from Mr.
Barr and other pro-gun Republicans to get the issue to the floor, announced that there would be a vote soon, taking gun-control advocates by surprise.
The strategy, apparently, is to try to minimize negative fallout by burying the repeal of a demonstrably popular law in Congress's usual pre-Christmas confusion.


Five Companies to Build Big Gas Plant in Nigeria
Nigeria LNG Ltd. signed a contract today with five foreign companies to build a liquified-natural-gas plant in Nigeria despite the international outcry over the hanging of nine minority-rights campaigners.
The project is valued at $4 billion.
The five companies -- the Royal Dutch/Shell group, Technip of France, Snamprogetti of Italy, the Japan Gasoline Company and M. W. Kellogg, which is part of Dresser Industries of the United States -- thus rejected worldwide pressure to abandon the project in protest over the hangings last month of Ogoni activists.


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day on Wednesday with an article about steelworkers at the LTV Corporation misidentified three members of the United Steelworkers of America.
They were, from the left, Dale DeWolf, Michael Scarver, a former local union president in Cleveland, and Frank Vickers.


Nelson Seeks More Productivity From Smith
It was not immediately clear whether Don Nelson wanted to light a fire under  Charles Smith today or merely give him something to ponder on the way back to the bench.
This much is known: If Smith thought he was unsure of his role on the Knicks, his coach is perplexed, too.
With Charles Oakley perhaps missing his second straight game on Saturday night against the visiting Detroit Pistons because of a sore left Achilles' tendon, Nelson has wanted to bank on another inside presence.
In Nelson's mind,  through 22 games, Smith has not become that player.


Giuliani at Odds With Governor Over Benefits for the City
Gov.
George E. Pataki, who has often been accused of favoring other parts of  the state over New York City, proudly declared today that his second budget would give the city $955 million in savings, mostly by cutting welfare and Medicaid.
It would, he said, maintain levels of local aid and offer relief from "killer mandates" imposed by the state.
But Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani offered a different view.
In fact, he issued his first notable public criticism of his fellow Republican since Mr.
Pataki was elected.


Debate in America Becomes a Paralyzing Show
To the Editor:
There was a special irony in Ethan B. Kapstein's "France vs. Europe" (Op-Ed,  Dec. 8) on the protest strikes now close to paralyzing France.
"In the United States," he writes, "big changes in social policy would be unthinkable without debate. . . . Deprived of debate, the French take to the streets."


France's Sale of Stake In Pechiney Falls Short
France's sale of its controlling stake in Pechiney S.A., Europe's biggest aluminum producer, raised a lower-than-expected 3.8 billion French francs ($760  million), amid strike turmoil.
About 470,000 individual investors subscribed for Pechiney shares, for about 2.7 billion francs.
"It was an exceedingly difficult  sale," a Finance Ministry spokesman said.


Nickelodeon Executive to Head Disney/ABC Cable Unit
The executive who put children's television on the big-time business map, Geraldine B. Laybourne, has been hired away from Nickelodeon by Capital Cities/ABC Inc. to take charge of its cable programming.
The announcement yesterday by Robert A. Iger, president of Capital Cities/ABC, also said that when the company merges with the Walt Disney Company  early next year, Ms.
Laybourne will become president of Disney/ABC Cable Networks, a new unit responsible for all nonbroadcast programming except ESPN, including the 24-hour cable news network that ABC plans to create.


French Rail and Other Workers Ending Their 3-Week Walkout
French railway workers voted today to end their three-week-old national strike, signaling an end to the country's most serious labor unrest in a decade.
Still, the sour mood of widespread discontent remained.


Old and Sad, but Brilliant
Berlioz's "Beatrice et Benedict," which was presented in semi-staged form by  the Yale Opera at Tully Hall on Wednesday night, is a happy, brilliant opera, a  masterly musical transcription of "Much Ado About Nothing." At the same time, great sadness hangs over it.
It was Berlioz's final work, yet he lived seven grim years after completing it.
In his old age, he was all but forgotten in his  country, known mostly as a critic.
How he could have written such music in an atmosphere of utter futility is a wonder.
For the most part, "Beatrice" is done with filigree lightness.
Its melodies are long, elegant and memorable; its orchestration is bracing and precise.
The central characters' mix of intellectual cynicism and emotional naivete is captured from the first tumbling bars of the overture.
Occasionally, Berlioz touches on darker chords and themes.
Writing his own libretto, he introduces a character named Somarone, a pompous, amateurish Kapellmeister who foists a "Grotesque Epithalamium," or wedding ode, on the unsuspecting Shakespeareans.
He is a tribute to the busybodies who made Berlioz's life an artistic hell.


PAYLESS CASHWAYS IN EFFORT TO CUT COSTS AND DEBT
Payless Cashways Inc, a building materials specialty retailer in Kansas City, Mo., said yesterday that it was restructuring its Boston-based Somerville lumber operations, to cut costs and reduce debt.
Payless Cashways said it was closing 5 of its 10 Somerville lumber stores and planned to sell its Bellingham distribution center.
The company will also close one store in Mishawaka, Ind.
The actions, along with a previously announced sale of the company's ownership interest in Total Home de Mexico, will result in pretax charges of $162 million  in the fourth quarter.


Executions in China


Corrections
An article on Nov. 12 about Jews who have organized to oppose the Israeli Government's efforts to make peace with the Palestinians referred incompletely to the Talmudic doctrine under which the assassin of the Israeli Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, claimed to be acting.
The "law of the pursuer" condones the killing of a person who is pursuing a Jew with deadly intent, but according to Maimonides' widely accepted interpretation, it does not allow the use of deadly  force unless other options are exhausted.
This correction was delayed for consultation with religious scholars.


No Need to Kill
To the Editor:


Manuel Gutierrez, Spanish General, 83; Aided Democracy
Manuel Gutierrez Mellado, a Franco-era general who played a major role in Spain's transition to democracy and helped face down a coup attempt in 1981, was killed in a highway crash today, Defense Ministry officials said.
He was 83.
As First Deputy Prime Minister in charge of defense after the death of the dictator Francisco Franco in 1975, General Gutierrez Mellado reformed the army to make it politically neutral.


Cuttings;A Little Reassurance for the Light-Deprived
The dark days are getting to me and my plants, so I decided to call a meteorologist to ask for a reading on light levels.
On Thursday, the Winter Solstice, the sun will rise over New York City at 7:16 A.M. and set at 4:31 P.M.
That's only 9 hours and 15 minutes of light, with a little dawn and dusk added for good measure.


Claiming Victory, Strikers Rally in Cities Across France
Hundreds of thousands of railroad and subway workers, students, teachers and  other state employees marched through Paris and other French cities today in demonstrations that celebrated a three-week public transportation shutdown protesting Government austerity plans as a victory.
"We have won a battle, but not yet the war," said Jean-Jacques Carmentran, head of the rail section of the Workers' Force union.


Jessica Morgan, Nico Israel
Jessica Clare Morgan, a curatorial assistant at the Museum of Contemporary Art in Chicago, was married last evening to Nico Israel, the John W. Draper Postdoctoral Fellow in Literary Cultures at New York University.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel performed the ceremony at the Duke-Semans House in New York.
Ms.
Morgan, 27, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Cambridge University  and received a master's degree in art history from the Courtauld Institute of Art in London.
She is a daughter of Finola Morgan and Leon R. Morgan, both of London.
The bride's father is a solicitor at Davenport Lyons, a law firm in London.
Her mother teaches English literature at St.
Margaret's School in London.


Military Puts Bosnia on the Web
QUICK, which countries are sending troops to Bosnia to help enforce the Balkan peace plan?
Who is commanding the 60,000 NATO forces?
And why does Defense Secretary William J. Perry think this risky operation serves America's national interests?
For answers to these and other questions about the Bosnia mission, the Pentagon says, log on to Bosnia Link, the military's new home page on the Internet.
The address is http:// www.dtic.dla.mil/bosnia/ on the World Wide Web.


Swiss Release Relative Of Mexican Ex-President
The sister-in-law of former President Carlos Salinas of Mexico has been released from a Swiss jail after prosecutors decided she was not an important figure in the drug money scandal surrounding the Salinas family.
A Swiss police spokesman said that Paulina Castanon, the wife of the former President's brother, had apparently played only a minor role in the case involving her husband.
She was arrested along with her brother, Antonio, on Nov. 15 in Geneva as she reportedly tried to withdraw money from a Swiss bank account belonging to her husband, Raul Salinas.
Antonio Castanon was released on Tuesday.


House Fire Kills 2 Children and Injures 1
Two children were killed and a third was critically burned yesterday when fire swept through a two-story wood-frame house in Plainfield, N.J.
The fire, which started at 6:41 P.M. in a house at 622 West Third Street, spread quickly up the walls of the house, which fire officials estimated to be about 80 years old and which was constructed with single beams running from the  foundation to the roof, with no fire stops or insulation.


U.S. Is Seeking Further Ways to Punish Nigeria for Executions
More than a month after the hanging of the Nigerian minority rights campaigner Ken Saro-Wiwa, the Clinton Administration is considering how best to  strengthen its campaign to isolate Nigeria's military dictatorship in protest against the execution.
The United States has withdrawn its Ambassador, suspended Nigeria's application for financial credits, tightened the granting of visas to Nigerians  with ties to the military regime of Gen.
Sani Abacha and refused to sell it weapons.
State Department officials will meet next week to consider what else they can do.


Claudia Tuchman, M. F. Bogdanos
Claudia Tuchman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bert Tuchman of New York, was married yesterday to Maj.
Matthew Francis Bogdanos, a son of Claire Bogdanos of  Sebastian, Fla., and Konstantine Bogdanos of New York.
Judge Harold J. Rothwax of the New York Court of Claims officiated at the St.
Moritz on the Park in New  York.
Mrs.
Bogdanos, 28, is a law clerk for Judge Leonard B. Sand of United States District Court in Manhattan.
She graduated cum laude from Princeton University and received a law degree from Columbia University.


Knowing Kahlo
To the Editor:
Deborah Solomon, in her contemptuous review of "The Diary of Frida Kahlo" and "The Letters of Frida Kahlo" (Nov. 19), criticizes Kahlo for being impersonal in her diary, complaining about her lack of "kitchen-sink detail," but then when Kahlo does give us these details in her letters, Ms.
Solomon accuses her of sounding like "the consummate 1950's housewife." Ms.
Solomon accuses Kahlo of being a pioneer of talk-show culture because her work was personal -- but so was that of other strong artists; think of Philip Guston's self-portraits with bottles and cigarettes or, in another medium, Michel Leiris's beautiful unflinching self-portrait in "Manhood." What is compelling in Kahlo's work is not raw self-exposure but the tension between the suffering self and that self transformed into sensuous, surrealistic art.
Let us hope that Ms.
Solomon is able to treat Joseph Cornell more fairly; her tone suggests she at least has more compassion for his gender.


What Makes a Company an Internet Player?
ONE word of advice: Beware the Internet wannabes.
Many companies would love to sport the Internet label, but not all have earned the right to wear it.
At a recent Montgomery Securities technology stock conference in San Francisco, company officials wasted no time stating their grand plans to grab a  share of the booming Internet market.
John Force, the portfolio manager of the PBHG Technology and Communications Fund, said, "It was amazing how many people used the word 'Internet.' "


Survey to Press U.S. Judges On Caseload And Expenses
Sometime next month, the nation's 840 or so Federal judges will be sent an extensive questionnaire designed to determine how hard they work for their money.
And the man asking the questions will be Senator Charles E. Grassley, an Iowa Republican who has already demonstrated his suspicion that many of the judges probably are not working hard enough.
He recently called for the elimination of  some judicial seats and believes several more could probably be erased to save money.


Three Guides to African-American History
Places of historic importance to African Americans are featured in three recent publications from regional tourist groups, all available free.
Philadelphia's "Share the Heritage" is a 32-page booklet in full color the size of a business envelope.
It covers historic people and sites, from Paul Robeson, the singer, actor and political figure, and Marian Anderson, the first black artist to star at the Metropolitan Opera, to Crystal Bird Fauset, a  social worker elected to Congress in 1938, as well as arts and culture, places of historic importance, galleries, shops and night spots.


BACKTALK: A Painful Goodbye in Cleveland, and a Sudden Echo in London;North America's Relocation Fever: Next Stop May Be English Soccer
This afternoon, in a stadium filled with their fiercely loyal but bitterly disillusioned fans, the Cleveland Browns will play what will probably be their final home game.
It's another example of an increasingly common occurrence in North American sports.
This year alone, the Quebec Nordiques, the Los Angeles Rams and the Los Angeles Raiders left their respective cities, and the Browns, the Houston Oilers and the Winnipeg Jets announced that they will relocate at the end of the season.
They join a tradition of pro sports carpetbagging that stretches back, past the Brooklyn Dodgers, all the way to the 1880's, when the Worcester, Mass., baseball team pulled up stakes to become the Philadelphia Phillies.


Meredith Hersch, Jonathan Yusen
Meredith Helene Hersch, a daughter of Sheila and Ira Hersch of Scarsdale, N.Y., is to be married today to Jonathan Mark Yusen, the son of Jane and Walter  Yusen of Winchester, Mass.
Rabbi Richard Jacobs is to perform the ceremony in the former Biddle house at Tarrytown House, a conference center in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The couple both graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College, where the bridegroom, 25, is studying for an M.B.A. degree.
The bride, 24, teaches the second grade at the White River School in White River Junction, Vt.


A Whole New Animal
Call it the original lobster bib.
In the scientific journal Nature last week, scientists reported discovering that the mouthparts of a lobster are populated by a flyspeck-sized animal, Symbion pandora, that sweeps up and eats food spills from the sloppy lobster itself.


In Africa, Many National Airlines Fly on a Wing and a Prayer
When Wolfgang Schmidt, a German journalist working in West Africa, wanted to  get from Cotonou, Benin, to Douala, Cameroon, earlier this month, he faced the kind of devilish choice that has become routine for many travelers in this region.
He could fly 455 miles in the opposite direction to Abidjan, and then wait three hours for a connecting flight on Air Afrique, the region's largest and best-reputed carrier.
Or he could plow ahead later that evening on Cameroon Airlines, one of the region's many small, troubled national carriers, for a direct flight to his destination.


10,000 Greeting Cards In Memory of a Camden Heroine
Aletha R. Wright would have been proud, or maybe embarrassed, at the 10,000 greeting cards printed in her memory.
A lifelong resident of Camden, Mrs.
Wright had been a county freeholder, a city school board president, a policy adviser to Gov.
Jim Florio, a day-care teacher and about 10,000 other things, it seemed, before she died of a heart attack in July 1994.
She was 43.
Now the city has printed 10,000 greeting cards featuring students' drawings as part of a "My Dream of Camden" art contest from 1992.
Of Camden's 23,000 students, 15,000 participated in the contest, sponsored by Cogen Technologies, a Houston-based company with a plant in Camden that produces electricity to be sold to utilities.


Books in Brief: FICTION
WHITE BOYS AND RIVER GIRLS Stories.
By Paula K. Gover.
Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill, $17.95.


Old German Steel Plant Becoming a Tourist Site
FOR the most jaded of travelers, for those who have feasted to excess on the  Pantheon and the Pyramids, Germany has come up with a new diversion -- a disused steelworks.
And not just any steelworks.
The custodians of the Volklingen Hutte like to compare its towering blast furnaces to the spires of a Gothic cathedral.
In its  glory days from its founding in 1873 to its closing in 1986, the plant belched forth the steel for 90 percent of German army helmets in the First World War and yielded armor that powered Hitler's war effort.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN


Children's Books
CARLOS, LIGHT THE FAROLITO By Jean Ciavonne.
Illustrated by Donna Clair. 28 pp.
New York: Clarion Books. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 8) THE FAROLITOS OF CHRISTMAS By Rudolfo Anaya.
Illustrated by Edward Gonzales.
Unpaged.
New York: Hyperion Books for Children. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9)


Speech And Free Speech
THE playwright Peter Sagal wastes no time getting down to dirty business in "Denial" on the main stage of the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven.
One demented professor, Bernard Cooper, author of "The Great Deception" (the  book refers to the Holocaust as "the extermination myth") charges that he is a victim of government persecution.
A star lawyer, Abigail Gersten, takes his case.
"My client is the First Amendment," she explains.
"I'm not condoning it,"  she says of Cooper's raving.
"Just defending his right to say it."


Of Cough Drops (Faster!) and Curtains (Later!)
PEOPLE WHO WRITE ABOUT MUSIC IN newspapers are given a number of basic directives.
High on the list is never to "review the audience": that is, never to use the precious small space given to classical-music coverage for generalized description of applause, or for bemoaning the lack of it, or for pointless vendettas against people in the reviewer's vicinity who talk among themselves, massage candy wrappers or itemize their personal effects.
To review the audience is to risk sounding like an insufferable snob.
The pure one, the learned hearer, sits in silence, trying to commune with the muse,  while philistines all around trespass upon his sacred space with nervous prattle that substitutes for true understanding.
This state of mind often ends up uncomfortably resembling its opposite.
Some finger-wagging monitors of the concert hall seem more vigilant to the errors of their neighbors than to anything happening on stage.


Free Agent Pool Gets Larger and Deeper
When their teams did not tender them contracts before last season, Bernard Gilkey, Glenallen Hill, Joey Cora and Tony Fossas became free agents.
They were  among a record group of 45 players who became free that way.
The contract tender deadline is this Wednesday, and general managers eagerly  await the opportunity to sift through a second group of players set free by the absence of tenders.
The number of such players has grown the past three years, and some people expect an appreciably larger group this week.


Guns, Art And Opera Violence
It wasn't your typical New York publishing party.On Dec. 12, in the Hunting World store on East 53d Street, R. L. Wilson was signing copies of his "Steel Canvas: The Art of American Arms," published by Random House.
Proceeds from the event, which had attracted a crowd of well-heeled members of the National Rifle Association and firearms connoisseurs in blazers and ties, were to be donated to the N.R.A.
Foundation.
Mr.
Wilson -- who has written 22 books about guns, maintains a shooting range behind his home in Connecticut and  is an arms consultant to the Metropolitan Museum of Art -- was sounding a little defensive.


The Newest Space Race
THE right stuff once had to do with guts and grit, with former test pilots and fighter jocks putting their lives on the line, blasting skyward on machines  renowned for their tendency to explode.
But flying into space is safer nowadays, and increasingly it is fueled by international diplomacy or cash or a little of  both.
Like much else in the waning days of the 20th century, space travel is threatening to turn from a calling into a currency.
The political side of the coin was highlighted last week as President Clinton announced a plan for Israeli astronauts to fly aboard the space shuttle and the  planned international space station.


Many Serbs Of Croatia Find Misery In Belgrade
Milan Peksir is a forlorn and broken figure as he wanders the streets of Belgrade, timidly entering cheap diners to try to keep warm over a cup of coffee and buying one or two cigarettes at a time from street vendors.
The last few months have been a humbling time for Mr.
Peksir, a 52-year-old laborer, and for many of the 170,000 Croatian Serbs who are now stranded in Serbia.


Corrections
An entry in the Business Diary column last Sunday, about changes in corporate leadership, misstated the new roles of Steven F. Goldstone and Charles M. Harper at RJR Nabisco.
Mr.
Goldstone, the president, adds the title of chief executive, replacing Mr.
Harper, who remains chairman.


Two Arraigned In Arson Death In the Subway
As investigators continued to search for several more youths who they say carried out an arson attack that killed a subway token clerk in Brooklyn, two suspects were arraigned yesterday and their roles were more clearly described.
The Brooklyn District Attorney's office said that both suspects, Vincent Ellerby, 17, and Thomas Malik, 18, confessed on videotape to last month's attack, which is said to have begun as a robbery.
They were arraigned before Judge Michael A. Gary in Criminal Court in Brooklyn.


Improving the Schools
The state recently issued report cards to school districts.
What improvements would you suggest for your district?
Reorganization Needed


The Gifts of Giving
Charitable contributions are tax deductible no matter when you make them, but, human nature what it is, many gifts are made in December at the last minute.
Well, here we are.
The American Association of Fund-Raising Counsel estimates that in 1994, charities received $130 billion in private donations and about one-third of that came in the fourth quarter.
Some charities tempt you by  giving you some thing in return besides a tote bag, although many benefits are standard.
Museums offer free admission to donors, while opera and dance groups get you in for a dress rehearsal and maybe let you mingle with the stars.
Of course, your tax deduction is reduced by the value of the benefit you receive, but some charities will gladly help by giving you nothing.
The Stamford Jewish Community Center in Connecticut, for example, is seeking contributions through what it calls a nonevent fund-raiser.
You give the group money and agree, as the center's flier says, "not to attend this very special nonaffair."
Here are examples of what donations will get you around the country, as compiled by James Schembari and Dylan Loeb McClain.


The Little Things Mean a Lot
THREE YEARS AGO, EMMA THOMPSON AND Anthony Hopkins were making a home together in "Howards End." This year they're battling it out at the box office.
"Sense and Sensibility," which Thompson adapted from Jane Austen's novel and in  which she has the enticing central role, is shaping up as the holiday season's one beloved film.
And "Nixon," with Hopkins as the President who just couldn't stop disgracing and rehabilitating himself, is already the year's most talked-about movie, three days before it opens.
But while "Sense and Sensibility" and "Nixon" face off against each other --  and against "Heat," with Robert De Niro and Al Pacino, "Jumanji," with Robin Williams, and other high-powered movies -- smaller pictures are sneaking into town. (Many are finally turning up in theaters after being presented at the New  York Film Festival earlier this year.) These are risky films, sometimes unglamorous, sometimes sad, sometimes not even in the English language.
They might have had to battle for attention at any time but are even more likely to be overshadowed in December, when the heavy-hitting Hollywood movies are hauled  out to qualify for awards.


Books in Brief: NONFICTION
A DIARY OF THE CENTURY Tales From America's Greatest Diarist.
By Edward Robb Ellis.
Kodansha, $25.


Parents as Partners
Everybody seems to know intuitively that the best schools have an active corps of concerned parents, whether in formal P.T.A.'s, as volunteers in classrooms or libraries or after-school activities, or just as stand-up advocates for their children.
Now a growing body of research supports that proposition.
"We've got lots and lots of data that show that in general, where good practices of family involvelment occur, there are benefits for students, parents and teachers," said Joyce L. Epstein, an education researcher at John Hopkins University.
Parental involvement is one of the eight pillars of the Goals 2000 law, the  sweeping Federal effort to improve America's public schools by the year 2000.
This month, the Federal Department of Education issued its 1995 analysis of the  schools' progress toward meeting the goals, which also include setting academic  standards, lowering crime in school and improving preschool programs.


Once Tyson Manages to Land, So Does Mathis
When Mike Tyson and Buster Mathis Jr. finally entered the ring tonight, the 18,000-seat Spectrum was half empty of spectators and fully barren of suspense.
The most urgent question was whether Mathis would last as long as the national anthem, which had been screechingly extended to 2 minutes 10 seconds by a trio called Brownstone.
To the surprise of many he did last longer, smothering Tyson determinedly but futilely before being knocked out at 2 minutes 32 seconds of the third round.


Karen Yamauchi, Jeffrey Eugenides
KAREN YAMAUCHI, a shy, soft-spoken sculptor, met Jeffrey Eugenides, a funny,  intense novelist, a year and a half ago at the MacDowell Colony, the artists' retreat in Peterborough, N.H.
At any given time at MacDowell, there are about 30 composers, painters, poets and others living and working in studios hidden in the woods.
If you take a walk there, you can usually hear piano playing or spot a poet leaning against a  tree.
It is known as an ideal place to work as well as to fall in love.


Art and Money
The arts are headed for trouble.
Public funding is shrinking as legislators cut programs for ideological or budgetary reasons.
Private funding, which some hope will fill the gap, is also tightening as foundations and individuals struggle to meet expanding needs in an uncertain economy.
The potential for harm is dismaying.
The marriage of public and private funds has sustained a remarkable diversity of organizations and made the arts an important, accessible part of American life.
You do not have to live in a great  urban center or travel hundreds of miles to see a great dance company or a great painting anymore.
In the 30 years since the National Endowment for the Arts was established, for instance, the number of professional orchestras in this country has increased from 110 to 230, dance companies from 37 to 450 and opera companies from 27 to 120.


Dana Freedman, Matthew Walden
Dana Michelle Freedman, a daughter of Sheril and Robert Freedman of Studio City, Calif., is to be married today in Beverly Hills, Calif., to Matthew Evan Walden, a son of Barbara and Stanley Walden of Hopewell Junction, N.Y.
Rabbi Jerry Cutler is to officiate at the Beverly Hills Hotel.
The bride, 31, is the vice president of current programming at 20th Century Fox Television in Century City, Calif.
She graduated from the University of Southern California.


Clinton's Bosnia Gamble
To the Editor:
There is little doubt that President Clinton is putting his re-election on the line as a result of American peacekeeping in Bosnia.
Since Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany has reportedly said that for the first time in decades, Europe would be pulling for the re-election of a Democratic President, perhaps the Bosnian warring factions should also place Mr.
Clinton's re-election high on their agenda.
There is much to be lost should the peace treaty fail and President Clinton not be re-elected.


It's Bob and Owen and Jon and Tate And Last but Not Least, the Two Jeffs
THOSE who subscribe to the currently fashionable, reversely snobbish view that series television is a vital (albeit commercial) art form should be cheered by "Partners," a half-hour comedy new to the Fox Monday night lineup this season.
This critically praised but precariously low-rated sitcom centers on Bob and Owen (played by Jon Cryer and Tate Donovan), a pair of eccentric male San Francisco arhitects, and Owen's fiancee, Alicia (Maria Pitillo), an attractive lawyer who both divides and unites them.
The show is propelled by young writers  whose own idiosyncratic, almost impossibly long-running relationship forms the heart of the enterprise.


SUNDAY: December 17, 1995;A QUESTION FOR: Nikki Giovanni
Q: Have you ever composed a poem over the phone?


Professor Stone Resumes His Presidential Research
IN THE FINAL, FRENZIED days before he completed the editing for his sprawling new film, "Nixon," Oliver Stone seemed oddly calm.
He sat slumped in an office at an editing studio near Santa Monica, exhausted and, yes, frightened.
Mr.
Stone, 49, remains scarred by the criticism of historians and journalists that he twisted facts in his 1991 film "J.F.K." when he dived into the murky waters of American history and created a Government conspiracy in the assassination of  John F. Kennedy.
Now comes "Nixon," starring Anthony Hopkins, about the life of the nation's 37th President until his resignation in 1974, two years after the Watergate break-in.


Displaced Persons
FRESH BLOOD The New American Immigrants.
By Sanford J. Ungar. 399 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.
AMERICAN DREAMING Immigrant Life on the Margins.
By Sarah J. Mahler.
Illustrated. 268 pp.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Cloth, $49.50.
Paper, $15.95.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
The Impatiens Man


Wreathed in Fur and Feathers
THINK Christmas wreaths and the mind usually jumps to pine boughs and red ribbons.
Not at the Parks Department's 13th annual wreath exhibit.
This year's show includes 22 wreaths made from a variety of materials that combine the spirit of the holiday season with the theme of animals and their environments.


MICHAEL EISNER IS WORTH $200 MILLION A YEAR
More than at any time since the Depression, the widening gulf between rich and poor threatens to violently unravel American society.
In "Michael Eisner Is  Worth $200 Million a Year" (Nov. 19), Michael M. Weinstein's glib assertion that "the super-rich earn their keep . . . the system is rational" seems at best unhinged from reality, and at worst dangerously self-absorbed.
Today, the obscene accumulation of profit for profit's sake is profoundly linked to the tens of millions of Americans who have watched their own incomes fall year after year.
In that grim setting, the cheery suggestion that anyone deserves $10 billion or $15 billion is simply bizarre.


Trust Me, Voters. I Didn't Have a Clue.
Representative Enid Waldholtz of Utah spent almost five hours last week answering questions about her convoluted personal and financial affairs.
But her sobbing performance at her exhaustive and exhausting televised news conference may have raised more questions than it answered.


A European Currency: French Strikes Pose Harsh Test
For the European Union to achieve its goal of a single currency by 1999 will  require quick and prodigious economic belt-tightening in most member countries,  a process that their leaders have seen as an initiation rite, painful perhaps, but allowing entry to an exclusive inner circle.
The turmoil in France over the last three weeks, however, has tested as never before the assumption that monetary union is worth the price of admission, at least under the current timetable, even for those who most want in.


Jane Austen's Fans
To the Editor:
Re "Jane Austen Meets Mr. Right" (Week in Review, Dec. 10):


Mischief Makers


The Kid From Hogan's Alley
R.
F.
OUTCAULT'S THE YELLOW KID A Centennial Celebration of the Kid Who Started the Comics.
Introduction by Bill Blackbeard.
Illustrated. 301 pp.
Northampton, Mass.: Kitchen Sink Press. $55.


Sharp Decline In Violent Crime May Be Slowing
After two years of sharp declines in violent crime in New York City, police officials concede that the trend has begun to slow and that crime may not go down much more.
While this year's reported rates of murder, robbery and burglary are expected to fall to their lowest levels since the early 1970's, the declines in the last  six months have been much less striking than the decreases in the first half of the year.


A Business School Merger Will Help Unify Rutgers
To the Editor:
Your front-page article "Balkan U.: Rutgers Gropes for a Vision" (Nov. 5) focused on the challenges Rutgers faces in unifying a diverse student body across three campuses.
Just days after the article appeared, the president, Francis Lawrence, tackled these challenges with the appointment of a single dean, George Benson, to lead the business schools on the New Brunswick and Newark campuses.


A Band With Appeal to the Broad-Minded
IT'S another ear-opening Saturday night in the Over the Edge music lab at the Common Ground coffeehouse.
And it isn't for the musically squeamish.


RESTAURANT: Navesink;Steamy Clam Chowder Is a Meal and an Elixir
A few minutes from the harbors off the Atlantic Highlands where there is no shortage of seafood restaurants, Pat and Ruddy Field are so confident of the way they prepare their food at The Navesink Fishery that they sell fresh fish from storefront counters, daring customers to stop there instead of passing on to the dining area in the back.
Go ahead, buy those juicy swordfish steaks or the tantalizing lobsters and clams on display, fresh from seaports up the road.
Chances are, you'll prefer Pat and Ruddy's versions.


STILL GOING
I enjoyed Mary Tannen's Style feature "Still Going" (Nov. 26), because I have worn three of the four perfumes she mentioned at different times in my life: Shalimar in my 20's, Chanel No. 5 in my 30's and now Arpege. (Joy and I do not work work well together.)
I was amused by Tannen's assertion that these fragrances are "complex, rich  and female." Indeed, my husband, a banker, athlete and former football player, wears Arpege every day.
MOLLIE HIBBARD Madison, N.J.


First, Fighting Words. Then a Deadly Fire . . .
The burned-out hole where Freddy's clothing store stood on Harlem's 125th Street is now the latest New York place where hateful words preceded a seemingly sudden act of fury by one man.
Was that man influenced by weeks of racially-laced comments by several community leaders?
Last week, a New York City grand jury began grappling with that question, among others, in the aftermath of the Dec. 8 attack on the store  by 51-year-old Roland J. Smith Jr., who started a fire that killed seven employees, then shot himself to death.


In the Region: Connecticut;For Duracell, a $70 Million, Self-Sufficient Hq
THE opening late last month of Duracell International's new 310,000-square-foot, $70 million world headquarters in Bethel could ignite renewed interest in the once-popular corporate campus headquarters so self-sufficient that employees never left the premises from morning to night.
It is the only single-occupancy commercial building of its size to have been  built in Connecticut in more than a decade.


Streetscapes: The Chrysler Building;Skyscraper's Place in the Sun
IN late 1929 New Yorkers gawked as the Chrysler Building emerged from its construction scaffolding.
The brilliant steel ornament and spire were unlike anything in New York.
The Chrysler Building is still unique, but until the recent cleaning of the metalwork, passers-by had become blase about this Art Deco masterpiece.
Now, people are again looking up.


NEW JERSEY VOICES
In as little as a year these visitors will no longer be able to get a close-up view of one of the great pillars of America and freedom."
Representative ROBERT D. FRANKS advocating a plan to dredge bottom sediment from the channel leading to Liberty  Island


Dilemma for Clinton on Nafta Truck Rule
Facing a Monday morning deadline, Clinton Administration and Mexican officials talked intensively today about how they might back away from an important provision of the North American Free Trade Agreement that would let trucks from Mexico travel freely in American border states starting next week.
The Administration, which negotiated the agreement two years ago, is now fearful that the trucks could pose safety hazards and spur trade in illegal drugs.
Meanwhile, Mexican officials are under political pressure at home to delay the implementation of the provision because of fears by the Mexican trucking industry that their business, already suffering because of Mexico's financial crisis, would be further hurt by American competition.


Smith Is Cleared to Play
OZZIE SMITH will apparently be back with the St.
Louis Cardinals next season, and GARY GAETTI may be joining him.
The Cardinals confirmed Friday that Smith had been cleared by an independent physician to play next year.
It was like old home week for the Cardinals: WILLIE MCGEE, who played on three pennant-winning teams for the Cardinals in the 1980's, returned to St.
Louis on Friday when he agreed to a $500,000, one-year contract.
McGee, 37, spent last season in Boston, hitting .285 with two homers and 15 runs batted in in 67 games.


BAD BEHAVIOR
A student accused a "tenured creative-writing professor" with an admitted drinking problem, of making remarks about her breasts at a party (Hers: "Bad Behavior," by Francine Prose, Nov. 26).
He then threw a drink in her face.
Hey!
I had to reread that statement to make sure I got it right.
In my experience, after a man makes sexual comments, she gets to throw the drink in his face.
IVY MORAN Maple Shade, N.J.


Candiotti to Stay in L.A.
The right-hander TOM CANDIOTTI returned to the Los Angeles Dodgers on Friday, agreeing to a two-year contract said to be worth $6 million.
Candiotti, 38, was  7-4 with a 3.50 earned run average last season.
He has a career record of 117-124 with a 3.51 e.r.a.
He pitched at least seven innings in 19 of 30 starts  and walked 2 batters or less in 22 starts.
To make room on the 40-man roster, the Dodgers designated right-hander KEVIN TAPANI for assignment. (AP)


MAKING MICROSOFT SAFE FOR CAPITALISM
If the letters published in your Nov. 26 issue, in response to Gleick's article, are a reasonably accurate reflection of those received, then Times readers are far more worshipful of the almighty dollar, and those who make it, than I would have guessed.
These letters are the sort that I would expect to find in The Wall Street Journal.
Bill Gates may have many talents, but it appears that his main talents are bullying his competitors and bamboozling the public.
SHERMAN L. GREENE New York


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: December 17, 1995
Weeks This
On Week  List Fiction


Q and A
Grand Prix Circuit


Blooms, Bracts abd Greens for the Holidays
PLANTS make splendid holiday gifts.
But in this busy week, during which they  usually are received, it is best to be have some advance advice on what to do with them.
The gift plants have spent their growing time in a grower's greenhouse, where they are kept at the right temperature and given the proper amounts of water and light.
Their growing period is timed so the blooms will be bursting out when you get them.


Groundhogs of Politics Reappear on New Hampshire Ballot
Despite the significance of its outcome, New Hampshire's first-in-the-nation  Presidential primary is as much a forum for fringe candidates as it is for serious contenders -- and all of them filed their candidacy here by the deadline of 5 P.M. on Friday.
During the past two weeks, New Hampshire's Secretary of State, William Gardner, accepted the $1,000 filing fee from 45 candidates for the Presidential  nomination from the Republican, Democratic and Libertarian Parties.


Protecting Your 401(k)
To the Editor:
Your article on employers who are raiding 401(k)'s ("Who's Been Eating My Nest Egg?" Nov. 26) raises some important issues for all employees who participate in such plans.


Husband Wins Claim in Secondhand Smoke Death
The United States Labor Department has ruled that the death of a former nurse from lung cancer was at least partly due to the secondhand smoke she had breathed at her job in a Veterans Administration hospital.
It awarded her husband $21,500 a year.
Anti-smoking advocates say the ruling in the case of the former nurse, Mildred Wiley, is the first in the nation in which a worker's compensation claim tied to secondhand smoke has been paid.


Knowing Kahlo
To the Editor:
Deborah Solomon's review of Frida Kahlo's diary reveals her inexperience with diaries in general (full of "messy handwriting"), Mexican politics, Spanish poetry and passionate art.
For Kahlo, pasion meant both "passion" and "suffering"; the two were intermingled linguistically, physically and artistically.


Invoking Sophistication and Savvy
THOSE who think that the last thing Huntington Village needs is another Italian restaurant should try Cafe Trilussa.
It is not a clone of all the others, but a sophisticated spot that reflects its owners, two savvy restaurateurs.
One owner, Luigi Quarta, who is in the dining room, is a suave European-trained charmer who tirelessly works the room.
He not only asks diners how the food is, but more importantly also listens to their answers and seems sincere in his desire to please.


Tax Incentives Make a Buyer's Heart Grow Fonder
A BUSINESS that owns its premises is more likely to be rooted to its community than one that merely leases.
When it expands, it is more likely to try to do so in place.
"It doesn't have to face a decision every five or 10 years about whether to leave or stay," said George G. Sirras, president of Major Development Company, a commercial brokerage in Flushing, Queens.
"And the banks are more willing to provide the financing they need."


Pop Briefs
CAPLETON: 'PROPHECY' African Star/Def Jam


A Modern Southern Cuisine In Charleston
CHARLESTON, S.C., is no stranger to revolutions.
In 1776 it fought off a British fleet in Revolutionary War (only to be conquered four years later).
In 1860 South Carolina signed the first Ordinance of Secession from the Union in Charleston; the next year South Carolinians fired on Fort Sumter in Charleston Harbor, igniting the Civil War.
In recent years another, far more benign, revolution has swept this stately port city: a gastronomic one.
Like many Southern centers, Charleston has seen an influx of young talent from leading restaurants and cooking schools around the country.
At the same time home-grown chefs are on the ascendency, looking at their regional cuisine with a contemporary eye.


East Islip in Forefront Of School Reform
In "Long Island Q&amp;A: One Expert's Singular View of What's Wrong With Schools" [Nov. 26] Dr.
James Lewis presents a positive view of education that is optimistic and driven by the belief that all children can learn.
I am very fortunate to work in a district that is driven by this belief and is in the forefront of educational reform.
Perhaps Dr.
Lewis is not aware of the innovative practices demonstrated at the East Islip School District.
We were one of the first districts on Long Island to embrace the Outcome Based Education-Mastery Learning Model.
We are thoroughly immersed in the school-improvement concept, as well as numerous other examples of innovative techniques and methods.
Change is slow, but we are actively pursuing any avenue that leads us to provide a more need-satisfying environment for our children.


Of Films and Greasy Palms: New York vs. Los Angeles
To the Editor:
Film shooting on any residential street in Manhattan can be problematic for directors, not just in Harlem.
Yet the article demonizes members of the community for such crimes as saving trees and renting out a day-care center and  being paid $100 a day for the use of their apartments, a figure that would be considered exploitation by some.
People in more affluent areas get more.


Commercial Property: Central Park Avenue;Westchester Shopping Road Is Getting a New Look
AS part of an improvement campaign being pursued by the Town of Greenburgh, about half of Westchester County's most prominent commercial street, Central Park Avenue, is changing its longtime crass commercial image to one more in tune with subtler 1990's design concepts.


Pop Briefs
DUKE ELLINGTON: 'DUKE ELLINGTON MEETS COLEMAN HAWKINS' Impulse


96 Budget and the Future of County Jobs
FROM the look of things, Andrew P. O'Rourke only wants to save taxpayer dollars.
He has laid off county workers and privatized some government services, and he promises more belt tightening.
The County Executive asserts that Westchester's fiscal health is at stake.
But not everyone is taking him at his word.
One critic, Carmine DiBattista, president of the Westchester County Civil Service Employees Association, which represents 1,200 county workers, calls Mr.
O'Rourke's budget cutting a ruse.


A City's Inner Workings Are Part of the Design
IT'S BEEN RAISING TINKLY LAUGHTER at Christmas cocktail parties: the Municipal Art Society has hired a sanitation man as its new president.
And it's  true that the appointment of Brendan Sexton, a former Sanitation Commissioner, does present an unexpected clash of images.
The Municipal Art Society, a century-old private civic organization founded to boost the quality of architecture in New York, has a reputation as a bastion of gentility, dedicated to promoting noble but somewhat enfeebled notions of taste, civility and esthetic refinement.
Mr.
Sexton's resume, by contrast, evokes images of landfills and recycling depots, the messy underworld of detritus that cities prefer to keep out of sight.
Well, let's hear it for garbage.
And let's salute the Municipal Art Society for recognizing architecture and urban design as much more than ways to decorate surfaces.
They are also powerful tools for bringing parts of a city together: streets, sewers, subways, parks.
Art can deal with the systems that make a city  tick, not just the individual buildings that enhance the way a city looks.


James Altgens, Photographer at Kennedy Assassination, Dies at 76
James W. Altgens, a longtime Associated Press staff member known for his photograph of the anguished Jacqueline Kennedy, seconds after her husband's assassination, clambering onto the back of their car while a Secret Service agent moved to her aid, was found dead on Tuesday in his home in Dallas.
He was  76.
Mr.
Altgens, who was retired, and his wife, Clara, 73, were both found dead at the home, The Associated Press reported.
The Dallas Morning News reported on  Friday that relatives said the couple had been suffering from the flu but that the police were looking into the possibility that they had died of carbon monoxide poisoning from a defective furnace.


Just Another Day Around the Fax Machine
THE jolly general store where you pick up your mail, trade rumors and warm your hands at the pot-bellied stove fled the neighborhood some generations before I arrived, but I miss it anyway.
So at least once a day I drop into Mailboxes Etc. on Third Avenue between 15th and 16th Streets, check my box, rub  my hands over the Konica copiers and call for local gossip.
This time of year, I'm lucky if anyone hears me.
The owner, Gregg Dougherty,  who looks like an N.F.L. quarterback, may be on the phone with Sotheby's to crate and ship a hundred pieces of over-priceless china.
The manager, Stacey Endelson, petite and perpetually tanned, has four hands; she can pluck your mail, send a fax, balance the books and send a Christmas gift to Prague.


Child Agency Is Criticized In Abuse Case
A Bronx woman who was arrested last week and accused of child abuse and neglect was supposed to have been under the court-ordered supervision of the city's Child Welfare Administration for the last 18 months, confidential state and city records show.
The woman, Michelle Ballard, 28, and her companion, Juan Vasquez, 33, were charged with second-degree assault and endangering the children's welfare.


WHEN IN ROME
To the Editor: Trastevere is without a doubt the most awesome neighborhood in the whole city of Rome, and Ms.
Spano clearly recognizes what makes it so different from the rest of the city, like narrow, meandering streets free of insane drivers and a piazza, Santa Maria, where Italian children can play soccer without bumping into hordes of tourists.
I wanted to mention my personal favorites in the neighborhood.
Serving the best pizza Across the Tiber -- where the word "Tras-tevere" come from -- Il Frontoni sits on the corner of the Viale Trastevere and the Via di Franceso a Ripa.
Also, the Stardust, near the confluence of the Via della Lungaretta and the Via di San Gallicano, provides great jazz through the night.
Finally, because most people will not be going to Trastevere from the airport, it should  be noted that the best place to catch a bus to Trastevere is from the Piazza della Repubblica or on the Via Nazionale, where a number of buses can take one straight across the river.
CARY R.  LATIMER Chicago


SOAPBOXPHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


SUNDAY December 17, 1995: HARD DRINKING;Gee Fizz!
Black Lemonade and Brain Wash are not drinks Grandmother is likely to serve during the holidays.
Nevertheless, an L.A.-based bottling company called Skeleteens is quenching a lot of thirsts with a kaleidoscope of carbonated, nonalcoholic but not-so-soft drinks, including a few with names too naughty to mention.


Christina Butler, David Murphy Jr.
Christina Eilene Butler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James D. Butler of Jersey City, was married yesterday to David H. Murphy Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Murphy Sr. of Palm City, Fla.
The Rev.
Joseph P. Parkes, the provincial of the New York Province of the Society of Jesus, performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
The couple, both 25, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.


Pataki Offers Medicaid Cuts That Could Close Hospitals
The $63.8 billion budget that Gov.
George E. Pataki presented on Friday wrings most of its cuts from the state's large Medicaid bill, a shift that his administration acknowledges could force some hospitals and nursing homes to close.
Mr.
Pataki said he would reduce state financing for Medicaid by $1.1 billion  in the next fiscal year, a drop of about 12 percent.
Though Medicaid is often viewed as a program that pays only for medical care for the poor, such a cut would affect communities rich and poor because health care institutions have long relied on Medicaid to help cover overall expenses.


Our Towns;A Temple With a Twist On Tradition
MEMBERS of Temple Shalom are getting used to seeing people gape at their menorahs.
Bill Laguna, the pastor, figures it's because the menorahs are so big.
When people driving through this forlorn stretch of Main Street come upon the great glass menorah windows on two sides of this huge new concrete and steel building, they stop in their tracks.
"I think they wonder: 'Well, what is this?' " Mr.
Laguna said.


Foreign Affairs;Que Pasa Aqui?
O.K., after a few days here I think I've got it all straight now:
Raul Salinas de Gortari, the brother of former Mexican President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, is accused of conspiring to kill Jose Francisco Ruiz Massieu, former Secretary General of the ruling PRI party, who was once married  to Carlos and Raul Salinas's sister, Adriana, who is being investigated for setting up dummy companies to receive hundreds of thousands of dollars in Government loans.
Meanwhile, Mario Ruiz Massieu, former deputy attorney general, fled the country after police suspected him of covering up Raul Salinas's involvement in the killing of Jose Franciso, Mario's own brother and Raul's brother-in-law.


2 Officials Suspended, Accused of Using Jobs for Personal Gain
The state has suspended two top officials of the agency that runs Roosevelt Island, pending an investigation of complaints by present and former workers that the officials had used their positions for personal gain.
Both officials denied doing anything improper.
Several leaders on the island, including an agency board member and a tenant  representative, have defended the officials and have attributed the charges to workers disgruntled over labor and contract issues.


MARY, MARY, QUITE CONTRARY
It is sad that Mary Tyler Moore is making such an effort to shun the title of all-American girl.
Why would she want to denigrate herself on David Letterman with ridiculous clothes and vulgarities?
Perhaps the public cannot accept any of her new personae because Mary Richards seemed inseparable from Mary Tyler Moore, and was a cherished friend we all wanted to know.
CECELIA CAMPOCHIARO Sunnyvale, Calif.


Health Care's New Victim
THE struggle to pass major health care legislation came down again to a communications war.
The Republicans knew deep in their bones this would happen,  and so, month after month, with great and consistent discipline, they promised to "preserve, protect and improve" Medicare (even while extracting $270 billion from its projected spending over the next seven years).
They would not be caught off guard like the hapless Clintonians back in 1993-94, who watched their detailed national health insurance plan sink in the polls under a point-by-point onslaught from the insurance industry and the Republicans.


Michael Emery; Journalist and Professor, 55
Michael Emery, a journalist and professor who with his father wrote a textbook used in more than 200 colleges, died on Wednesday at his home in Woodland Hills, Calif.
He was 55.
The cause was cancer.


A Knockout Night at the Garden
Friday night at Madison Square Garden.
A star-studded crowd.
A buzzing arena.
And a 22-year-old rising star named Oscar De La Hoya in the ring.
For the first time in two and a half years, big-time boxing returned to the Garden, and it did so with distinction.


Portfolio Disclosure, One Day At a Time
IN what is probably the most detailed disclosure effort ever by a mutual fund company, GIT Investment Funds of Arlington, Va., has begun posting the portfolios of its four equity funds at the beginning of each day on the Internet.
The move allows current or potential shareholders and competitors alike to follow each day's trading activity in the GIT equity funds and, soon, its nine other no-load mutual funds.
GIT manages $219 million in equity, bond and money market funds.


Newspaper's Coverage Is a Matter of Opinion
I had heretofore considered The New York Times a reliable news source until I read your nauseating and inaccurate puff piece about a newspaper that is being introduced in Bedford and Pound Ridge.
Your article ["Against the Odds, a Community Paper Emerges," Dec. 3] asserted that until two earlier (now defunct)  newspapers were introduced to these markets in 1992 and 1994, "these towns had no complete, accurate local news source." "The Patent Trader," you go on to say, "a regional weekly covering 10 communtities . . . could not provide in-depth coverage of town issues."
Says who?
Not the almost 50 percent of the homeowners in those towns who subscribe to The Patent Trader.
Not the business owners, who consistently place  more advertising dollars in The Patent Trader than in any other local newspaper.
Not the towns themselves, which have consistently named The Patent Trader as their official newspaper, in preference to these purportedly superior alternatives.


Reading The Fine Print
To the Editor:
I would like to clarify a point in Alec Foege's article ["Scorned, Shunned and Doing Quite Nicely," Dec. 3] about the relationship between the record label TVT and Interscope Records as it relates to Trent Reznor, Nine Inch Nails and Nothing Records.


SUNDAY December 17, 1995: PEDESTRIAN ART;Just 'Ped X-ing' Around
Yvette Helin, a conceptual artist in New York, looked up at a street sign one day in 1990 and came up with, well, a concept.
The familiar "Ped X-ing" symbol,  with its generic black graphic, led her to wonder, "Who is that person?" Helin,  also a costume designer, decided to "bring the symbol to life" by dressing up like the anonymous figure and cruising the streets.
Now, aided by a few grants,  her concept has become the Pedestrian Project, a group of nine artists and performers who turn up in public places (like Grand Central Terminal, above) and address social ills, from child abuse to "insane morals." But their evocations aren't always serious.
"We recently went shopping in Beverly Hills," Helin says.
Life is, after all, but a walking shadow.


MARY, MARY, QUITE CONTRARY
O.K., Mary Tyler Moore is not Mary Richards, but she doesn't have to prove it by remodeling herself in the image of Ziggy Stardust ("Mary, Mary, Quite Contrary," by Jonathan Van Meter, Nov. 26).
What's next, changing her name to an unpronounceable symbol?


Just Happy to Be Here: Isles Manage a Late Tie
If the Islanders were to issue a video chronicling the first 30 games of this season, it would likely be titled, "Every Imaginable Way to Lose a Game."
Tonight, thanks to Wendel Clark, they figured out a way to tie one, 3-3, against the Hartford Whalers at Nassau Coliseum.


Prominent Los Angeles Blacks to Honor Simpson Prosecutor
Nearly two months after the O. J. Simpson murder trial, some of this city's most prominent blacks are planning to honor Christopher A. Darden, the prosecutor who was vilified by many blacks as a traitor to his race for his role in the trial.
The event on Monday night at the California Afro-American Museum here is being billed as a tribute to Mr.
Darden, but sponsors described it as an effort  to dispel the impression that Mr.
Darden is no longer welcome among blacks here.


The Bills Are Refreshed And Thinking Playoffs
Earlier this season, Bills Coach Marv Levy was asked why his team, participants in four straight Super Bowls in the early 1990's, had such a precipitous drop-off last season.
They finished 7-9 and out of the playoffs for  the first time since 1987.
Levy said it was due, in large part, to the fact that the Bills had played more games during that four-season span than any other team in the National Football League.
Buffalo played 90 games, including preseason and post-season games, and played exhibitions in London and Berlin as part of the American Bowl  series.
It was the equivalent of squeezing a little more than five regular seasons into four.


The Spanish Steps Reopening This Week
Rome's Spanish Steps are scheduled to reopen to tourists on Wednesday after seven months of restoration.
The inauguration, however, brings with it a new set of rules meant to protect the the 18th-century landmark from further deterioration.
Mayor Francesco Rutelli annnounced last month that visitors to the steps will have to refrain from eating, drinking, loitering, selling goods,  making portraits, littering, disturbing the peace and even sitting on the steps after midnight.
The Spanish Steps will remain open to the public, and "walking up and down or just sitting on the steps will be allowed," said the Mayor.
In recent years the  steps had become a popular meeting place for young people and backpackers who often used the Baroque monument as a camping site.
"We would find meter-high garbage piles, people lighting fires to cook spaghetti -- at night anything could happen," said Mr.
Rutelli.


Fire Destroys $1 Million Worth of Gifts for Poor
A fire that broke out on Friday night and was not extinguished until this afternoon destroyed a warehouse jammed with donated clothes, household goods and furniture, items that were to be distributed by one of the city's largest charities.
The fire at the four-building Society of St.
Vincent de Paul complex could not have come at a worse time, said James Coleman, who has worked sorting clothes for the charity for several years.


State Pulls Plug On Trade Center
To hear the state tell it, Harlem had ample opportunity to make a go of its proposed international trade center.
After seven years of false starts, the state says, Gov.
George E. Pataki had no choice but to pull the plug.
But according to those leading the project, the trade center was well under way; Governor Pataki simply took the $64 million in Regional Bank funds back for his budget.
"He's got a budget to close," said Representative Charles B. Rangel.
"If this was happening in some other community that was strongly Republican, this would not be happening."


Where Felony Is No Bar To Being Elected Sheriff
For 28 years Sheriff Paul L. Barrett has been enforcing the law around this Mississippi River city, carving a place for himself in local lore as the man who hung by his feet to save a would-be suicide who was threatening to jump from the tallest building in town and the kind of lawman who at Christmas took baskets of food and toys to the families of the men he had locked up.
But because of his conviction in October on Federal perjury charges, which are unrelated to his job in Vicksburg, he has become one of four county sheriffs with past convictions in Mississippi.
In the eyes of the state Attorney General  and others, these sheriffs are examples of the fox guarding the chicken coop.
Efforts are under way to remove Mr.
Barrett from the office to which he won an eighth consecutive term last month.


Slip-Sledding Away on Snow Days
WHENEVER it snows enough to make a decent snowball, the Parks Department will sponsor "Snow Days" in city parks.
Events will include sled races, snow sculpture and free hot chocolate.
"Snow Days" will be announced in schools and on the radio, or call (800) 201-PARK.
Events will be from 2:30 P.M to 5 P.M. on  school days, and from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M. on weekends and holidays.
These are the  locations.
CENTRAL PARK Sheep Meadow, 66th to 72d Street, west side of park.
There will also be "safe sledding" sites at Pilgrim Hill, 72d Street and Fifth Avenue, and  106th Street, mid-park, just west of the Conservatory Garden.


TERROR ON AN EIGHT-HOUR SHIFT
Thanks to Bruce Porter for opening the world of the other prisoner -- the correction officer -- to the public eye ("Terror on an Eight-Hour Shift," Nov. 26).
The men and women who put their lives on the line to sustain security at correctional facilities rarely receive such an insightful and empathetic treatment of their work.
We must stop viewing correction officers as just another bar on the cell.
These men and women need the best professional training and skills.
Our prisons  have come to represent urban bubbles where city problems are custodially contained, with a population that is increasingly younger, more alienated and more violent.
This situation can only result in increased incidents of violence, as evidenced in the recent nationwide disturbance in the Federal prison system over crack-cocaine sentencing policies.


Linda Dengenis, C. P. Anderson
Linda Anne Dengenis, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Dengenis of Avon, Conn., was married yesterday to Christopher Paul Anderson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul A. Anderson of Ridgefield, Conn.
The Rev.
Paul Couch performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Greenwich, Conn.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-25


City Found In Violation On Lead Paint
A year and a half has passed since doctors found high levels of lead in the blood of Amal Khamis, who is now 2 1/2.
And nearly as much time has gone by since city health inspectors marched through her family's one-bedroom Sunnyside  apartment and branded 29 spots on the walls with a red stamp marked "lead."
City officials instructed the building's owner to remove lead-based paint from the apartment, but the Khamises' landlord employed a common, and successful, defense: hiring a private environmental testing firm which found the lead levels to be safe.


Speaker Gingrich Lashing Out, in His Own Words
Following are excerpts from comments on a variety of topics by Speaker Newt Gingrich during the last year.
Murder and Liberalism


Benefits of Circumcision Do Not Include Health
To the Editor:
To critics who use words like "barbaric" and "mutilation" to describe circumcision, Rabbi Gerald Chirnoma replies: "I shut it off. There's nothing mutilating about it, and the fact is that it does have a side benefit about it"  ("If It's a Bris, It's Time for Rabbi Chirnomas," In Person, Dec. 3.).


Charter School Compromise Nears a Vote in Trenton
For three years, Gloria Bonilla-Santiago has been planning the charter school of her dreams.
Run by Rutgers University, it would serve 500 children in Camden  with an innovative curriculum that would emphasize math and science.
She would start the school tomorrow but for one problem: charter schools -- which are public, but operate independently of regular districts -- are not permitted by the state.
But Ms.
Bonilla-Santiago's luck might be changing.
Both houses of the State Legislature could vote on bipartisan enabling legislation as early as this week, and if they do so by the year's end, New Jersey's first charter schools could open in 1997.
Ms.
Bonilla-Santiago, a professor of social work at Rutgers, said  the bill looks fine to her.
But other educators have warned that it is too limited to effect drastic change.


Choirs and Musicians Herald the Season
MANY "Messiahs" and numerous "Nutcrackers" have been sung and danced since Thanksgiving and the outpouring of holiday music continues unabated in churches  and concert halls around the state.
Benjamin Britten's "Ceremony of Carols" has taken a leap up in popularity, and, as always, audiences will be inspired by familiar carols along with works by composers like David Willcocks, John Rutter, Ralph Vaughan Williams, Vivaldi, Praetorius and others.


REPUBLICAN SOCIALISM
I take strong issue with Lewis on two specific points.
He writes: "Most Americans do not enjoy taxable capital gains." In fact, many Americans do own common stock, via mutual or retirement funds or both.
In addition, almost all Americans who have jobs in the private sector are affected, directly or indirectly, by the level of available venture capital in the economy.
Many older Americans are now locked into stocks they bought years ago because of the tax they would have to pay on illusory gains that exist solely because of inflation.
Lewis says, "The Templeton Growth Fund . . . makes risky plays mainly in foreign countries." John Templeton, who founded the fund that bears his name, is widely known to be a firm believer in buying shares in undervalued companies and holding them for a long time.
After Templeton's retirement, this investment philosophy remains in place.
There are speculators, but Templeton isn't one of them.


. . . And a Racial Shooting
The United States Army, which had seemed a model of race-blind upward mobility when compared to the rest of society, may have a dirty little secret: a white-supremacist, far-right underground in its ranks.
After two 82d Airborne Division soldiers from Ft.
Bragg, N.C., were charged with the apparently random  shooting deaths of a black couple, Army Secretary Togo D. West Jr. last week ordered a sweeping investigation into extremist activities among his 510,000 troops.
The two accused soldiers had frequented an off-base world of leather-jacketed skinheads, swastikas and Hitler posters; the one who fired the  gun, a court affidavit said, had spoken of wanting to earn a spider-web tattoo by committing a murder.
Among the elite Special Forces at the same base, another underground has been circulating a rightist newsletter contemptuous of its commanders and the Government as "internationalist Quislings." And no one could  forget that Timothy J. McVeigh, accused of blowing up the Oklahoma City Federal  building, had nursed his fury in the First Infantry Division barracks at Ft.
Riley, Kan.
JOHN KIFNER


Nothing to Smile About
Violence in Karachi, Pakistan's capital, has hurt business for the roadside dentists who offer nostrums and surgery for prices from 75 cents to $4 a treatment.
For some, there's little to do but read the newspaper. (Agence France-Presse)


REPUBLICAN SOCIALISM
Michael Lewis's "Republican Socialism" (The Capitalist, Nov. 26) would have us believe that whenever someone sells property or securities, realizing a capital gain, the proceeds of that transaction are immediately buried in a coffee can beneath the petunias.
What really happens is that profits go directly into a bank account for only a nanosecond before they are lent to someone who wants to build a house, buy a car or expand a factory -- all of which produce jobs and wealth for the people whom Lewis thinks have no stake in capital-gains tax reductions.
PAUL R. HOLLRAH Locust Grove, Okla.


Saddam, We Have Returned
A Pentagon team spent last week in western Iraq, searching the desert for the remains of the first American combat casualty of the 1991 gulf war.
The search team, under Red Cross leadership, combed the sands without success, Pentagon officials said, but perhaps something else was begun.
The fact that the Iraqi leader, Saddam Hussein, had authorized the visit made it a small but potentially significant attempt by Iraq to end its deep diplomatic isolation.
American military and diplomatic officials acknowledged the gesture as "humanitarian," but said it would not change the Administration's support for continuing United  Nations sanctions against Iraq.
TIM WEINER


European Union Offers Timetable for Talks With Applicants
Leaders of the European Union offered new hope today to countries in Eastern  Europe that their admission to the union and its single market would come sooner rather than later.
Ending a two-day summit meeting here, the 15 leaders agreed to begin formal negotiations with 10 Eastern European countries, as well as Malta and Cyprus, by the end of 1997.


Cyberstocks: Did You Miss Out?
THE little guy has missed out again, right?
Now that Internet stocks like Netscape have taken off into the cybersphere, it might seem that the big shots who got in early have made the instant fortunes, leaving everyone else in the dust.


A Kept Woman


Mississippi Learning
SILVER RIGHTS By Constance Curry.
Illustrated. 258 pp.
Chapel Hill, N.C.: Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill. $21.95.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A. Miami Loses Again


Attention Bankers! Your Future Is at the Phone Company
PAUL W. WALSH needed a change.
He wanted to work for a small enterprise, instead of the large ones for which he had long labored.
He wanted a challenging, fast-paced job.
And he wanted to move his family from Ohio to New England, where he and his wife grew up.
But Mr.
Walsh did not try to achieve these goals in banking, a field he had worked in for 20 years at institutions like Citicorp and Norwest.
Instead, earlier this year, he sought and got a job in a far distant field -- as chief executive of Wright Express, a small company in Portland, Me., that helps fleet  operators like Airborne Express monitor fuel costs.


Clinton's Tax Crackdown Would Hit Investors, Too
WHEN the Treasury Department proposed strict new tax rules on Dec. 7 -- Pearl Harbor Day -- big companies and Wall Street firms quickly cried sneak attack.
But while the Administration's move is aimed mostly at those groups, someone else who will be caught up in the combat made nary a peep: individual investors.
Many of the proposals center on that puzzling investment known as preferred stock.
These securities give investors first dibs on dividends, ahead of holders of common stock.
If a company gets into trouble, preferreds give investors a claim on assets that also outranks that of common shareholders, although not that of bond owners.
And because preferreds do not return any principal, they generally yield higher dividends than do bonds.


MOVIES THIS WEEK
A salute to Marlene Dietrich, portraits of a minister and two convicts, and a suspense gem enhance the film menu for television this week.
The Dietrich program, on American Movie Classics, includes two top comedies: the rarely shown FLAME OF NEW ORLEANS (1941) and A FOREIGN AFFAIR (1948).
In both, Dietrich goes to town.
In the sly and flavorsome "Flame," Rene Clair's costume caper, she plays an adventurer who snares a banker (Roland Young) and a skipper (Bruce Cabot) - Monday at 8 and 11:30 P.M.
The film has two subtly hilarious scenes.
Watch a flustered Laura Hope Crews explain nuptial rites to Dietrich.
At a staid musicale, in brilliant pantomime, two dandies (Franklin Pangborn and Mischa Auer) dish a demure Dietrich.


Getting Rid of Garbage: Towns Are Seeking Cheaper Ways
J.
Christian Bollwage, the Mayor of Elizabeth, stood up at the Union County Utilities Authority's garbage rate increase hearing on Tuesday and delivered what amounted to a declaration of war.
"It's time to let the forces of capitalism take hold," he said, "and end the  state-mandated monopoly on waste disposal that is charging Elizabeth taxpayers double the market price."


Weighing the Future of the Network Anchor
EACH NIGHT AT 6 O'CLOCK, CARrying on a tradition best represented in the public imagination by Walter Cronkite, the three major television networks bring pleasant, respectable-looking, middle-aged white men into American homes to deliver the day's news.
The anchor role has long been viewed as the most prestigious in network journalism, and the men who attain it usually stay at their desks for years.
Today, Dan Rather of CBS is 63 years old, Peter Jennings of ABC is 57 and Tom Brokaw of NBC is 55.
Each has held his job for more than a decade; none talks of retiring soon.
And last month, NBC gave Brian Williams, its 36-year-old White House correspondent and substitute anchor, a contract that will pay him more than $1.5 million a year through 2000, tacitly anointing him as Mr.
Brokaw's eventual successor and another perpetuator of the Cronkite tradition.


Books in Brief: FICTION;Heroism Before Jack Aubrey
For fans of Patrick O'Brian, here is an unexpected bonus: a precursor to the  Aubrey-Maturin series of Napoleonic-era seafaring adventures, with all the charm of the author's mature works.
And for those who have been daunted by the prospect of embarking on a 17-volume series, here is the perfect way to test the waters.
THE UNKNOWN SHORE (Norton, $23) first came out in 1959, but it has the same elements that mark Mr.
O'Brian's more recent works: the wealth of social detail, the quiet humor, the harrowing shipwrecks, the swashbuckling adventures  in foreign parts -- and, most important, the abiding and unlikely friendship between two young men, one a sociable creature born to the sea and the other a surgeon's mate, brilliant in scientific understanding but lacking in social graces.
Jack Byron and Tobias Barrow are a bit younger than Jack Aubrey and Stephen Maturin, but the dynamic is the same.
When Toby is in a haze of oblivion, Jack helps him navigate the puzzling terrain of human relations: in an early escapade, when Toby has become lost in London, wandering around dressed in a sack after having been set upon by thieves, Jack arranges for a flock of turkeys to be released from the top of a monument, knowing that Toby, an ardent  naturalist, will be irresistibly drawn to the spectacle.
Once at sea, the action becomes more grisly, as the 220 men who set out from England to circumnavigate the globe dwindle down to a mere handful.
Jack and Toby stick together through it all, painfully making their way across swamps and stormy seas, from barren islands to Indian camps, finally arriving safely in Valparaiso.
From a cozy, well-lighted 20th-century home, their travails could not be more delightful to contemplate.
TAMAR LEWIN


Habitats: 171 East 88th Street;$332, and Only 1 Roach
INSIDE the lobby, vaguely orange tiles have been patched, repatched and nibbled away, and a sign to the left of the glass-fronted interior door reads simply: "The exterminator is available."
Stuck onto the door itself is a yellow United Parcel Service notice, announcing the attempted delivery of a package.
The courier had written "Barbar Shop Has It." Next door, one of the city's few spinning barber poles still whirls, outside the resting place of the mysterious package.


Scholars of Political Speech Are Giving Gingrich Some Very MixedGrades
This is how Speaker Newt Gingrich, in a recent talk to the American Medical Association, described the price to be paid if the Republicans failed to persuade President Clinton to accept their formula for achieving a balanced Federal budget in seven years:
"First, it'll be clear to this country that the best chance we've had in a generation to balance the budget will have failed -- not been postponed, failed. And second, you will see interest rates skyrocket and the stock market crash, because the fact is, they are counting on us keeping our word because they actually believe we are different."


The Art of Storytelling in Both Testaments
JOHN PIETROWSKI wants to set the record straight.
He is not a churchgoer; he  is a director.
That's just in case some people are assuming that the doubleheader at the Playwrights Theater of New Jersey -- "Genesis" and "Mark's Gospel," one-man shows both -- is entirely the work of Max McLean, the solo performer.
"I focus on storytelling as theater," Mr.
Pietrowski declared.
" 'Genesis' is epic in scope, and we're doing an edited version."


Miles to Go Before He Sleeps
SOMEWHERE in the lush pastures of Normandy, a dairy farmer is lecturing Tom Vernon on the proper diet of the Holstein cow.
Not exactly mundane trivia, coming from the birthplace of Camembert, where what a cow eats has a direct bearing on the pungency of the cheese produced.
To  hear Mr.
Vernon wax eloquent on the wedges of rich, creamy cheese ripening in the heat of his bicycle bag, you can almost taste them.


Pop Briefs
L. L. COOL J.: 'MR. SMITH' Def Jam


Witness to the Holocaust
ALL RIVERS RUN TO THE SEA Memoirs.
By Elie Wiesel. 432 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $30.
IT is 1936 and in Sighet -- a small Hungarian village of which it was once said that "everyone had his own synagogue, even atheists" -- an 8-year-old boy is taken by his mother to see a renowned rabbi who is passing through.
The boy is a solitary, rather clinging child, in love with his mother as boys who grow up to be writers or artists often are.
The rabbi spends a few minutes alone with the child and then confers with the mother, who emerges from their talk sobbing  and refusing to answer any of her son's questions.
Twenty-five years later the son visits the bedside of a dying cousin and discovers that the rabbi had predicted that the 8-year-old would grow up to be "a great man in Israel" but that neither he nor the boy's mother would "live to see the day."


A Troubling Index of Children in Trouble
Half full or half empty?
Last week the Association for Children of New Jersey issued its third annual "Kids Count," a report on the state of children's well-being in all 21 counties, 27 cities and large towns, and the state as a whole.
The count is a compilation of statistics on infant health, child and teen-age mortality, child abuse, family problems and other indicators of well-being.
The findings were decidedly mixed.
On one hand, more than half the state's counties are doing well: when the difference between the average scores of the top-ranked and bottom-ranked counties was divided by four, 12 counties finished  in the top quartile and only one county in the bottom quartile.
On the other hand, that county, Essex, had low rankings across the board and has shown no improvement over three years.
The same is true of three other urban counties, Camden, Hudson and Passaic.
This map shows the ranking of counties by quartile and the ranking of 27 cities and towns on a critical measure of infant health: low birth weight.
Newborns weighing less than 5.5 pounds have a higher death rate and are more likely to develop long-term disabilities if they survive.


Knicks Win And Await Riley's Arrival
When Pat Riley returns to the Garden on Tuesday night, the only theme will be the personal battle between him and his former team, the Knicks.
There will be no subplot, such as the Knicks trying to break a two-game losing streak.
That potential problem was taken care of last night as the Knicks defeated the Detroit Pistons, 86-82, before a crowd that was saving its lungs for Riley's much-anticipated arrival.
It wasn't a pretty victory for the Knicks (17-6).
But it was good enough to rebound from a 103-94 loss to the Nuggets here on Thursday.
Another defeat to the Pistons would have taken some of the focus off Riley's return and raised questions about whether the Knicks were slumping.
Now it's all about Riley.


Dr. Herzfeld, Dr. Burnstein
Dr.
Doris Leona Herzfeld and Dr.
Yochanan Burnstein are to be married today in Brooklyn.
Dr.
Benjamin Helfgott, a rabbi who is the bridegroom's maternal grandfather, is to perform the ceremony at the Manhattan Beach Jewish Center.
The couple are both residents in ophthalmology, she at Downstate University Hospital Center in Brooklyn, he at the Bronx-Lebanon Medical Center in the Bronx.


Bookshelf
STARLIGHT AND CANDLES: The Joys of the Sabbath.
By Fran Manushkin.
Illustrated by Jacqueline Chwast.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $15. (Ages 4 to 8) As they help Mama with the final preparations for the Sabbath, and as it proceeds, Jake and Rosy and their family review the essentials of this Jewish ritual.
The cut-paper-and-watercolor illustrations are strong and pleasing.


When a Meal's Focus Is the Staff of Life
THE bread is terrific at Good Bread Bakery and Cafe in Greenwich -- not unexpected with a name like that.
More surprising is the high level of cooking at such a modest place.
The shop is essentially a bakery, which also offers sandwiches, take-out salads and pastas.
At dinner, service is helpful and relatively quick, at Sunday brunch it can border on chaotic, but at all times the food is fresh-tasting and good.


Swedish Fireworks In 1920's Paris
FOR INNOVATIVE ARTISTS AND writers, Paris was certainly the place to be in the 1920's.
The city was entrancing; the era, astonishing.
Cafes resounded with  artistic arguments; they also brimmed over with scandalous whispers, for Paris was the home of social as well as esthetic nonconformists.
Although countless memoirs have celebrated the City of Light of the 20's, few say much about a remarkable ballet company that flourished there at the time: Les Ballets Suedois, a troupe organized by Swedes but inspired by the Parisian avant-garde.
The group had its triumphs.
It had its scandals too.


Challenge for Giants Is to Add to the Cowboys' Misery
Now that the Giants know they are not as good as the Dallas Cowboys, what is  their motivation when they play them this afternoon?
Revenge?
"That's definitely a source of motivation for us," quarterback Dave Brown said.
"If nothing else, if we can create some misery down there, then that would be even better for us."


F.Y.I.
Yellow Hook, Until . . .


Dung! What an Unusual Name!
FOR those who try to impress their friends with their worldliness, few things work better than the casual mention of exotic names.
These days a quick reference to former President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea, who goes on trial Monday for taking hundreds of millions of dollars in bribes, should be riskless and impressive.
You simply say Roh.
No.


Conservative Who Helped Save Canada Tries to Save Party
He was by many accounts the most effective federal voice in the campaign against Quebec independence in October, a major force behind the narrow victory  for Canadian unity.
But if Jean Charest, a 37-year-old bilingual Quebecer, helped save Canada, his next task is even more formidable: to rebuild his shattered Progressive Conservative Party.


Red Cross Suspends Activities in Burundi
The International Committee of the Red Cross says that it has suspended all activities in Burundi after a wave of grenade attacks on aid agency offices.
The Red Cross is one of the largest relief agencies operating in Burundi, where ethnic violence pits the country's Tutsi-dominated army against members of the Hutu majority.


Rutgers: No Sellout
To the Sports Editor:


One Day Late, and G.O.P. Challenge Is Tossed
A State Supreme Court justice has thrown out a lawsuit by a former Queens County Republican leader, Frances M. Werner, challenging the results of party elections after finding that she had filed her claim one day too late.
In an election in October, party members, led by City Councilman Thomas V. Ognibene and State Senator Serphin R. Maltese, defeated Mrs.
Werner and installed a Maltese aide, Joseph M. DeFronzo.
Mrs.
Werner sued later that month, but in a Dec. 7 ruling, Justice Richard B. Rutledge said that she had not filed  the challenge within the 10-day legal window.


Word for Word/The Flag Bulletin;Two Centuries of Burning Flags, A Few Years of Blowing Smoke
LAST Tuesday, the Senate narrowly defeated a constitutional amendment to outlaw flag desecration.
The vote of 63 for the amendment and 36 against it fell just shy of the two-thirds majority necessary for passage. (The House has already passed a broader version of the amendment.)
How times have changed.
The first flag desecration laws (most of which were passed between 1897 and 1905 by individual states) were not to stop political dissidents from burning flags.
According to Robert Justin Goldstein, the author  of "Saving Old Glory" (Westview, 1995) and the forthcoming book "Burning the Flag" (Kent State), these laws (all states had them by 1932) were intended to prevent the use of flag imagery for political campaigns and for commercial and advertising purposes -- uses that are now seen as patriotic.


Accident At A-Plant Leads Japan To Debate
A recent accident at Japan's prototype fast-breeder nuclear reactor is rekindling a fierce debate over whether the Government should continue pursuing  an energy technology that other countries have abandoned.
No one was hurt in the accident, in which two to three tons of sodium leaked  from the reactor's secondary cooling system, and no radioactive materials were discharged into the air.
But critics of the Government's policy say the accident reflects shoddy construction and poor safety standards.


Parent Power
FOR years, from the time they were installed in 1983, the high, heavy thermal-pane windows in her kindergarten classroom drove Gail Signorelli nuts.
Like nearly all the windows in Washington Elementary School here, they stuck, permanently.
Some teachers strained their backs tugging at them.
One custodian hurt his back so severely he was out for months.
As a result, Ms.
Signorelli's classroom, like the others, was usually stifling.
It faced south, overlooking the playground blacktop, from which heat rose.
"The heat made children cranky," Ms.
Signorelli said.
"In the afternoon they'd fall asleep."


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
WHERE THE SUCKERS MOON: The Life and Death of an Advertising Campaign By Randall Rothenberg.
Vintage, $14.


I'll Fake Manhattan
BECAUSE the Manhattan where I grew up is now situated near Oz, I was moved one early fall morning to inspect the replacement city with some tourists, to whom the Astor and the Roxy might have sounded like flowering plants.
At the Gray Line terminal at Eighth Avenue and 54th Street, I paid $17 and climbed into a double-decker time warp, the kind of bus that had sent me airborne through the golden New York of just after World War II.
I was heady with the memory of travels on such open upper decks as the bus started north on Eighth Avenue and a young woman with an Eastern European accent began to talk through a mike.


At the Casinos
What's happening onstage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets  are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.


BACKTALK: A Painful Goodbye in Cleveland, and a Sudden Echo in London;From Graham to Brown To Ryan, to Nothing at All
It happened on a Sunday afternoon in one of those hazy autumns of childhood between the first day of school and Santa's knee.
My father sat next to me.
We were in the upper deck of Cleveland's then-Municipal Stadium confronting the winds of Lake Erie.
"There he goes!" Dad yelled.
But before I could spot Jim Brown's No. 32, there erupted from within the combined throats of nearly 80,000 Browns loyalists a thunderous, visceral roar both terrifying and riveting.
Frightened, I watched the crowd watch another of Brown's 126 touchdowns and discovered, in that fleeting, intriguing and emotionally magnetic experience, the power of a Home Game.


Pataki Budget Would Cut Aid To Many School Districts
When Gov.
George E. Pataki released his budget on Friday, he said something that momentarily brought a sigh of relief from hundreds of legislators and school officials around the state: he would not cut the state's major form of school aid in 1996.
But the fine print of Mr.
Pataki's spending plan reveals something quite different.
Though it is true that one type of school aid remains level in his budget, many other types of assistance are sharply cut.


Miss Beggans, Mr. Bruckmann
Elizabeth Mary Beggans, a vice president of Hancock Institutional Equity Services, was married yesterday to Kurt Donald Bruckmann, the president of a commodities brokerage firm that bears his name.
Both work in New York.
Msgr.
Joseph A. Beggans, a great-uncle of the bride, performed the ceremony at St.
Michael's Church in West End, N.J.
The bride is a daughter of Kathleen C. Beggans and Joseph A. Beggans of Ocean Township, N.J.
The bride's father is a director of taxes for the Philip Morris Companies in New York.


Dressing-Up Season
Honoring those who do good works and supporting art and architecture.


Winter Keeps U.S. Troops From Bosnia
Instead of the show of force that the American military had planned here in northeastern Bosnia, American troops stood by helplessly today as winter weather prevented planes from landing for a third consecutive day.
After two low passes over the airfield, one green C-130 dipped into sight, but only briefly before disappearing again into gray clouds a few hundred feet above the runway.
The cargo plane gave up and went back to Ramstein, Germany.


DEALS AND DISCOUNTS
BRITISH BARGAIN Thistle and Mount Charlotte Hotels of Britain are offering to make the dollar equivalent to a pound sterling in a promotion good for stays until March 7 at 102 hotels in England, Scotland and Wales.
Bookings must be made and prepaid in the United States before Feb. 21; December reservations must have been prepaid 14 days in advance.
The promotion is based on full-rate tariff for a minimum two-night stay.
Sample discounted rates are $170 a night at the Tower Hotel in London; $145 at New Hall, a moated manor house in Sutton Coldfield, near Birmingham, and $110 at the Arden in Stratford-upon-Avon.
Information and reservations: (800) 847-4358.


Our Year: A Desktop Publication
IRA W. GABRIELSON has spent hours hunched over his Macintosh computer the last few days, writing paragraph after paragraph, choosing easy-to-read typefaces and setting up the two-column format he likes for his annual holiday letter.
The problem is the photographs: he has not figured out his brand-new digital scanner.
"I'll get it going eventually," said Dr.
Gabrielson, executive director of the physician's assistant training program at Springfield College in Massachusetts.
"Maybe even before Christmas."


Drug Testing Plan Drawing Criticism
A defense lawyers group says President Clinton's plan to seek drug tests for  everyone arrested on Federal charges may trample on the presumption that a suspect is innocent until proved guilty.
The White House press secretary, Michael D. McCurry, said on Friday that Mr.
Clinton would announce a plan on Monday under which Federal prosecutors would seek a drug test for anyone facing Federal charges before setting bail.


Corrections
The Photographer's Journal feature last Sunday, picturing a dog and a boy looking at each other at the side of a school bus, omitted the photographer's credit.
The picture was by Bernard Delgado of The New York Times.


American Money Makes the Whole World Sing
ONCE again, American guns, carried by American soldiers, are heading into a distant fray, their reception in Bosnia at best uncertain.
Memories of Somalia and, still, Vietnam, haunt every military venture overseas.
American butter, spread by American corporations investing abroad at a record pace, has meanwhile never been so widely welcomed.
Although United States battleships and B-52's have in many places overstayed their welcome, Boeings filled with business executives and Commerce Department aides can land almost anywhere, even at Noi Bai Airport in Hanoi.


No, Thanks
Even on the most exalted throne in the world, we are only sitting on our own bottom," Montaigne wrote.
That kind of thought has prompted some people to do a surprising thing: decline that big promotion or big chance.
Do you know of people who waved off success because they lightly valued it, were happy where they were, or whatever?
Send the story to On the Job, Money and Business, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Or by E-mail to onthejob@nytimes.com.
Include your phone number.
All submissions become the property of The Times and  may be republished in any medium.


Inquiry to See Whether Officials Helped Sell Protected Horses forSlaughter
Over the last 22 years, Federal land managers have culled tens of thousands of wild horses from the open spaces of the American West, rounding them up as part of a popular Government program that offers the animals for public adoption.
Now, according to Government documents, some employees and officials of the Bureau of Land Management, the Government agency that runs the program, are under investigation in connection with a profit-making scheme to divert adopted  horses to slaughterhouses.


Mayor Forms Panel to Seek New Housing
Housing in Williamsburg is a perennial problem, the stuff of lawsuits, rallies and demonstrations, as two growing groups -- Hasidic Jews and Puerto Ricans -- compete for a limited amount of affordable space.
Speaking to a sea of 10,000 Hasidic men at the annual dinner of the Satmar sect, the largest in Williamsburg, Mayor Giuliani announced on Wednesday night that he was forming a task force to study the neighborhood's housing problems.
"What we have to do is produce affordable housing," the Mayor said.
"We want you to remain in Williamsburg. We want you to grow in Williamsburg."


When in Rome
To the Editor: Susan Spano, in "Frugal Traveler: Living, Briefly, Like a Roman"  (Nov. 12) apparently missed our favorite restaurant, Paris, a few steps from the Piazza Santa Maria.


Ms. Buonanno And Mr. Chase
Carolyn Ann Buonanno, a daughter of Martha and Bernard Buonanno of Providence, R.I., was married on Friday to Michael Christopher Chase, a son of Barbara and Francis Chase of Cohasset, Mass.
The Rev.
Robert Randall performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Sebastian Church in Providence.
Mrs.
Chase, 27, teaches the sixth grade at the Lincoln School in Brookline, Mass.
She graduated from Brown University and received a master's degree in teaching from Simmons College.
Her father is a partner in Edwards &amp; Angell, the Providence law firm.
She is a granddaughter of the late Senator Thomas J. Dodd and a niece of Senator Christopher J. Dodd, the Connecticut Democrats.
Her  paternal grandfather, Bernard V. Buonanno of Providence, is the chairman of the  New England Container Company in Smithfield, R.I.


ISRAEL AND SYRIA SET PEACE TALKS FOR WASHINGTON
Israel and Syria will open "a new phase" of intensive and broad peace negotiations with American mediators in Washington at the end of this month, Secretary of State Warren Christopher announced today.
Mr.
Christopher made the announcement at a joint news conference with Prime Minister Shimon Peres, three weeks after Mr.
Peres began an aggressive new effort to bring President Hafez al-Assad of Syria back to the negotiating table  and work out a comprehensive Middle East peace.


INSIDE
INVESTING IT /Page 4/ The tax status of preferred stock may change, and the uncertainty has frozen the preferred market.
By Anthony Ramirez.


MARY, MARY, QUITE CONTRARY
There is a place for Mary on television and it isn't on "New York News." It's back in Minneapolis where she belongs.
She should polish the "M" on her kitchen  wall, reapply for a job as Lou Grant's associate producer and see if Rhoda and Phyllis need a roommate.
Who says you can't go home again?
I would welcome her back with all my heart.
My life didn't turn out exactly like Mary Richards' did, and I am sorry that Moore's life hasn't either.
Listen to all your fans, Mary.
You're gonna make it  after all.
MERRILL SILVER Montclair, N.J.


Train Crash Kills Driver Who Stopped
A Manhattan-bound Long Island Rail Road train struck a car that had darted onto the tracks near New Hyde Park yesterday morning, killing the car's driver,  injuring two train passengers and a conductor, and disrupting train service for  most of the day on several busy lines, the police and a railroad spokesman said.
The accident occurred at 9:10 A.M., when the train, the 8:33 from Huntington  carrying about 450 passengers, hit a car at the gated Covert Avenue crossing, less than a mile west of New Hyde Park, said Brian Dolan, an L.I.R.R spokesman.


Drug and Alcohol Use Rising Among Teen-Agers, a Study Finds
Drug use among the country's teen-agers increased again last year, an annual  survey released on Friday shows.
Forty-eight percent of the students in the high school class of 1995 said they had tried an illegal drug, and 64 percent had smoked at least one cigarette.
Alcohol remained the most popular drug used by high school seniors, with 81 percent saying they had tried it at least once in their life, the study found.
That is about the same percentage as in 1994.


Cone Is Still Talking With Persistent Orioles
Deal? What deal?
That's what David Cone's agent, Steve Fehr, asked yesterday in response to newspaper reports that Cone and the Yankees had reached agreement during a meeting Friday in Tampa, Fla.


A New Arts Center For Cincinnati
Downtown Cincinnati is home to a new center for the visual and performing arts.
Designed by Cesar Pelli, the Stanley J. Aronoff Center for the Arts houses three theaters, a rehearsal hall and a 5,000-square-foot art gallery.
Seven snack bars serve the theater lobbies and the adjacent Plaza 600 Restaurant offers dinner before a performance and drinks and dessert afterward.
Among the scheduled events is the Broadway production of "Miss Saigon," which runs through Jan. 6.
In February the Cincinnati Ballet will present the All American Festival featuring Agnes deMille's "Rodeo," "The Lost World," a new ballet on a pre-Colombian theme by Peter Anastos, and George Balanchine's "Who Cares." At the Weston Art Gallery is an exhibition of historical and contemporary works of art inspired by the Ohio River, and "Jay Bolotin: Objects  from the Mechanical Opera," an exhibition of opera stage sets by Mr.
Bolotin, a  native of the Ohio River Valley.


President-to-Be Of Haiti Faces Tough Agenda
Even with 14 candidates on the ballot, the result is considered a foregone conclusion.
It is what comes after the presidential vote on Sunday that promises to be the next big test for stability in Haiti and for the Clinton Administration's policy toward this country.
Everything the United States and the United Nations have done here since restoring President Jean-Bertrand Aristide to power 14 months ago has been aimed at guaranteeing a peaceful transition to a popularly elected successor.


A Bridge Too Near, Too Narrow
Tucked away in a corner of Jamaica Bay, Hamilton Beach is a place out of time, inaccessible by car save for one connecting bridge and cut off from the city's sewer system.
So, when the City Department of Environmental Protection decided last summer  to install sewers, the community, fed up with cesspool overflows, welcomed the idea.
Augustine Barry rejoiced with his neighbors, happy that his family and his menagerie of turkeys, chickens and rabbits would no longer be sloshing through the muck on rainy days.


MARY, MARY, QUITE CONTRARY
I find it interesting but disheartening to read about Moore's low self-esteem.
Perhaps she should reexamine at least one character she created many years ago -- Mary Richards.
That character was strong, ethical, decent and  beautiful, in countless universal ways.
Is this not all an emanation of Moore herself?
JULIE BRICK Waterbury, Conn.


The G.I.'s Don't Carry a Marshall Plan
AMERICAN troops were already deploying in the winter snows of Bosnia last week when President Clinton joined the signing of the Balkan peace treaty in Paris; the mission could cost American taxpayers as much as $2 billion by the time it ends next year.
But even that falls short of the extent of American involvement, which will also include a disputed share of Bosnia's reconstruction and the repatriation of several million refugees and displaced persons.
The Clinton Administration has played down this expense while it cajoles a skeptical Congress to support the sending of troops.
But this week the Americans and their allies will sit down in Brussels to work out what needs to be fixed first and where the money will come  from.


Small Gain In Big Fight To Liberate Puerto Rico
The mail arrived on Dec. 2 while Juan Mari Bras was celebrating his 68th birthday in the western city of Mayaguez.
He was already feeling lucky from recovering from heart surgery a few months earlier, but he said the mail brought the best gift he received that day -- the loss of his United States citizenship.
"I spent my whole life traveling the world with a U.S. passport to preach independence for Puerto Rico," Mr.
Mari Bras, a lawyer, said in an interview this week.
"I haven't been able to get it for everyone, but at least I got it for me."


Is Nets' Anderson Looking at Exit Ramp?
It was probably a good thing the Nets did not practice yesterday.
The way Kenny Anderson was feeling after not playing in the fourth quarter of the Nets'  105-98 loss at Detroit Friday night, he probably would not have shown up.
Anderson, who boycotted a practice last year after being benched during the final quarter of a December game against the Knicks, was not happy about watching from the sideline as the Pistons turned a 1-point lead at the end of three quarters into an easy victory.
"I'm not happy with it, bottom line," Anderson said after scoring 11 points in 24 minutes.
"You can take it for what it's worth."


Ringing In An Answer To a Tax Question
In all the explanations for this phenomenal year in the stock market, one has received little attention: taxes.
We will soon find out just how important it has been.
Ever since the 1994 election returns were in, a tax question has been hanging over Wall Street: Will the Republicans who control Congress be able to make good on their promise to cut the tax rate on capital gains, and, if so, what will be the effective date?


When Bears Get Too Close for Comfort
NO way would I want to go into court to defend the bears of New Jersey.
Not with this rap sheet:


The Judge Who Started It All
To the Editor:
I was pleased to see mention of George Dewey Hay in Dana Andrew Jennings's article on the 70th birthday of Nashville's WSM Grand Ole Opry ["A Still-Stompin', Still-Fiddlin' 70-Year-Ole," Nov. 26].
Hay, the founder, emcee and eventual "namer" of the Opry, was born in Indiana; his 100th-birthday anniversary was also celebrated last month.


SUNDAY December 17, 1995: SHOPPING AROUND;Fireside Chatter
Christmas really brings home the Phineas T. Barnum law of sucker-side economics: people will buy anything.
A case in point: the talking spatula shown  above (and mistakenly printed in reverse image).
For only $14.99 at stores like  Spencer Gifts and Ace Hardware, tongue-tied cooks can wield a push-button tool that offers such helpful gustatorial commentary as "Mmm, smells real juicy -- now we're cooking."


Myanmar
To the Editor: With respect to travel in Myanmar, my experience was quite different from both the Beckers' ("Burmese Blues," Letters to the Editor, June 18) and the two respondents whose replies appeared Sept. 3.


4 Cantors to Take Center Stage
ANNIE BORNSTEIN-HOWARD was singing in "La Traviata" at the Houston Grand Opera when she was flooded with feelings that led her to a new career.
"I stood  backstage crying," she said.
"It felt so empty, so unconnected to anything else. It was only important that you get the notes out. Nobody cared about you."
She emphasized the word "you." Today when she sings, she said, she knows she  is appreciated for the warmth of her personality and the depth of her commitment to her listeners -- as well as the beauty of her voice.
The mezzo-soprano now serves as the cantor of the Jewish Community Center in White Plains, where one of the joys, she said, is that "I can be myself, use my voice and be spiritually involved," all at the same time.


HOLIDAY BRIBERY
AT MASON'S parking garage, it's that special time of the year: the tipping board is up once again.
Glittering with Christmas lights, it hangs near the garage's entrance on 50th Street off Broadway, a tribute to the regular customers who have contributed to the employees' tip pool.
The board lists contributors by name and car, ranking them in a hierarchy of generosity, with the big tippers traditionally celebrated in a green zone at the top.
It appears to all the world as a confirmation of the city's enduring holiday spirit: Yo!
Pay up!
Remember the greediest!
But is this really what Christmas is about today?
Maybe not.
Outside the garage many New Yorkers seem to be abandoning their holiday rituals of bribery and extortion.
I don't want to be alarmist -- after all, doormen and supers are  still doing nicely -- but a lot of people have become reluctant to skim their customary share of the city's wealth.
Companies routinely forbid employees to accept gifts worth more than $25, which has been a tremendous hardship on the class of executives -- advertising buyers, mutual-fund managers, fashion editors -- who once proudly adorned their offices with tributes of crystal and leather and wine.
Some still manage to sneak their booty home, but others no longer even get the chance to violate company policy: because of all the corporate cost cutting, they're lucky these days to be offered a box of cookies.
Some receive nothing but cards announcing that their gift money has been donated to charity.
It's demoralizing.


Anne M. Lund, C. R. Williams
Anne Marsh Lund, a daughter of Viola and Prof.
Charles C. Lund of Chevy Chase, Md., was married yesterday to Christopher R. Williams, a son of Elaine Williams of New York and Robert F. Williams of Santa Fe, N.M.
The Rev.
Samuel Abbott performed the Episcopal ceremony at Grace Church in New York.
Ms.
Lund, who is keeping her name, is the sales manager in the New York office of Bennison Fabrics, a manufacturer.
She is a graduate of Oberlin College.
Her father teaches English at the University of the District of Columbia.
Her mother teaches American history at Georgetown Visitation Preparatory School.


A Shopping Trip, a Protest And Lingering Questions
Eight days after a fiery massacre that killed eight people and raised a host  of racial and economic questions in Harlem, throngs of Christmas shoppers and a  cacophony of holiday and rap music blaring from storefront loudspeakers yesterday gave 125th Street the semblance of a normal bustling Saturday.
But somber memories of the tragedy wreathed a gathering outside the fire-blackened Freddy's clothing store as Harlem's representatives in city, state and Federal governments voiced anguish for the victims, condolences for their families and a sense of loss for a poor community sometimes riven by misunderstanding and racism.


A Collector's Pride: The Round Table Under Glass
Len Feiner peered through a swirl of snowflakes at Hamlet the cat, who perched on a round table in front of a wall of bookshelves.
Mr.
Feiner, a portly, silver-haired man, was not standing in a snowstorm looking in a window.
He was standing in the drape-muffled lobby of the Algonquin Hotel, where he is chief concierge, proudly examining details of a three-inch-high microcosm of his workplace, encased in a fluid- and flake-filled dome.


Rangers Put Up a Fight, But Can't Stop Capitals
It would be pleasant for Ranger fans to read here that their weary and injury-depleted team came from behind and stole a game tonight from the Washington Capitals.
It would be encouraging to review how Aleksei Kovalev burst out from his slump and how goalie Glenn Healy played spectacularly in his once-a-week relief role.
However, this was not the case.
Kovalev's goal-less streak extended to 17 games, and he accidentally turned over the puck on a play that put Washington ahead for good.
Healy wasn't all that bad, but he let stoppable shots get past him.
And the Rangers lost by 3-2, their second defeat in two nights, following a 10-game unbeaten streak.


Five Candidates Scramble for Millard's City Council Seat
On paper, the City Council's Fifth District is heavily Democratic, but Charles Millard, a Republican, snatched the seat in 1991.
He quit this month when Mayor Giuliani named him president of the city's Economic Development Corporation.
Now there is a scramble to fill the vacancy.


Of Films and Greasy Palms: New York vs. Los Angeles
To the Editor:
A couple of years ago I walked out the door of my tenement to confront a mugging in progress: two young men were rolling around on the sidewalk with an older man between them.
I yelled at the attackers, hoping to scare them off.
But they merely unclinched and looked annoyed.


Correction
A front-page picture caption last Sunday about an abortion clinic in Garden City that is fighting eviction misidentified the three people at the right.
They were, from left, a security guard for the building, an escort for the clinic and a representative of the Nassau chapter of the New York Civil Liberties Union.
They were not abortion protesters.


Hint of Smoked Salmon From Holidays Past
EVEN though I eat smoked salmon year round, I still associate it with holidays.
When I was growing up in England, it was served plain, with brown bread and butter, as a first course for Christmas dinner or on New Year's Eve.
Now, a favorite of mine is inspired by Anton Mosimann, a chef based in London.
He makes a terrine that consists of layers of smoked salmon wrapped around a creamy mousse of smoked trout spiked with fresh horseradish.
When Andre Soltner was the chef at Lutece, he combined smoked salmon and spinach into a remarkable, delicate terrine.
The dish can be made a day or two in advance and is good served on lettuce leaves, sprinkled with a little bit of  olive oil, with toast.


BEST SELLERS: December 17, 1995
Weeks This Last
On Week Week  List Fiction


The 2 Mrs. Whitmans, As Viewed by the G.O.P.
It is December in Washington, and there are Christmas parties for every lawyer and lobbyist in the city.
These events are not for fun, not for the hosts at least, who hope to gain a little attention for their many causes.
The Republican National Committee offered up some mini-pizza and chicken-with-peanut kebab in a somber room over Union Station, and Haley Barbour, the chairman, left no doubt about his purpose when he broke away from a clutch of people and set out to perform the duties of host by apologizing, " 'Scuse me while I go do some work."
That was on Monday, the day Governor Whitman met Senator Bob Dole in Edison to endorse him for President.
There was not a lot of surprise in her choice, because there was not a lot of choice left for her in the Republican field, now  that Gov.
Pete Wilson of California and Gen.
Colin L. Powell of everyone's dreams have taken themselves out of the race.


Bonds Denies Abuse
San Francisco Giants outfielder BARRY BONDS testified during divorce proceedings that he never physically abused his wife but once kicked her after she kicked him.
In court in Redwood City, Calif., Friday, Bonds said SUN BONDS, his wife of  six years, had fierce temper tantrums that included breaking trophies and smashing holes in the walls and doors. (AP)


Boy Admits Killing Parent
The second of two brothers accused of killing their parents and younger brother in a skinhead rage pleaded guilty on Friday to one of the murders.
The first brother, Bryan Freeman, 17, accepted a plea bargain last week to avoid any chance for the death penalty.
His brother, David, 16, pleaded guilty on Friday to one count of first-degree murder; the penalty for that is a life term without parole.


Editors' Note
The Commercial Property column in the Real Estate Section on Nov. 19 discussed changes in retailing on Madison Avenue.
It included a brief reference  to space that had been leased for a coffee bar on 51st Street.
The article misidentified the concern that had leased the space.
It was New World Coffee, not Timothy's New World Coffee.
The article said that New World had decided against opening at the 51st Street location and was seeking subtenants for the space because of the number of other coffee bars nearby.
The article should have verified the account with New World, or attributed the information to the brokers who provided it.
A lawyer for New World says that the company had terminated the lease and was not seeking subtenants, and that concern about competition was not a factor.
The matter is now in litigation.


The Roseanne of Literature
Dorothy Allison WRITES EVERYTHING down: dialogue she overhears on buses, the  stories of her dead aunts, fragments from old June Carter songs.
She takes notes even while talking to friends on the telephone, typing bits of their conversation into her computer.
"I have a terrible memory," she explains, a little defensively, when caught.
She arches one eyebrow and smiles wickedly, her bad eye squinting to see if I believe her.
I don't.
Her closet is lined with red, black and gray notebooks full of journal entries that became poems, then short stories and eventually, novels.
"Watch out," she tells people, "or I'm liable to put you in a story."


Corrections
The NYC column last Sunday, about Human Rights Day, referred incorrectly to the United States' participation in the 1989 United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.
The American representative at the United Nations, Madeleine K. Albright, did sign the convention earlier this year, though it has  not yet been ratified by the Senate.


In Defense Of the Playwright
To the Editor:
Matt Wolf's essay on Ronald Harwood's play "Taking Sides" ["Ugly Americans,  British Style," Nov. 26] shows a misunderstanding of the play and of the character of the investigating officer, Major Arnold, the role that I have been  playing on the West End.
Mr.
Wolf assumes that through this "ugly American," Mr.
Harwood's play puts America on trial, treating the nation as a whipping post.
I  feel that Mr.
Harwood's fine and complex work needs defending by someone who knows it inside out.


Haiti Takes the Next Big Step
HE is not the man whom officials in Washington had hoped to see succeed Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
But everything seems to indicate Haitians will elect Rene Preval as their new President in voting today -- which automatically means  the United States now has a considerable investment in his future success.
The Honeymoon's Over
The balloting comes after two months of friction in relations between the Clinton Administration and Mr.
Aristide.
After the year-long honeymoon that followed Mr.
Aristide's restoration to power in October 1994, the two countries  have recently had very public disagreements about issues like privatizing state  companies and returning more than 160,000 pages of documents seized by American  troops from the headquarters of the military and paramilitary groups here.


Pop Briefs
MICK HARVEY: 'INTOXICATED MAN' Mute


BAD BEHAVIOR
When crude language becomes criminal, we trivialize actual harassment.
Men verbally harass one another in the work place all the time.
If women truly want to run with the wolves, they can't behave like fragile daisies every  time someone drops a bawdy remark.


Continental In Chelsea
BIRICCHINO ++ (212) 695-6690; 260 West 29th Street; $(c) all major credit cards


Senator Offers A Way to End Confrontation With Clinton
The chairman of the Senate Whitewater Committee today offered to try to resolve the constitutional confrontation with the President over the committee's access to notes taken by a White House lawyer at a Whitewater meeting of senior  Administration officials two years ago.
Defying Congressional subpoenas for the notes, the White House has said the material is protected by lawyer-client privilege and executive privilege.


TO HAVE AND TO HOLD
While we may chuckle over the foibles of the rich and their often unenforceable prenuptial clauses, let's not forget that prenuptial agreements can be useful and are not only for the rich and controlling ("To Have and to Hold," by Jan Hoffman, Nov. 19).
Pet custody and "marital-fat" issues aside (and yes, I have drafted at least one pet-custody visitation clause), some assets that seem more ordinary than the value of the career of an opera star may be equally difficult to put a price tag on (for example, an author's copyright, a small business or a professional license).
When possible, removing these items from the equitable-distribution operating table is more an exercise of good common sense than of ego gratification.


2 Officers Are Wounded in Queens Shootout With Paroled Murderer
Seeking a convicted murderer on parole to arrest him in another murder, two police sergeants were shot and seriously wounded yesterday in a wild gun battle  at a housing project in Queens, officials said.
The gunfight ended when the parolee was shot and critically wounded by the police.
A senior law enforcement official said last night that it was unclear whether the officers, Sgt.
Darren Finn, 35, and Sgt.
James Hopkins, 33, were struck by the parolee's bullets or by police bullets.
The officers, both of whom worked for the housing bureau and were wearing bulletproof vests, were in serious but stable condition at Elmhurst General Hospital, Police Commissioner William Bratton said.


ON THE TOWNS
Music


Psychogossip
HOW FREUD WORKED First-Hand Accounts of Patients.
By Paul Roazen. 301 pp.
Northvale, N.J.: Jason Aronson Inc. $30.
TO say "How Freud Worked" is an apt title for this book would be unfair to Freud, unfair to the notion of work and unfair to the word "how." These are Paul Roazen's recollections of the conversations he had 30 years ago with 10 people whom Freud analyzed when his health was fading.
The profiles aren't exactly fresh and they have very little to do with how Freud conducted his analyses.
But they're not completely worthless either.


BENEFITS
For Oklahoma Bombing Victims TODAY -- A concert at Carnegie Hall at 8 P.M. will benefit the Oklahoma City Victims and Family Relief Fund.
Peter Simon, a pianist from Oklahoma, will be the featured performer, and Shawntel Smith, who is Miss America and a former Miss Oklahoma, will be mistress of ceremonies.
Members of New York City's Urban  Search and Rescue Team, who traveled to Oklahoma City to assist after the bombing, will be the guests of honor.
Tickets, $15, from (212) 247-7800.


Northern Ireland Disarmament Panel Convenes
Stating that there was no assurance that it would succeed, former Senator George J. Mitchell has begun the work of the new international panel that is to  deal with the dispute over disarmament of the Irish Republican Army in Northern  Ireland.
Mr.
Mitchell, head of the International Body on disarmament, said on Friday in Belfast, the Ulster capital, "we understand that the success of our efforts is far from assured but we believe that the process of peace and reconciliation  now underway in Northern Ireland is historic."


Surgery Gives Man New Best Friends
WILL animals one day become a routine source for organs to transplant into humans?
Perhaps when pigs fly.
But the radical cross-species experiment in which scientists here last week transfused baboon bone marrow into a 38-year-old man with AIDS is not the only current effort to topple barriers between species.
Procedures in which sheep intestines are used as surgical sutures and pigs are bred to provide heart valves for humans are already considered routine.
And  now, refinements in drugs to ward off rejection have prompted renewed enthusiasm for the use of entire organs from animals for human transplantation.
At five major transplant centers around the country, protocols are being readied for the experimental use of primates and specially bred pigs as donors of "bridge" hearts, tiding transplant patients over until suitable human donors can be identified.


He Was a Camera: A Photographer's Farewell
THEY COME IN TUTUS AND TOGAS, in waistcoats and wigs, sweaters and jeans.
They get there in limousines, on the subway, by foot.
Virtually everyone who is  someone in the arts has found a path to Jack Mitchell's photography studio on East 74th Street near First Avenue in New York.
No more.
Mr.
Mitchell, one of the premier arts photographers of our day, is retiring at age 70 and moving back to his home state, Florida.
Tomorrow.
Why now, at the peak of a career that started when he was 15?
Why now, when he's healthy and runs five miles a day?


Officials Ponder Expansion Of Drug Searches in Prison
The number of seizures of drugs in the New York State prison system has doubled in the last three years, shedding new light on prison drug trafficking that officials say causes much of the unrest behind bars.
Faced with mounting evidence of contraband smuggling, a State Senate committee recently began an investigation to determine whether correction officers should be given broader powers to search for drugs.


An Alien Concept Settles In the Universe of Sitcoms
DESPITE THE EVIDENCE OF this year's offerings, the situation comedy is a fairly flexible creative framework.
Nothing inherent in the form demands that every series be based on either a warmly dysfunctional nuclear family or a collection of thin, warmly neurotic young adults.
Exceptions can be and have been made.
Occasionally, older or overweight people have been showcased.
More rarely, and mostly long ago, shows loaded with unabashedly nonwarm elements -- like satire and social commentary -- have squeaked through.
See, for instance, "M*A*S*H," "All in the Family," "Soap" and "Golden Girls."


Experts Warn of Possibility of Outbreaks of New Strains of Flu
The influenza virus, one of the oldest and deadliest of human plagues, could  develop a new form and start a worldwide epidemic at any time, and medical science needs to prepare, experts say.
At a conference this week, more than 200 infectious-disease specialists started work on a plan to prepare for what some believe is an inevitable pandemic, or worldwide epidemic, of killer flu.


The Steelers and Stewart Get That First-Round Bye
Steelers 41, Patriots 27


Of Poetry and Pastrami


Choirs and Musicians Herald the Season
AUDIENCES who would like a break from Christmas music may find a pair of 3 o'clock recitals this afternoon providing just such a pause.
English compositions -- works by Henry Purcell for voice, winds and continuo  -- will be presented by the Musicians of the Old Post Road in a free recital at  the Yale Center for British Art.


Ethiopia Appeals for Food
Ethiopia has appealed to Western donors for 250,000 tons of food aid to help  feed some 3.2 million people who will face hunger next year, the state radio said today.
The radio quoted Simon Mechale, the commissioner for disaster prevention, as  saying most of those affected were displaced from Eritrea after it won independence from Ethiopia in 1993.
He said many more people also face hunger in a number of rural regions because of drought.


Cuomo the Author
To the Editor:
I was dismayed by Brent Staples's ill-tempered diatribe under the guise of a  review of Mario Cuomo's "Reason to Believe" (Nov. 19).


A Law on Young Smokers Denies Their Civil Rights
To the Editor:
In the Dec. 3 Jersey column "For Young Smokers, a New Risk: the Law," about the Flemington ordinance allowing the arrest of anyone under the age of 18 smoking a cigarette in public, Joe Sharkey properly asks whether such a law is an infringement of the smokers' civil rights.


For Managing Agents, It's a New World
AFTER a series of kickback indictments stained an otherwise colorless industry, many managing agents -- the men and women who handle millions of dollars of expenditures and hiring for the city's co-ops and condos -- have spent much of the last year reforming, consolidating and reorganizing their businesses.
With the 49 indictments leveled 18 months ago as the catalyst, some managing  agents have hired private investigators and public relations people to clean up  their images and their procedures; some have formed their own association, which promptly passed a code of ethics; some have merged or sold or dissolved their companies; some have introduced multiple bidding systems.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 Meet seven giants of the city bureaucracy.


Macfarlane Rejoins K.C.
The free-agent catcher MIKE MACFARLANE is back with the Kansas City Royals after signing a two-year contract yesterday.
MacFarlane, 31, played for the Royals his entire career until going to the Boston Red Sox as a free agent last  season.
He hit .225 with 15 home runs and 51 runs batted in in 115 games with Boston.
The right-handed Macfarlane is a lifetime .251 hitter with 91 home runs  and 360 r.b.i.
The Royals designated catcher BRENT MAYNE for assignment. (AP)


BAD BEHAVIOR
Prose's Hers column about her colleague Stephen Dobyns, who was savaged by one of the star chambers that have sprung up on politically correct campuses, is all too familiar.
The academic committee imposed on Dobyns is the kind of extreme punishment that was once the exclusive province of our courts.
Its action clearly shows that academic speech codes are not about decency or civility, but about power and control.


For Disabled, An Embrace
There are hundreds of severely ill or disabled children whose parents are unable or unwilling to care for them.
Michael Rodriquez, at school with his physical therapist, Kara White, is one of the fortunate ones: He has a foster family.
Article, page 61.


TERROR ON AN EIGHT-HOUR SHIFT
I read your article about Mike Hensley with alarm.
This man belongs behind bars, with the men he guards.
He is as dangerous as they are, but because he wears a badge, he's O.K.
It saddens me to think that his wife stays with such an abusive husband, putting not only herself but her children in danger.


Susan P. Vaughn, Gerard M. O'Brien
Susan Perkins Vaughn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George A. Vaughn 3d of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to Gerard Murray O'Brien, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth A. O'Brien of Red Bank, N.J.
The Rev.
Carl D. Reimers performed the ceremony at Central Presbyterian Church in New York.
The bride is an actress and a founder of the Six Figures Theater Company in New York.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father, who is retired, was  the chairman of Head Racquet Sports in Plainsboro, N.J..
Her mother, Martha Hinman Vaughn, is a photographer in Princeton.


When Dreams of Christmas Are Blue
IT is a time for rejoicing, religious faith, of friends and family, warmth and comfort, delicious food, gift giving and celebrating.
Well, bah!
Humbug!
For many people, this Norman Rockwell vision of happiness is as much an apparition as the Ghost of Christmas Past.
For them, the holiday season is a time of profound difficulty, a period experienced as a relentless assault of false bonhomie, rampant commercialism, obligations and stress, marked by feelings of loneliness and being overwhelmed.
In fact, the phenomenon is so widespread that mental-health professionals have given it a name: the holiday syndrome.
The syndrome, informally known as "the holiday blues," has a definition and symptoms.
There are even suggestions for weathering the condition, which usually starts when Halloween costumes begin to appear in store windows, persists through Thanksgiving, Hanukkah and Christmas and passes once the New Year celebrations are over.


Where Did He Go?
THE NEANDERTAL ENIGMA Solving the Mystery of Modern Human Origins.
By James Shreeve.
Illustrated. 369 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $25.
THE Neanderthals were a large-brained Homo species that lived in Europe and parts of Africa and Asia from about 120,000 to 30,000 years ago, when they apparently vanished from the face of the earth.


Teaneck 1995, Meet Teaneck 1949
High school students in bobby socks hunch over manual typewriters.
White schoolchildren perform the play "Little Black Sambo" without self-consciousness.
A newspaper headline casually refers to "Japs." A caption with a photograph of a government office says, "Citizens have no difficulty in obtaining answers from smiling and alert township employees."
This was 1949, the year the United States Army decided that Teaneck was a "model community" and dispatched a photographer to create an exhibition to be shown in postwar Japan and other occupied lands.


Atrium Renewal, Adding Art, Chases Away Most of the Zen
Do bamboo trees look better with a Nevelson (or a Calder or a Dubuffet or an  Oldenburg) in front of them?
That is the question.
And the answer is no.
The public atrium in the former I.B.M.
Building at 590 Madison Avenue, at 57th Street, one of the most celebrated public spaces to have been built in Manhattan in the last generation, reopened last week after a discreet renovation.
New management -- the I.B.M.
Corporation sold the building in 1994 to the developer Edward J. Minskoff -- has added eight works of sculpture to the space, cleaned it up and rechristened it "The Sculpture Garden at 590 Madison."


BAD BEHAVIOR
Prose's article was provocative.
The changes engendered by our new sensitivity to sexual-harassment issues are not made in a vacuum; they affect other areas as well.
Will the faculty continue to attend faculty-student social events, considering what an offhand comment might cost a tenured professor?
Will the students lose something valuable if the social gatherings end?


A Treatment for Stroke
A new era for stroke patients began last week, with the first firm evidence that treatment can help patients recover.
A large Federal study found that stroke patients who were given intravenous injections of a clot-dissolving drug  had a 30 percent better chance of leaving the hospital and returning to normal life than those who did not receive the drug, called TPA.
But the drug can work  only if administered quickly.
The patients had to arrive at a hospital, have a CT scan to make sure that their stroke was caused by a blood vessel blockage and start receiving the drug within three hours of the time their symptoms began.
GINA KOLATA


Books in Brief: FICTION


Corrections
An article last Sunday about David Rockefeller misidentified the organization on whose behalf he presented an award to King Hussein of Jordan.
It is the National Committee on American Foreign Policy, not the American Committee for Foreign Policy.


Hint of Smoked Salmon From Holidays Past
EVEN though I eat smoked salmon year round, I still associate it with holidays.
When I was growing up in England, it was served plain, with brown bread and butter, as a first course for Christmas dinner or on New Year's Eve.
Now, an equally good first course can be a carpaccio made with very fresh raw salmon, cut into thin slices and sprinkled with extra-virgin olive oil and chives.
Another favorite of mine is inspired by Anton Mosimann, a chef based in London.
He makes a terrine that consists of layers of smoked salmon wrapped around a creamy mousse of smoked trout spiked with fresh horseradish.


U.S. Dialysis Provider Doesn't Skimp on Patient Treatments
To the Editor:
Re your series on dialysis care (front page, Dec. 4-6): While you recognize that maintaining clinical quality with a reimbursement that is lower today than  when it was first set in 1973 is a challenge for dialysis providers, you are wrong about how that challenge has been answered.


DIARY
THE NETWORKS


A Welcome Christmas Past
DEEP in the perpetually shadowed canyons of Wall Street, a glow of nostalgia  is attracting crowds to a set of windows that sweetly evoke Christmases of pressed-tin toy trucks and trains, of child-size washing machines and chubby-faced dolls that neither talk, walk, wet nor glide on in-line skates.
It's Christmas 1950's style.


Fire Officials Cited Owners Of Building for Sprinklers
The owners of the Harlem building gutted by arson Dec. 8 failed repeatedly in the last six years to show that the sprinkler systems had been properly installed and inspected, city records show.
The sprinklers failed in the fire, which killed eight people, including the gunman who set it.


A Hint of Smoked Salmon and Holiday Dishes Past
EVEN though I eat it all year round, I still associate smoked salmon with holidays.
When I was growing up in England, it was served plain, with brown bread and butter as a first course for Christmas dinner or on New Year's Eve.
Now, an equally good first course can be a carpaccio made with very fresh raw salmon, cut into thin slices and sprinkled with extra-virgin olive oil and chives.
Another favorite of mine is inspired by Chef Anton Mossiman, who is based in  London.
He makes a terrine that consists of layers of smoked salmon wrapped around a creamy mousse of smoked trout spiked with fresh horseradish.


Of Films and Greasy Palms: New York vs. Los Angeles
To the Editor:
The article left out one costly difficulty created by film crews: their set-ups often block parking signs.
I ought to know.
On Dec. 1, I took some out-of-town friends to the Orpheum Theater, and I eventually found a solitary parking spot on Seventh Street between Avenue A and First Avenue.
Many of the other spaces were occupied by a film crew's equipment trucks.


Executors Mishandled Two Artists' Estates
Warhol Legal-Fee Fight Is in Court Again" [Dec. 3] says that the executors of the Mark Rothko estate "were found guilty of self-dealing, profiting from acquiring Rothko art at low prices and selling it at much higher ones and fined."
The Rothko executors did not buy and sell Rothkos.
They "wasted the assets of the estate" by making two hasty deals with Marlborough Galleries, wherein all Rothko's estate paintings were turned over to Marlborough for a fraction of their worth, based on phony appraisals.
The Rothko executors did not profit financially from the contracts, nor did they acquire Rothko's paintings.


The Debate Over High-Speed Police Chases
Last year, more than 11,000 cars were stolen here, giving this city of 290,000 residents one of the highest auto theft rates in the country.
This year, the police say, the number of thefts has been cut in half now that officers in patrol cars are allowed to chase the car thieves.
But in going after suspects, Tampa's police have been involved in a number of accidents, including one in which officers crashed into a utility pole and another in which they knocked a house off its foundation.
And during a chase last week, a car driven by a suspect struck another car, killing two German tourists.


Worlds Within Worlds
When I read of the just-discovered Symbion pandora, a radically new life form that's pinpoint small, trisexual (it will try anything) and lives on the lips of lobsters, my first though was: Do lobsters have lips?
But that was quickly followed by a renewed sense of wonder at the quirky fantasia of life on earth.
With a mouth like a hairy wheel, and other anatomical oddities, pandora is so outlandish that a special phylum was created for it -- Cycliophora, of which pandora is the only member.
I must admit, I get a devilish delight when the miraculous appears right under my nose.
After all, the marvelous is a weed species.
One can glimpse it on one's doorstep.
People often ask me where they might go to find adventure.
Adventure is not something you must travel to find, I tell them, it's something  you take with you.
The astonishing can turn up in the leaf clutter, or even a neighborhood restaurant, in a dingy tank, on the lips of lobsters.


Against a Welter of Hardships, a Survivor's Example
WHEN Daria Alinovi was 17, she won a date with John Travolta.
"We went to the premiere of 'Saturday Night Fever,' " she said.
"I sat next to him as they showed the movie. He kept saying: 'I can't believe it. They like it.' "
The year was 1977.
As the grand-prize winner in a department-store sweepstakes, Miss Alinovi won not only Mr.
Travolta, but also a visit to Hollywood.
For one week she stayed in the land of make-believe.
"I rode a bicycle built for two with Henry Winkler, the Fonz!" she said.
"I stood on line  at Paramount's commissary. Cher was in front of me, and Erin from 'Happy Days' was behind me. It was incredible."


SURVIVAL OF THE FITTEST
WHEN VOTERS IN RUSSIA CHOOSE A NEW Parliament today, many of them will be voting for the candidates they think can halt the country's crime epidemic.
But  crime won't be legislated away.
In the cities, where the action is, a payoff to  the mob is never far from the surface of even the most routine commercial transaction.
The free market came to Russia before anybody established a working legal system.
What Russia has instead is a mob-ruled system of enforcement.
Corruption has become as accepted as the north wind.
Because Russian tax rates are among the highest in the world, most transactions here occur in cash.
When a Russian mobster talks about money, he makes a distinction between "white," or legal money, and "black" money.
Black money, much of it in American  dollars, is what everyone wants, and truckloads of the stuff gets shuttled around Moscow every day.
Black money -- untraced, untaxed and, legally speaking, unaccounted for -- is what people use to get rich, and to pay off their black taxes to the mob.


Workers and Bosses, a Society Askew
TED, an egoless young man, is an undercover agent chosen by Feathers, the eccentric master of a surveillance racket.
Ted's first assignment, for which he  is renamed Kenneth, is to turn in the employees who are ripping off a canning factory.
The pseudonymous private eye takes to the job with "an incredible ability to enter an environment and become one with it."
With that endorsement from Feathers arrives another assignment, this time in  a leather plant that employs hundreds of thousands, robbers all.
And Ted a k a Kenneth is to have a new name: Dennis.


Rangers' Monthly Calendar Booked Solid
With their undefeated streak over at 10 and their injuries mounting, the Rangers' leadership is unhappy about the busy schedule assigned to the team by the National Hockey League.
Their game at Washington last night was the Rangers' 10th in 16 days, their 13th in 22 days and their 26th in 49.
After getting today off, they will conclude the month of December -- the busiest ever in franchise history -- with  7 games in 14 days.


Last of His Kind
THE MOST DANGEROUS MAN IN DETROIT Walter Reuther and the Fate of American Labor.
By Nelson Lichtenstein.
Illustrated. 575 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $35.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
House 1.
Bosnia: Vote on a bill that would cut off money for deployment of United States troops on the ground in Bosnia.
Rejected 218 to 210, Dec. 13. 2.
Bosnia: Vote on a resolution opposing President Clinton's deployment of United States forces in Bosnia but voicing support for the troops themselves.
Approved 287 to 141, Dec. 13. 3.
Bosnia: Vote on a resolution that would express support for United States troops in Bosnia while noting that some lawmakers have "questions and concerns"  about their deployment.
Rejected 237 to 190, Dec. 13.


What Is a Man? A Good Question
LET'S TAKE A BRIEF THEATER tour of American masculinity.
Like all good post-modernists, I'm interested in, even obsessed by, styles of the past; with how in life, art and entertainment we revise and remake them.
"Style" may be too vague a word: I mean forms and conventions, ways of seeing, being and behaving.
And what matters more than forms and conventions of masculine and feminine behavior?
Gender is the popular word for these categories right now, and I find it a pompous word.
But on a stage, when genders meet theatrical genres, things start  to happen.


Q. &amp; A.
Making Repairs In a Co-op


The Devils Once Again Have Trouble Finding the Net
Team defense, Jacques Lemaire's trademark, is the only thing the Devils have  had going since their Stanley Cup triumph.
Even though only three players have departed, the Devils are nowhere near the collective unit they were last spring  and summer.
They are ineffective in just about all aspects of their game except defense, and they are especially hurting when it comes to goal production.
Their encounter with the Buffalo Sabres here tonight was no exception.
Although they created enough opportunities in taking 41 shots against Andrei Trefilov, the Devils scored only on goals by John MacLean and Petr Sykora and suffered a 3-2 loss, their third consecutive setback and one that put them three games below .500 at 13-16-3.


Visions From the Great Bureaucracy
ABOUT 6:30 A.M. every working day, a van arrives at a Sanitation Department garage to test 15 workers for drug use, fulfilling a controversial Federal law.
Joseph Miller, the program's supervisor, is generally surprised by the reaction.
"Many sanitation workers like the random drug testing," he says.
"Think about it: they work in pairs, on a truck. How would you like to have a partner who's drunk or high on something? We get comments like, 'It's about time; it's a wonderful program.' "
Those on the front lines of the city's bureaucracy bear witness that municipal work has its quirks and insights.
Last week, seven city workers were lifted, however briefly, from rounds of responsibility to tell a few of their stories -- and to receive $7,500 Sloan Public Service Awards from the Fund for the City of New York.


Blooms, Bracts abd Greens for the Holidays
PLANTS make splendid holiday gifts.
But in this busy week, during which they  usually are received, it is best to be have some advance advice on what to do with them.
The gift plants have spent their growing time in a grower's greenhouse, where they are kept at the right temperature and given the proper amounts of water and light.
Their growing period is timed so the blooms will be bursting out when you get them.


MAKING MICROSOFT SAFE FOR CAPITALISM
Finally!
An excellent and well-argued article in a publication outside the trade press that sheds light on the subtle and complex nature of the Microsoft monopoly ("Making Microsoft Safe for Capitalism," by James Gleick, Nov. 5).
Even though many industry analysts argue that it is too late to address the monopolistic position Microsoft has at the "application program interface," or A.P.I., level, it is a key aspect of the problem and Gleick presents it well.
A.P.I.'s are indeed an essential facility, like radio broadcasting standards were in an earlier era.


2 Legislators Take Aim At Police Murder Rate
John DeVenter, a retired Hanover Township police chief, was shot to death while escorting a couple through a cemetery in Newark in July.
Mr.
DeVenter was  not on active duty at the time, but eight on-duty New Jersey police officers were also killed this year, some under startling circumstances.
The number is more than double those killed last year and is in marked contrast to the years from 1986 to 1993, when three officers were killed in eight years.


Congress Sends Lobbying Overhaul to Clinton
Congress today sent President Clinton the first major overhaul of lobbying laws since 1946, after the bill escaped 18 days of unusual postpassage delaying  actions.
The bill, which Mr.
Clinton is expected to sign, will require thousands of lobbyists who now escape the feeble grasp of existing law to register -- and to  report publicly who hires them to lobby on what issues and how much they are paid.
About 6,000 lobbyists are currently registered; perhaps 3 to 10 times as many will now have to.


Japan Can Act to Free China Dissident
To the Editor:
Re "Beijing Sends a Strong Warning With Long Sentence for Dissenter" (front page, Dec. 14):


Neither Pool Nor Her Bills Hold Water
Sixteen years ago, when Vincent Attanasio, a delivery man for The New York Post, was killed during a robbery, his wife, Florence, got rid of their portable swimming pool.
"He really loved the pool," Mrs.
Attanasio said.
"He'd always be working on it, cleaning it. It was too emotional for me to have it around."


The New Wrinkle in Mink
Mink coats have a new opulence: they are being embellished with loops and balls made of mink, along with fur fringes.
The decorations on the collars, pockets, hemlines and cuffs were set in motion by Karl Lagerfeld, the designer,  for Fendi, and strongly influenced other furriers.
And more and more, the fur trimmings are also finding their way onto cloth coats.
The skin-on-skin mink coats, made from minks raised on ranches, have revived the turn-of-the-century technique of stretching and sewing skins together.
The new ranch mink coats, with their flat skins, depart from the popular technique that started in the 1930's of "letting out" mink skins, that is, cutting them into quarter-inch strips and then sewing them together to achieve a fluid effect.


Agency Bars Trash Haulers From Merging
New York City regulatory officials have accused a major refuse-collection company of secretly trying to merge with another hauler after being indicted on  charges it joined a Mafia-run cartel to dominate the city's private garbage industry.
The officials in the Department of Consumer Affairs said the indicted company, the Barretti Carting Corporation of Brooklyn, may have sought the merger to evade closer financial scrutiny by city and law-enforcement agencies by operating under a different corporate name.
Alfred C. Cerullo 3d, the department's Commissioner, said last week that his agency had rejected the proposed merger between Barretti and the Jumbo Carting and Refuse Corporation of Brooklyn.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about Cafe Los Negros, a web site created to highlight black and Latino art, misstated its Internet address.
The address is:


Going Nowhere
As parts of the Government shut down because of another budgetary impasse, President Clinton and Republican Congressional leaders made the day one of blame, not progress.
Mr.
Clinton offered sharp words on the radio; Senator Bob Dole called them "garbage." Page 40.


Why Not a Detroit 'Acropolis'?
To the Editor:
Re "A Tribute to Ruin Irks Detroit" (news article, Dec. 10):


Aid for 'Antique' School Lab
Midwood High School students consistently win awards in the prestigious Westinghouse Science Talent Search -- no thanks to their laboratories.
Chemistry lab tables have no gas to light Bunsen burners and no water to wash away chemicals.
A ventilation problem has allowed fumes to corrode metal shelves.
Physics lab tables have no electricity to power energy experiments.
And the biology lab -- a single room that serves 900 students -- became a flooding geyser last year when a spigot blew.


FUNDS WATCH
A Newborn Cousin For a Closed Fund


Marla L. Schiff, Jeffrey S. Stein
Marla Lauren Schiff, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sheldon F. Schiff of Hewlett  Harbor, L.I., was married last evening to Dr.
Jeffrey Stephen Stein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard I. Stein of New York.
Rabbi Morris S. Friedman performed the ceremony at Le Cirque in New York.
Mrs.
Stein is an associate at Julien &amp; Schlesinger, a New York law firm.
She  graduated from Northwestern University and received a law degree from American University.
Her father is an agent at the New York Life Insurance Company in New York.


Sarah F. Touborg, Scott P. Moyers
Sarah Friis Touborg, a daughter of Margaret Bowers Touborg of New York and Dr.
Jens Touborg of Weston, Mass., was married yesterday to Scott Patrick Moyers, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Moyers of Falls Church, Va.
The Rev.
Anne F. C. Richards performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest  in New York.
Mrs.
Moyers, 27, is a sales representative in the college textbook division of McGraw-Hill in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University and received a master of philosophy degree in medieval and Renaissance literature from Cambridge University in England.


A Chip at TV Violence
When all else fails, is technology the answer?
Bill Gates seems to think so,  but others might not find it that simple.
Take TV violence.
Many people say children shouldn't watch it, but often parents aren't around to monitor what's on.
So some suggest putting computer chips in new sets that let parents block violent programs.
Last week, a House-Senate panel voted to require just that.


POSTINGS: Making Downtown a Round-the-Clock Village;Office Building Going Residential
The first major project bringing reality to visions of a bustling, round-the-clock village in downtown Manhattan's commercial canyons is to begin by spring when workers start converting a 21-story Italian Renaissance building  at 25 Broad Street from office to residential space.
The 500,000-square-foot building, erected at the turn of the century, has 15-foot-high ceilings on its first four floors and a 125-foot-long marble lobby, all of which are in the conversion plan of the architect, Costas Kondylis.


BAD BEHAVIOR
Prose aggrandizes Dobyns's case by comparing it to the Salem witch trials and the Army-McCarthy hearings.
Her friend Dobyns, with both a prestigious position  and a drinking problem, should have taken care to preserve the former with a cure for the latter long before it came to the stage of throwing drinks at students.
Apparently, when his problem only reached the stages of public censure, suspension and economic punishment was he willing to address the extent of his alcoholism.
Prose is correct that this incident is not sexual harassment.
It is a simple case of alcohol abuse.


The Hubbub Over Prices Of Term Life Insurance
PREMIUMS for term life insurance have fallen to record lows, and the industry is using that good news to sell more insurance.
But it has added a curious twist: buy now, the sales pitch goes, because these prices will not last.
Nice try.


Correction
A caption on Nov. 26 about the work of the weaver Lenore Tawney misattributed a photograph of a weaving that resembles a reversed American flag.
The photographer was Lisa Kahane, not George Erml.


Three Finnish Festivals Are Chilly, Of Course
Ice and snow are the focus of three consecutive festivals in Finland this winter.
First, Finnish championships in ice-hole swimming (which is exactly what it sounds like), kick sled and skating competitions and a winter outdoor crafts market will be elements of the Snowy Weeks Festival in Ahtari, a small town near the western coast of the country.
On each weekend between Jan. 27 and Feb. 25 a  different event will be featured.
For a schedule or more information: (358 65) 393 555; fax (358 65) 393 611.


'Where Does The Guilt Begin?'
To the Editor:
In "Taking Sides," Ronald Harwood cleverly sets up his two protagonists, and I fear that many viewers, including Matt Wolf, fell into the trap.


Welfare, End of
The following interactive encyclopedia entry looks back from the year 2015.
References to events before December 1995 are real; subsequent developments may  become so all too quickly.
SUMMARY.
For 60 years, until 1995, the United States Government ran a social program technically called Aid to Families with Dependent Children, and commonly known as welfare.
The program, which provided cash grants to indigent families, was abolished as part of a bipartisan deal that reduced Federal spending and transferred power to state governments.
At the time of its demise,  welfare was a thoroughly discredited program -- often accused of causing long-term poverty rather than helping people survive it.


Russians Confront a Ballot Made Daunting by Choices
When Russian voters take a look at their ballots for Sunday's parliamentary elections, some of them may yearn for the days when choices were limited to all  from column A.
Each voter will receive two pieces of paper: the first, which is enormous, will be for selecting one of 43 different parties.
The second ballot will list candidates running in the voter's district.
Of the 450 Members of Parliament, half of them will be chosen based on the results of the party preference vote.
The other half will be chosen in individuals races.


The Word That Brought Down the House
YESTERDAY, THE House erupted into partisan shouting," wrote Adam Clymer last  month in the Sunday Week in Review section of The New York Times, "after Representative John L. Mica said of Mr.
Clinton and his shifting views on budget balancing, 'We're here to nail the little bugger down.' "
The Florida Republican was ruled out of order for his choice of a word, and was permitted to resume speaking only after the House voted to let him; then he  apologized.


Injured Evangelist To Leave Hospital
Billy Graham, the evangelist, could go home from a New York hospital today or tomorrow, nursing four fractured ribs -- not just the one detected after a fall  earlier last week, his spokesman said.


Gingrich Ally Won't Run
Representative Bob Walker, a Pennsylvania Republican who was a top lieutenant to Speaker Newt Gingrich in pushing the Contract With America, said on Friday that he would not seek re-election in 1996.
Mr.
Walker said his decision to step down after 20 years in Congress was not  based on bickering among the new majority Republicans or his failure to win a leadership post.


St. Moritz
Like many ski resorts in the Alps, St.
Moritz was a spa and summer vacation spot long before it became a winter retreat favored by the rich and chic, among  others.
Its glittering site in the remote upper Engadine Valley, among clear lakes and wooded slopes surrounded by 12,000-foot peaks, facing southwest and attracting intense sunshine and the dry alpine air, made it an ideal place for taking a cure.
In a sly move in the fall of 1864, a local innkeeper, Johannes Badrutt, made  a bet with a group of his regular customers from England.
If they returned in winter and found less sunshine than in summer, he would pay their travel costs.


Birth Control Pill Risk Affirmed but Called Low
New research by the World Health Organization provides more evidence that some newer birth control pills may double the risk of blood clots compared with  older types.
But two studies by the organization, published today in The Lancet, a British medical journal, agreed with earlier studies that the risk is very low for the millions of women worldwide who take the pills.


Why Beijing Is So Afraid Of Mr. Wei
ASK average Chinese to name their most important goal and the answer will be: a good job; wealth; a visa to America or Europe; more wealth, or a good education.
Way down the list, perhaps just below dental work, would be: a democracy movement to change China.


A Decorative Paint Team Transforms Houses
OH, the power of paint!
If you can't tell a faux bois from a faux marbe, relax and listen to artists like Fred Crawford of Mount Kisco, Patricia Goldschmidt of Larchmont and Jane Hassler of Mamaroneck.
They specialize in decorative painting.
"Faux marbe looks opulent like veined marble," Mr.
Crawford said.
"It was very popular during the 80's. Faux bois, which resembles various wood grains, is more in demand in the 90's."


Up and Coming: Aunjanue Ellis and Carrie Preston;Two Young Performers Ride 'The Tempest'
THEY HAVE TRAVELED separate but similar trajectories, these two young actresses: small-town childhoods in the Deep South, leaps from the safety of small colleges to large universities, intense immersions in intensely serious theater schools.
Now, as major supporting players to Patrick Stewart's shipwrecked Duke, they have shot out of post-graduate obscurity together aboard  the starship "Tempest."
Carrie Preston of Macon, Ga., has pulled up a chair near several pale Kabuki  puppets beneath the large Broadhurst stage and its circle of sand -- the site of Prospero's magic island on Broadway.
She is 28, looks 21, with her close-cropped blond hair, and plays 15 as Miranda, the Duke's daughter.
Often presented as a simpering miss, Miranda in this production has dirt on her face and muscles.
She is a wild child who discovers sex and then the world.


Only Connected
LIFE ON THE SCREEN Identity in the Age of the Internet.
By Sherry Turkle. 347 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.


Top Dog


Where Bootleggers Thrive, Labels Follow
IN THIS HOLIDAY SEASON OF pop retrospectives, boxed sets and greatest-hits compilations, let's not forget some of the most unheralded and hard-working of Santa's helpers: the people who make bootleg recordings.
For legal reasons among others, they tend to prefer anonymity (rather than a  possible jail term), but in their self-effacing way they have preserved decades of musical history.
They make sure that performers' official stories --  their studio recordings and carefully selected (and sometimes doctored) live albums -- face the reality check of what's left behind: demo versions of songs,  outtakes and concert performances that were supposed to be vaguely remembered, not recorded.


TERROR ON AN EIGHT-HOUR SHIFT
The "toughest job in America" is being a prisoner in one of our vile prisons.
It is not being a guard.
Every concentration-camp guard in history probably thought he had it rough, just like the correction officers in your article.


No Headline
It's a new game; a new time, a new beginning, and we shall move forward together." -- SHIMON PERES, Isarel's Prime Minister, on Sygrian peace talks. [1:6.]


Liberties;Nixon at Hilton Head
With Bill Clinton enjoying, you might say, a renaissance, it's time again for touch football, toadying and group empathy.
The Starbucks meritocracy will soon  head down to Hilton Head for Renaissance Weekend, that earnest festival of public policy and personal vulnerability.
While the organizers have rather hilariously threatened to expel anyone caught using Renaissance friendships for "political purposes," the retreat's most famous guest, Bill Clinton, has ignored that stricture.


BAD BEHAVIOR
As much as I would love to join the opposition to the feminist crusade for political correctness, Francine Prose pushes the case too far.
When I was a college teacher, I never would have doubted that throwing a drink in a student's face or commenting on a female student's breasts would jeopardize my job.
In an earlier day, it would have been called "unprofessional  conduct." WILLIAM A. BAKER Bloomfield, N.J.


A Hint of Smoked Salmon and Holiday Dishes Past
EVEN though I eat it all year round, I still associate smoked salmon with holidays.
When I was growing up in England, it was served plain, with brown bread and butter as a first course for Christmas dinner or on New Year's Eve.
Now, an equally good first course can be a carpaccio made with very fresh raw salmon, cut into thin slices and sprinkled with extra-virgin olive oil and chives.
Another favorite of mine is inspired by Chef Anton Mossiman, who is based in  London.
He makes a terrine that consists of layers of smoked salmon wrapped around a creamy mousse of smoked trout spiked with fresh horseradish.


Mr. Bildt's Responsibility in Bosnia
The Bosnia peace agreement signed in Paris last week not only provides for an international peacekeeping force to oversee the military aspects of the Dayton accord.
It also provides for civilian monitoring of the accord's political provisions.
These govern such critically important issues as the investigation of war crimes, election arrangements, refugee relief and resettlement and the distribution of $6 billion of international reconstruction aid.
The nations sponsoring the agreement have handed the execution of these political provisions to Carl Bildt to supervise.
He is a former Swedish Prime Minister who has served since June as the European Union's diplomatic mediator in the Balkans.


Editorial Notebook;Mr. Angleton and Mr. Ames
By the time I met James Jesus Angleton in the early 1980's, he was a discredited figure, a stooped, ashen-faced man left to tend to the orchids he loved and the conspiracy theories he could not let go.
During his heyday as head of counterintelligence at the Central Intelligence Agency he terrorized the organization in a ceaseless search for Russian spies.
In the world of counterintelligence, where nothing is assumed to be as it seems and everyone is presumed capable of betrayal, Mr.
Angleton saw treason at every turn.
He would tell me darkly of plots and deceptions that made the mind reel.
I think of Mr.
Angleton these days as I read of the real and devastating betrayal of Aldrich Ames.
Nothing Mr.
Angleton ever conjured came close to the treachery of Mr.
Ames, who for 10 years sold Moscow nearly every secret about American espionage activities in Russia.
With his help, the K.G.B. insinuated volumes of false information into the United States intelligence-gathering system, some of it reaching the President and some of it influencing American defense spending and foreign policy decisions.


For Jets, Nothing Good Ever Happens in Houston
In what has become the pro football equivalent of the ultimate nightmare, the Jets (3-11) will play the Oilers (5-9) Sunday (Channel 4, 1 P.M., New York time).
This may be the Oilers' last game in Houston and the outmoded Astrodome,  advertised as the Eighth Wonder of the World when it opened 30 years ago, and the Jets will hardly mourn.
Last year, in the final game of a 6-10 season, the Jets took a 24-10 beating  here.
They saw some of their veterans quit in midgame and learned that their general manager, Dick Steinberg, had stomach cancer.


The Confectioner's Art
While the Metropolitan Museum presents outstanding examples of the haute couture, a costume exhibition of a different order is being mounted nightly across town, at Lincoln Center.
Barbara Karinska's designs for the New York City Ballet's "Nutcracker" offer an object lesson in cut and construction.
Since the  start of this century, when Paul Poiret liberated women's torsos from their Victorian corsets, freedom of movement has been one of fashion's rallying cries.
And yet, many of the most eloquent solutions to the problem of dressing the body without hindering it have come not from the so-called laboratory of the couture but from Karinska, an engineer and an artist.
Born in 1886 in the Ukraine, Karinska immigrated to Paris, London and, finally, to New York.
In the recently published "Costumes by Karinska," Toni Bentley documents her work for the stage in Europe, for Broadway and Hollywood (she won an Oscar for "Joan of Arc"), for the Metropolitan Opera and the Ice Capades and, for more than 45 years, for George Balanchine and the New York City Ballet.
She died in 1983.


POSTINGS: Growing in the Boerum Hill Historic District;Brooklyn Gets a House and Garden
John and Cynthia Gillis already had their special, private garden in the Boerum Hill section of Brooklyn.
Now, with the approval of the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission, they are about to build a house designed to complement their garden, and the neighborhood.
It was a decade ago that Mr.
Gillis, an architect, and Mrs.
Gillis, a landscape designer, rented the Greek Revival house at 360 Pacific Street, with an option to buy the vacant lot next door at 362 Pacific.


Act II of Federal Shutdown: Some See Politics of Absurd
Cpl.
Yamashita Johnson locked the door of the National Gallery of Art at noon sharp today, leaving Karen Rose fuming on the street in esthetic deprivation, while Joan Phillips delighted inside at the windfall of being among the final gallery visitors to the Vermeer supershow.
"It's grandstanding," said Ms.
Phillips, speaking of the politicians, not the paintings, as she sympathized with Ms.
Rose and other citizens locked outside the museum, normally open until 5 P.M.
"You can't really shut down the Government," she said as the gallery crowd thinned down to a precious few savoring the unhurried serenity of Vermeer.
"These politicians are grandstanding."


2 Districts Face Uncertainties in Lost Revenue
WHEN the ownership of the Shoreham power plant transferred from Lilco to the  Long Island Power Authority three years ago, the property became exempt from paying property taxes.
That change affected the Shoreham-Wading River School District, which had been receiving about half of the $78 million in taxes from the power plant.
When Northrop Grumman decided to sell half its 500 acres in Bethpage, it sought a reduction in its assessment.
This month a settlement was reached that reduces the assessment 25 percent.
Of the $13 million in yearly taxes that the company had been paying $8 million to $9 million was for the Bethpage School District.


Blooms, Bracts and Greens for the Holidays, and Maybe After
PLANTS make splendid holiday gifts.
But in this busy week, it is best if recipients have some advance advice on what to do with them.
The gift plants have spent their growing time in a greenhouse, where they are kept at the right temperature and given the proper amounts of water and light.
Their growing period is timed so the blooms will be bursting out when you get them.


Devoted Parents Help Children With Special Needs Flourish
The woman was not a saint, but she said she wanted to be the foster mother of a child with special needs.
She was given Vadim -- a 2-year-old boy with severe  brain damage.
He had a seizure disorder and was unable to suck or swallow.
He could not walk or talk.
He spit up.
And he cried all weekend long.
On Monday morning, she carried Vadim back to the agency that had given him to her three days earlier.


Play It Again
DANGEROUS MEN By Geoffrey Becker. 161 pp.
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. $22.50.
GEOFFREY BECKER'S first collection of stories appears under a misleading title.
Its heroes -- vulnerable boys, tender adolescents and twenty-something musicians -- are hardly men at all, and none too dangerous either: a harmonica player returning from Europe with his girlfriend to an America woefully short on romance; two brothers running a small-time recording studio and vainly chasing the same femme fatale; a 15-year-old hitting the road with his hard-luck bluesman father.
Readers expecting fast-paced action will be disappointed, for "Dangerous Men" focuses less on what happens than on what doesn't.
These are stories about what is missed, lost, decided against or regretted, once the action is over.


New Law in Massachusetts Strict on Youth With Guns
Under a tough new mandatory-sentencing law being called the strictest youth gun legislation in the country, Massachusetts youths convicted of any gun-related charge will face a minimum six-month term in the custody of the state's Department of Youth Services.
Only four other states -- California, Georgia, Florida and Michigan -- require any sort of incarceration for a juvenile's first-time gun offense, according to State Representative Jim Brett, a sponsor of the Massachusetts bill.
It was signed into law by Gov.
William F. Weld last month and takes effect on Feb. 25.


Correction
Two picture captions on Dec. 3, with an article about the selection of Tibetan lamas, were reversed.
The picture on the left showed Gyaincain Norbu, the Chinese Government's choice for Panchen Lama.
At the right was Gedhun Choekyi Nyima, who had been selected for the same office by a monastic search committee.
A correction in this space last Sunday referred incorrectly to the dispute.
It did not concern the selection of a Dalai Lama.


Zaleski, Assailing His Critics, Says He's Still on the Job
DESPITE reports to the contrary, Mayor Terence M. Zaleski of Yonkers said last week that he had not disappeared from City Hall or abdicated his $102,878-a-year responsibilities since he lost his re-election bid in November to John D. Spencer, the Republican and Conservative majority leader of the City  Council.
"I'm not a no-show," Mr.
Zaleski said in a phone interview from his home.
"I've been at City Hall several times over the last several weeks, and I have always been reachable, either on my car phone or by beeper."


Christmas Sounds Ring In the Season
MANY "Messiahs" and numerous "Nutcrackers" have been sung and danced since Thanksgiving, and the outpouring of holiday music continues unabated.
As always, audiences will be inspired by familiar carols and the works of composers like David Willcocks, John Rutter, Michael Praetorius, Ralph Vaughan Williams and Antonio Vivaldi.
The United Methodist Church of Katonah takes to the streets today caroling.
Bundled up and bearing flashlights, parishioners and friends will set out from the church at 6 P.M., lingering longer at the homes of the elderly and shut-ins, and returning to the church for hot cider, cocoa and cookies.


Lucca's Pleasures
To the Editor: Susan Spano extolled the virtues of Lucca, Tuscany's "alternative city," in her article "Frugal Traveler: Behind Lucca's Walls" (Nov  26).
I would like to echo her.
My wife and I spent a week in Lucca in October.
We chose it over other Tuscan cities because it is a good center for reaching other spots in Tuscany and because it is, as Ms.
Spano points out, a gem in itself.


On Tokyo's Packed Trains, Molesters Are Brazen
Every morning, millions of Japanese brace for the ugly commuting hurly-burly: the train ride.
For Samu Yamamoto, the sights and smells of the rude and uncouth rush-hour crowd conjure up sensations that propel him into spells of debauchery.
Mr.
Yamamoto, 42, is something of a professional molester, and for him the subways are a feast of touchables: long legs, smooth necks, slender breasts and a cornucopia of behinds in all shapes and sizes.


Heresy Trial Is Moved After Connecticut Episcopalians Protest
The upcoming heresy trial of a retired Episcopal bishop may be a historic occasion, but at least one diocese wants nothing to do with it.
After receiving an outpouring of complaints from members of his diocese, a Connecticut bishop has withdrawn his offer to let the trial be held there.


Behind the Crime In South Africa
To the Editor:
"As Crime Soars, South African Whites Leave" (front page, Dec. 12) reports that wealthy white South Africans are willing to trade their small mansions, full-time maids and employer-provided Mercedeses for a basic house and a basic motor vehicle somewhere else.


Geologists Zero In on Sodom and Lot's Wife
Geologists say they have pinpointed the probable site of the biblical cities  of Sodom and Gomorrah and worked out a theory of why Lot's wife was reported to  have ended up as a pillar of salt.
The findings by two British geologists working in Canada were printed in the  Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology on Friday.


Ann I. McClellan, James J. Kery
Ann Ivison McClellan, the director of marketing at the World Wildlife Fund, the international conservation organization based in Washington, was married yesterday to James John Kery, a financial planning and investment adviser in New York.
The Rev.
William McD.
Tully officiated at St.
Bartholomew's Episcopal Church in New York.


On the State's Roadways This Week: 9 Trouble Spots to Avoid
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.
1.
INTERSTATE 80 between Parsippany and Teaneck.
Sporadic eastbound lane closings, Monday through Friday, 9 AM. to 3 P.M.


The Mayor Goes Shopping on 125th Street


Books in Brief: FICTION
ANNOTATIONS By John Keene. New Directions, paper, $8.95.


Whose Savings, Anyway?
To the Editor: Your article about long-term care and asset depletion ("Live Long! And Prosper,  Too?" Minding Your Business, Nov. 12) is frighteningly indicative of what's wrong with our country's mind-set.
Savings are primarily for one's old age; if there's anything left for the children, fine.
But there is absolutely nothing tragic about using one's assets for nursing home care and letting one's children build their own nest eggs.
Furthermore, the solution for finding long-term care  is careful savings and, in some cases, long-term care insurance.
Contrary to your article, the answer is not to "give your money to your children" or to "turn money into exempt assets" so that Medicaid can foot the bill.
It's time we acknowledged reality.
The Government isn't a bottomless trough of dollars to be  lapped at endlessly.
MICHAEL W. BLUMSTEIN Scarsdale, N.Y., Nov. 12


BAD BEHAVIOR
We were fortunate enough to participate in one of Dobyns's poetry courses; it was a pivotal experience in our academic life.
Our class was positively charged  with sexual energy -- on the part of the students.
And more often than not, the  women were writing the salty lines.
The tone of the classroom was set by 19- and 20-year-olds -- racy, sexual, sophomoric -- but Dobyns always brought us back to poetry and craft.
ABBE ARONSON LAURIE GWEN SHAPIRO New York


At 30, a Spacecraft Is Still Going in Circles
It's nice when your friends remember to call, especially when you're turning  30 and you're 31 million miles from home.
Pioneer 6, a spacecraft launched on a journey through the solar system on Dec. 16, 1965, and expected to have burned out long ago, got a slightly early happy birthday call on Friday and answered back.


Long Island Vines
Merlot Peconic Bay Vineyards, Cutchogue, 1993. About $15.


Fall From Grace
WHAT a wonderful novel is "The Damnation of Theron Ware"!
First published by  Harold Frederic (1856-98) to great acclaim in 1896, it is now virtually forgotten.
I first discovered Frederic's book in the mid-1960's when I was teaching American literature at the University of Windsor; it had been reprinted by Fawcett, billed as a "classic of American realism," with an introduction by Van Wyck Brooks.
For me, "The Damnation of Theron Ware" provided an odd, unexpected link between the crude naturalism of the young Stephen Crane (whose first novel, "Maggie: A Girl of the Streets," was published in 1893) and the elegant dissections of wealthy New York society of Edith Wharton (whose second full-length novel, "The House of Mirth," was published in 1905).
The theme of Frederic's story -- of a young minister's "damnation" -- would seem to reverberate with echoes of Nathaniel Hawthorne, but in fact it reveals the barest glimmer of the Hawthornian obsession with sin and mankind's relationship  to God.
Instead, it has more in common with Oscar Wilde's 1891 novel, "The Picture of Dorian Gray," in which a young, ingenuous hero is "poisoned" by a book of amoral hedonism and by his friendship with a mentor whose disregard for  convention completely unhinges him.


Ethos at Keio Academy Is Both Japanese and Fun
WHEN David McGuckin came to Keio Academy here as a basketball coach, he was told that students took soccer very seriously.
He did not appreciate how seriously until he was leaving basketball practice one night last January and heard a tapping noise coming from the middle of the soccer field.
When he went out to investigate he found two players juggling a soccer ball in the dark on the snow-covered field.
Keio Academy, a Japanese high school, won the New York State Class C soccer championship on Nov. 18 at Canisius College in Buffalo, defeating Northrose-Walcott of Rochester 3 to 1.
The entire student body took the eight-hour bus ride to Buffalo.
In Japan it is a tradition to cancel classes and travel to championship games to show support for one's school.


A Salute to Other Holidays During the Holiday Season
HOLIDAYS from around the world figure in Christmas-season events today.
At the yearly Texaco Holiday Festival, from 1 to 4 P.M. today at the Hudson River Museum in Yonkers, the theme is "Winter in the Andes." Tahuantinsuyo and the Andean Dancers, two ensembles specializing in South American music and dance, will perform, and visitors may encounter minstrels in other parts of the museum, playing guitar and singing in Quechua, the language of the Andean people.
Slides of Andean scenes will be shown, and "Season of Light," the planetarium show at 1:30, 2:30 and 3:30 includes a musical celebration of Los Posadas as well as Hanukkah, Kwanzaa and such other exotic holidays as India's Diwali and Loy Krathong in Thailand.


THE MURDER BROADCASTING SYSTEM
HOW MUCH longer will Americans tolerate the cult of violence that passes for  "local news" on television?
Even as crime rates subside, the wicked nightly assault on our senses gets louder.
The more advanced the technology by which stations prepare their 10 or 11 P.M. summaries of the day, the greater the mayhem they import to arouse our anxiety and disturb our sleep.
Deliberate? You bet. Cynical? Completely. And pervasive.


SUNDAY December 17, 1995: GOOD BREEDING;As Hot as A Cucumber?
Can you still be as cool as a cucumber if a cucumber is orange?
It's too soon to say for sure, but the Department of Agriculture is betting that you can with  an experimental new cuke it has packed full of beta carotene.
This pigment, which the liver turns into vitamin A, is why carrots and cantaloupes are good for you -- and why they are orange.
So Philipp Simon, who breeds plants at a U.S.D.A. lab in Madison, Wis., and John Navazio, a plant geneticist, have added  it to cucumbers.
The new strains, which still taste like cukes, aren't as rich in beta carotene as carrots, Navazio says, but they compare favorably with many squashes and melons as a source of the nutrient.
In third-world tropical climates, Navazio notes, cucumbers are an important part of the diet but carrots are not.
"These people are short of carotene, and cukes could be a major source." He estimates that it will be five years before the orange cucumbers hit the marketplace and three before seeds are available to home gardeners.


Harlem Church Is Outpost of Empire;House of Prayer Built Wide Holdings on Devotion to Sweet Daddy Grace
Barnstorming the country in the 1920's and 30's, baptizing thousands at once  in rivers and beneath the spray of fire hydrants, an immigrant preacher who called himself Sweet Daddy Grace promised salvation and upward mobility to America's black and poor.
At revival meetings from Harlem and Washington to Charlotte, N.C., and Los Angeles, he flaunted his gold jewelry, flowing hair and five-inch fingernails while "love offerings" of cash rolled in from the faithful.
From those flamboyant beginnings, guided by that message of economic self-reliance, Daddy Grace's church, the United House of Prayer for All People,  has grown into an unusually prosperous religious organization.
A church that started out selling toothpaste and shoe polish now has extensive, and growing, real estate holdings in cities across the country.


Toothsome


Pop Briefs
'R. KELLY' Jive


Old Life Building Getting a New Look
To the Editor:
Your sad tale of the renovation of the erstwhile Life Building at 19 West 31st Street ("Old Life Building Getting a New Look," Nov. 5) notes that in its present incarnation the structure is called the Herald Square Hotel.


NCAA Goes to the Meadowlands To Ward Off Bootleg Vendors
Months before the 1996 NCAA Final Four basketball tournament, the NCAA is sending advance troops to the Meadowlands to combat bootleg merchandise.
NCAA representatives met with the local police and officials from East Rutherford, Carlstadt and the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority at the Meadowlands  on Tuesday to formulate strategies for cracking down on vendors of unauthorized  shirts and hats.
At every Final Four, the NCAA loses thousands of dollars to vendors of bogus  goods who use the four team logos and the NCAA-trademarked Final Four logo, said Jack Waters, the NCAA licensing director.


It May Have Tasted Good, But . . .
It's been three years since Wayne McLaren died of lung cancer at 51, thus ending an embarrassing interlude for tobacco makers in which Mr.
McLaren, a once rugged film stuntman who had appeared as the Marlboro Man in advertising, became a high-profile critic of smoking as his fatal illness progressed.
Last week his final role was taken over by Alan Landers, a 55-year-old former model and actor who touted Winstons in advertisements on billboards and subway walls and in magazines during the late 1960's.
Mr.
Landers, who speaks hoarsely  after having undergone two operations for lung cancer that he blames on smoking, is one of 12 Florida residents who filed lawsuits last week seeking damages from various tobacco companies and cigarette distributors.


Fighting Party Terror;How to Mix, Create the Right Mix And Not Get All Mixed Up
WILLIAM F. BUCKLEY JR. has this theory about parties. They are like bull rings.
Everyone, he says, has a "querencia" -- the tiny area within which the fighting bull fancies himself entirely safe.
People feel drawn to such sanctuaries -- i.e., a spouse, a topic of conversation or a person who greets you as if it were "the highlight of his day." But the lack of a querencia at a dinner table is like such moments "as when in a foxhole, or on a sinking boat, that you rediscover God and the need to utter a silent prayer," he writes.


Still Fishing


Team Is Carrot, Academics the Stick
AN afternoon practice session was about to start at the Church Street School  gymnasium here, where 15 youngsters in blue-and-white uniforms were already trying out jump shots and dribbling basketballs down the court on a recent Saturday afternoon.
On the sidelines, a would-be rookie held his ground as he tried to persuade the coach, Randy Harper, to give him a chance on the Winbrook Pride Wildcats.
The team, for youngsters 10 through 13, won a championship trophy from the North American Youth Basketball Tournament in its first season last year in Green Bay, Wis.
Unmoved by the recruit's pleading eyes, Mr.
Harper shot back a barrage of questions.
"I've heard your grades aren't that high in English," said Mr.
Harper to the sixth grader, who said he was doing passing work.


Switzer Takes the Lead In 'All My Cowboys'
On Barry Switzer's desk at the Dallas Cowboys' sprawling complex here is a clear block of crystal with these words inscribed inside: "There is no limit to what can be done if it doesn't matter who gets the credit."
"I believe that," said the harried 58-year-old coach, whose team will attempt to halt a much-ballyhooed two-game losing streak when it battles the Giants at Texas Stadium on Sunday.
"The feeling is that because I was out of football for  five years between Oklahoma and the Cowboys that I just lost all sense of football. It's false. I watched the game. I kept in touch with it. Football is like Mozart and Chopin. How much has that changed in 200 years? The sophistication is in the passing game, and that is where I have had to study most. But players are players. And I know a good one when I see one.


Double the Plugs for Two Stocks
IF great minds think alike, the personal finance magazines might be expected  to cross paths a good dozen times with their stock picks for the coming year.
But among the 75-odd recommendations from the forecast 1996 issues of Worth,  Smart Money, Money and Kiplinger's, only two stocks appear more than once: Caterpillar and Citicorp.


Ready To Be Shabbos Goy, Police Officer's Never Asked
To the Editor:
I was intrigued by the Soapbox essay about the Shabbos Goy who ended up as a  mounted policeman ("Tales of a Shabbos Goy," Dec. 3).
I'm one police officer who never made it, but my father and many members of my family were Shabbos Goys in  their day, either in Harlem (when it had a large Jewish population) or the Bronx.
Unlike the mounty, my father was paid: two cents for turning on the lights, five cents for making a fire in the stove.
The money was left at a mutually agreed upon location.


Corrections
The Perspectives column on Nov. 12, about the Red Hook waterfront, misstated  the ownership of two buildings.
The Beard Street warehouse is owned by a developer, Gregory O'Connell -- as noted in the first reference to the building  and in the picture caption -- not leased from the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
A separate building, at 480-500 Van Brunt Street, is city property through tax foreclosure; it is not privately owned.
A reader's letter dated Nov. 15 pointed out the errors; this correction was delayed by an editing lapse.


A Road Map From Pataki: $3 Billion and 5 Years
Gov.
George E. Pataki announced on Friday that he wants $3.15 billion set aside for roadway and bridge construction in New York City over the next five years.
The money is part of a $12.6 billion capital plan for roadway and bridge  imporvements around the state.
The proposal can be modified by both the Legislature and the Governor over the next five years.
Many projects were planned under Mr.
Pataki's predecessor, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, and Mr.
Pataki is continuing their financing; other projects remain to be chosen for part of the $3.15 billion.
CLIFFORD J. LEVY


Getting Walloped For Water
SINCE 1987, 70 percent of the buildings and homes in New York City have seen  the installation of water meters.
Some, among them some co-ops and condominiums, are still waiting for bills.
Others have been suddenly hit with whopping charges.
What's going on here?
"It's a nightmare," said David Kuperberg, president of Cooper Square Realty,  a real-estate management company in Manhattan.


How Do You Solve a Problem Like Cityspire?
Cityspire, at 150 West 56th Street, is the skyscraper that whistled in the wind -- until some decorative slats were removed from its cooling tower.
But the building's other problems have proved harder to solve.
When Cityspire's tower topped out 11 feet over its permitted height in 1987,  city officials penalized the developer, Ian Bruce Eichner, by ordering three floors of studios for dance companies added atop what was supposed to have been  a covered pedestrian arcade midblock between 55th and 56th Streets.


Cries of 'Fore!' (And 'Ouch!') On 242d St.
At $21.50 for 18 holes, the Douglaston Golf Course, a city-owned course that  is leased out to a private management company, is popular with local golfers.
But along 242d Street, where homes lie 200 feet directly below the 14th hole's tee-off area, the golf course is considered akin to an enemy battlefield.
Residents there say they are exposed, even in the winter, to a barrage of golf balls that smash into their cars, their windows and themselves, and they are lobbying the city to put up a net to stop the errant missiles.


Cake in Face, Board in Uproar
Community Board 3's public meetings have always been among the city's most volatile.
Impromptu protests, name-calling and the occasional fistfight among anarchists, squatters and advocates of real-estate development have become the norm in recent years.
But after a cake was thrown in the face of the chairman, Albert Fabozzi, at last month's meeting, Mr.
Fabozzi decided he had had enough.
Citing what he said were safety concerns, he convened this month's meeting, last Monday night,  at the board's cramped headquarters on East Fourth Street instead of at Public School 20, at Houston and Essex Streets, where it is usually held.
And he barred people without business before the board from attending.
Mr.
Fabozzi also canceled the meeting's public session, during which anyone can speak out on any  issue.


Ruth G. Israels, William Rosenwald
Ruth Goldstein Israels, a former teacher, and William Rosenwald, the investor and philanthropist, were married last evening in Mr.
Rosenwald's apartment in New York.
Dr.
Ronald B. Sobel, the senior rabbi of Congregation Emanu-El in New  York, performed the ceremony.
The bride, 82, was a substitute teacher in the New York City Public Schools,  and is a graduate of Hunter College.
She is the daughter of the late Elizabeth and Henry Goldstein.


Dr. Management Strikes Again
MANAGING IN A TIME OF GREAT CHANGE By Peter F. Drucker. 371 pp.
New York: Truman Talley Books/Dutton. $24.95.
PETER F. DRUCKER, as the toastmaster would say, needs no introduction.
Like the toastmaster, though, I'll give you one anyway.
Peter Drucker is Dr.
Management, the person who discovered that the vast numbers of people who yearn  to run corporations would ante up the price of a book for broad insights into the way business works.
While others have played this game well -- Tom Peters and "In Search of Excellence" come to mind -- Mr.
Drucker is the iron man.
In a  seemingly endless series of tomes beginning with "The End of Economic Man" (1939), he has said just about everything worth saying about running corporations.


Susan Bernstein, I. M. Leitman
Susan Terry Bernstein, a daughter of Dorothy and Daniel Bernstein of North Woodmere, L.I., is to be married today to Dr.
I.
Michael Leitman, a son of Josie Goodman of Philadelphia and Malcolm Leitman of Jenkintown, Pa.
Rabbi Jeffrey Miller is to officiate at Temple Israel of Lawrence, L.I.
The bride is a sales representative at the David N. Company, a women's clothing manufacturer in New York.
She graduated from the University of Maryland.


For Some, the Government's Paralysis is Getting Serious
BOSTONIANS shiver in subfreezing weather.
Corn growers agonize over how many  acres to plant next year.
Investors hold onto stocks in a booming market, waiting for Congress to cut the capital gains tax.
In various ways, these people have all been caught in the political crossfire between Congress and the White House, victims of uncertainty over the Federal budget.


IN PERSON


Rail Europe
To the Editor: I was happy to read your Q &amp; A "The Train in Spain" (Oct. 15) about booking through a United States agent, Rail Europe, since I am planning a  trip to Spain and France.
However, your readers may want to know more.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
JAMAICA A Christmas Gospel Choir To Soothe Weary Shoppers


An Expert on Loss
IMPERFECT PARADISE By Shen Congwen.
Edited by Jeffrey Kinkley.
Translated by Jeffrey Kinkley, Peter Li, William MacDonald, Caroline Mason and David Pollard. 537 pp.
Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. $42.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.


U.S. Writer and Aide Wounded in Russia
An American journalist and his Georgian assistant were injured today during fighting in the Russian republic of Chechnya.


Pop Briefs
THE RENTALS: 'RETURN OF THE RENTALS' Maverick/Reprise


Blooms, Bracts abd Greens for the Holidays
PLANTS make splendid holiday gifts.
But in this busy week, during which they  usually are received, it is best to be have some advance advice on what to do with them.
The gift plants have spent their growing time in a grower's greenhouse, where they are kept at the right temperature and given the proper amounts of water and light.
Their growing period is timed so the blooms will be bursting out when you get them.


Wanted: Jolly Fellows, Beards a Plus
FINDING a Santa Claus who looks like the real thing is not easy.
No one knows this better than Leslie Catlin of Berlin, who is in the business of supplying Santas to malls, shopping centers and private parties.
So Ms.
Catlin is forever on the lookout for Santa look-alikes or at least reasonable facsimiles.
And for a long time one of her best prospects was Bill Welch, a Scout master to one of her sons.


Ad Campaign Brings Responses From Companies
SEVENTY-FIVE leads from companies that are interested in relocating have been generated from an advertising campaign promoting Westchester as a prime business location.
The commercials, sponsored by the Westchester Business Partnership, a nonprofit joint venture of the public and private sectors, have been appearing on cable television and radio since September.
The spots feature business executives explaining why they have chosen to locate to or expand within the county, and they give a number (800-791-6683) to call for information.


A First Step, However Imperfect
To the Editor:
Michael Kimmelman's article "Culture and Race: Still on America's Mind" [Nov. 19], about the 1969 exhibition "Harlem on My Mind" at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, does not mention an event that we who lived through the period remember vividly: the Ocean Hill-Brownsville school dispute in 1968 that led to  a teachers' strike and that was probably the seminal event in race relations in  New York City since the race riots of the Civil War.


In Oklahoma City, the Holidays Are a Season of Sorrow and Remembrance
With time and effort, the great scar that was the site of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building is beginning to heal, the wreckage of the April 19 bombing replaced by grass and red dirt as raw as the earth on a grave.
Tractors  grumble over it, packing it down.
It is too early for official monuments, the people of this city say, or even  a sign.
Instead, an ever-changing array of offerings are left on the chain-link  fence that marks off as sacred ground the place where 168 lives were lost.


E-Mail
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review


Grant Gets a Kick Out of Club Knick
He walks briskly through the hall that leads from the locker room to the floor.
His legs are desperately trying to keep pace with his shoulders and his upper torso.
Like a wind-up action figure, Gary Grant keeps moving toward the court, elbows swaying, head upright.
"What up, baby?" he says to a teammate.


Life Term in Murder Case
A man was sentenced to 25 years to life in prison on Friday for murdering a German tourist.
The man, Xou Yang, 20, pleaded guilty to murder and robbery in the May 16, 1994, shooting of Gisela Pfleger of Emmerich.
Her husband, Klaus, was wounded in the robbery in the San Jacinto Mountains.


Year of the Dragon
WHAT happened to Paul Gwo-Shang Liu should happen more often.
In 1983 Mr.
Liu was just another casino bartender.
A year later, as one of Atlantic City's first full-time Asian casino hosts, he was too busy to wield swizzle sticks.
Although Mr.
Liu, a 47-year-old Chinese-American, is fluent in Burmese, Urdu, Pakistani and three Chinese dialects, he spent most of his time as a host translating the English spoken by the casino's Asian-born gamblers into something American casino executives could understand.


The Return of the Conquering Jackets
WHEN HUNDREDS OF thousands of American pilots, bombardiers, gunners and navigators returned home after World War II, they put aside their khakis, boots  and duffle bags.
But the one thing many of them kept was their leather flight jackets, which were often emblazoned with images of tigers, rabbits, bombers or  voluptuous women.
They wore them as mementos of the Allied victory much as medieval knights had paraded around castle courtyards in full armor following the Crusades.
Spurred in part by this year's celebrations of the 50th anniversary of the war's end, the popularity of flight jackets is greater today than ever.
The originals are bought as nostalgia items or historical artifacts by ex-G.I.'s, by collectors of war memorabilia and by retro-fashion buffs.
The jackets are now as fashionable in Tokyo, London, Paris and Munich, as in New York and Los Angeles.
These days too, fakes and reproductions are proliferating: Ralph Lauren stocks undecorated versions, and Hammacher Schlemmer sells several thousand a year, at  $369 each.


Loss in Theft By L.I. Couriers Is $35 Million
Robert and Susanna Scaretta used their armored car company to defraud several banks of $35.8 million, a court-appointed official testified today in a hearing  that will determine the couple's sentences for their fraud convictions a year ago.
The official, Jeffrey Stark, whose job was to determine the size of the loss, reported that six banks had filed claims against the Scarettas totaling $79 million and that only $43 million had been recovered.
The Scarettas used the missing money to cover losses at Atlantic City casinos, operate a private plane  and take expensive vacations, according to testimony in their trial before Judge Arthur D. Spatt in Federal District Court here.


Through the Dust, Alpine Beauty
BEFORE my husband, Duke, and I left for a two-week driving vacation through southern Chile, I was repeatedly told that the Lake District was just like Switzerland.
I have traveled all around Switzerland and this description is only half right.
The Lake District does have alpine mountains, storybook villages set on azure lakes, thrilling skiing, expensive hotels and many citizens of European descent.
But unlike the Swiss, the Chileans haven't realized that some  visitors like to balance their natural wonders with good shopping.
In Chile, it's genuinely difficult to find postcards; in fact, the amiable people seem a little surprised that a foreigner would vacation in their country.
Temuco, 422 miles south of Santiago, is the gateway to the Lake District.
It  was founded in 1881, after a treaty with the fiercely tenacious Mapuche, who had managed to fend off first the Incas and then the Spanish conquistadors.
Most tourists fly to Temuco from Santiago, the Chilean capital, rent a car, and take  off for the nearby water-sports and ski resorts, but the city has considerable charm and the best Mapuche crafts in southern Chile.
In many ways, it's like stepping into an old Western town.
A visitor can watch cattle auctions in the stockyards behind the railway and see Chilean cowboys on horseback, in flat-brimmed hats and woolen ponchos.


Britain Announces Winners Of Marshall Scholarships
The British Embassy has announced the 40 American college students who have won Marshall Scholarships this year for two years of study at a British university.
Far more public college students than usual won the honor, which was established by the British Government in 1953 in gratitude for United States aid through the Marshall Plan after World War II.


Books in Brief: NONFICTION
MEN IN BLACK By John Harvey. University of Chicago, $29.95.


Russian Democracy: A Voter's-Eye View
WITH 43 parties competing in today's parliamentary elections, Russian voters  have been deluged by in 60-second, 30-second and 10-second political television  commercials.
Many of them were as gauzy, slick and elliptical as the best of Madison Avenue.
Of all the major parties only the Communists declined to pay for commercial advertising time -- boasting that they are too poor and high minded to indulge in bourgeois campaigning.
But, then again, they already had name recognition.


Corrections
The listing of notable books of the year on Dec. 3 omitted an entry.
It should have read:


Algerian Militants Execute Islamic Leaders
Two top leaders of Algeria's Islamic movement were executed by militants in the movement a month ago, the official Algerian press service reported today.
The death of Mohammed Saeed and Abdrrezak Redjam by firing squad after a trial conducted by the Armed Islamic Group had been reported earlier in the week by two underground Islamic publications.


Vatican Reaffirms Its Policy on Jerusalem
The Vatican, in an oblique reference to comments by Leah Rabin, the widow of  Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel, said today that its position on the status of Jerusalem remained unchanged.
Mrs.
Rabin said Thursday after a private audience with Pope John Paul II, that he had acknowledged Jerusalem's "double role" as capital of Israel and a holy city to Jews, Christians and Muslims.


Austrian Right Looks for Gain Today
With polls about to open for Austria's most important elections in half a century, Jorg Haider had every reason to smile Friday night as he strode into the cavernous Hofburg, part of the giant palace from which Austro-Hungarian emperors once ruled.
Mr.
Haider, already Europe's most successful far-right politician, is poised  to make new gains in the parliamentary elections on Sunday.
The thousands who cheered him at his Hofburg rally, he hopes, will soon propel him to the peak of  power.


MARY, MARY, QUITE CONTRARY
Mary's insecurities only make her more endearing.
Today I reflect fondly on the bygone Saturday night ritual of turning on her show.


E. D. H. Johnson, 84, Authority On Arts and Letters of Britain
Edward Dudley Hume Johnson, a longtime professor at Princeton University who  was an authority on aspects of British arts and letters, died on Dec. 9 at the Princeton Medical Center in New Jersey.
He was 84 and lived in Princeton.
The university announced his death last week.
The cause was lung cancer, said his daughter, Victoria Pickering.


BAD BEHAVIOR
I was a student of Dobyns's in a creative-writing program, so I know firsthand that he can be intimidating and brusque.
But these aspects of his personality never impaired his effectiveness in the classroom, which is probably a better place to judge the merit of a teacher than a cocktail party.
It bodes badly for American letters when young writers and literary scholars seek to prohibit language, salty or otherwise.
Furthermore, I'm surprised students were so willing to let a powerful bureaucratic institution determine the difference between appropriate and inappropriate speech.
Precedents like this have a way of coming back to haunt you.
Listen to these students howl when  the same committee decides to censor a sexually explicit poem in a school literary review.


No Bull? Scrutinize This Russian TV Campaign Ad
WHAT'S a Russian voter to do?
One unanticipated consequence of democracy has been the wide assortment of animals, pornography stars, cosmonauts and other surrogates enlisted for campaign commercials in behalf of candidates from the 43 parties competing in today's parliamentary elections.


Corrections
Because of a computer entry error, a chart last Sunday about the votes of Congressional representatives from New York, New Jersey and Connecticut misstated the party affiliation of Rep.
Susan Molinari.
She is a Republican.


TERROR ON AN EIGHT-HOUR SHIFT
When society places a person behind bars, it has a moral obligation to do whatever can reasonably be done to change that person before he or she goes back into the stream of society.
It is unacceptable to merely lock up inmates and throw away the key.
Work, education, training and other programs in prison provide the formal mechanisms to attempt a change.
Rehabilitation has labored under the idea that nothing works.
When such an assumption is made, meaningful efforts subside and are replaced by simple notions of incapacitation, crime control and "get tough" approaches.
Prison populations increase and inmates simply mark time.


Reform Finds Cold Comfort In Russia's Agonized Voters
The auditorium was shabby, poorly lighted, and freezing.
Most of the seats were empty and the speaker -- practically the only person there not wearing an overcoat -- couldn't seem to get the microphone to work.
People seemed restless, embarrassed, bored.
The chubby man at the podium, a principal architect of Russia's remarkable journey from Communism to democracy,  was losing ground with nearly every word he spoke.


Ann M. Benson, Alexander Burney
Ann Mary Benson, the daughter of Bruce D. Benson and Nancy L. Benson, both of Denver, was married yesterday to Alexander Kenneth Burney, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Derek H. Burney of Montreal.
The Rev.
Bruce Moncreiff performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Vail Chapel in Vail, Colo.
Mrs.
Burney, 25, and her husband, 27, work at Jones Intercable, a cable television company in Englewood, Colo.
She is a manager of corporate sales for the Mind Extension University, and he is the manager of Canadian business development.


Is Simpler Better? State Readies New Rules for Building
New Jersey is about to undergo a subtle but important change in the way houses, and neighborhoods, are built.
Until now, every city and town has had its own standards governing development sites: how wide each street should be, what the sewer pipes should be made of, whether sidewalks are required and so on.
But under regulations that are to take effect next summer, all residential developments would be subject to the same guidelines.


Sports of The Times;3 'Champions' Scout Tyson's Frustration
AT a big heavyweight fight it's usually the other way around: the champion is defending the title and the challengers are at ringside, woofing and wailing for an opportunity.
But as Mike Tyson flattened Buster Mathis Jr. in the third round last night at the Spectrum, he swaggered in the ring while the three champions -- Frank Bruno, Bruce Seldon and Frans Botha -- were at ringside scouting him.


Ousted Labor Chief Has No Regrets
Four months have passed since Lane Kirkland was chased from his position atop the nation's labor movement, but his wounds remain raw and his sentiments bitter and defiant.
Mr.
Kirkland, who was president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. for 16 years, does not have a kind word for John Sweeney, the man who now holds that job.
And he admits that he still harbors some ill feelings toward the labor leaders who, he says, plotted behind his back and anonymously skewered him in the news media to help push him from power.


Ready When (If E'er) the Muse Strikes
Here in the city of Wharton and Mailer and Janowitz, where literary yearnings flourish and fade, there is a subspecies of struggling writer for whom the dream doesn't die and the struggle roils on into old age.
These writers defy the stereotype of the striving scribbler: haunter of coffeehouses, pecking away at a PC.
Their turf is the senior citizens' centers;  Social Security sustains them.
But their ambition is the same.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Corruption Is Cited in Suit On Dismissals
The court-appointed trustees of a teamsters' union local are seeking damages  from a company that five years ago paid corrupt union members $500,000 to help dismiss about two dozen clerks at Kennedy International Airport.
The overseers filed a civil action on Friday seeking $6 million in actual and punitive damages from the freight forwarding company, Thyssen Haniel Logistics of Atlanta, and its parent in Duisburg, Germany, which has the same name.


Pop Briefs
TIM WARFIELD: 'A COOL BLUE' Criss Cross


Through the Eyes of Lucian Freud
IT IS PAST MIDNIGHT, AND LUCIAN FREUD is walking through London's National Gallery, his steps reverberating in the vast, empty rooms.
Having the great museum to himself is a privilege that comes from being England's most prominent  artist, a painter who has created some of the most potent and unflinching images of the human body in the late 20th century.
Add to this distinction his near obsession with privacy, and a schedule in which he paints each day until late into the evening.
And here he is in the gallery in the middle of the night, with all the lights on and the run of the place.


Officers Cleared in Man's Death
A grand jury has exonerated six police officers in the shooting death of a Lower East Side man who allegedly fired at them with a pistol.
The Manhattan District Attorney, Robert Morgenthau, said Friday that more than 50 witnesses had been interviewed and that 14 had appeared before the grand jury.


Gimme a Slice and a Jamaican Beef Patty
WHEN Carl Suares walked out of a driving rainstorm into Nick &amp; Joe's Pizza &amp;  Heros in downtown Brooklyn last week, his eyes passed right over the New York-style slices, the Sicilian pies, the stromboli, the calzones and the meatball heroes.
"I'll have," he said, "a Jamaican patty with cheese."


With No Budget, Clinton and Republicans Pass the Blame
With parts of the Government closed because of the budget impasse and thousands of workers threatened with furloughs on Monday, President Clinton and  Republican leaders in Congress spent the day blaming each other, but made no progress toward resolving their differences.
In a radio address this morning, the President accused the Republican Congress of forcing Government installations to close "in an effort to force through their unacceptable cuts in health care, education and the environment."


A Former Waiter Defends Restaurants of Chinatown
To the Editor:
In her Dec. 10 Soapbox essay "Unwelcome in Chinatown," Amy Wu says she is mistreated by people in Chinatown when they discover that she cannot speak Cantonese.
I worked as a waiter in a Chinese restaurant during my college years, and I never saw this happen.


Roadhouse Offers 90's Twist to Classic Dishes
ELI'S in Plainview is rooted in the diners and roadhouses of the past.
It is  a look through America's culinary rear-view mirror, a retrospective, featuring superior 90's versions of traditional, heartland dishes.
The new roadhouse, at 799 Old Country Road (931-8511), recaptures forgotten flavors and sometimes adds a new twist to middle American classics like meatloaf, hamburgers, barbecue ribs and chicken, pork chops, mashed potatoes and bread pudding.
Eli's, offering generously sized, reasonably priced portions, is  also an alternative to the splashy and expensive luxury scene.


Corrections
The Your Home column on Dec. 3, about moving costs, included a mathematical error in an example of insurance coverage that must be obtained by carriers licensed by the Interstate Commerce Commission.
A 200-pound article with a value insured for 60 cents a pound would be covered for $120, not $12.


The Mexican Collapse
THE MEXICAN SHOCK Its Meaning for the United States.
By Jorge G. Castaneda. 254 pp.
New York: The New Press. $23.
MEXICO'S violent awakening from the first-world dreams it entertained during  the presidency of Carlos Salinas de Gortari has been a boon to the country's publishers.
The struggle to explain what happened -- the peasant uprising, the political assassinations, the anticlimactic election and the economic collapse -- has become a melee of memoirs, exposes and campaign year kiss-and-tells.
Book parties in Mexico City are often no parties at all, but political events attended by hundreds of people and by great debate about who did what to whom.


Behind the Crime In South Africa
To the Editor:
Re "As Crime Soars, South African Whites Leave" (front page, Dec. 12): I am a high school history teacher.
I teach about Africa and spent last summer in South Africa on a Fulbright-Hayes grant.
Your article on white flight from South Africa disturbed and frustrated me.


Of Films and Greasy Palms: New York vs. Los Angeles
To the Editor:
I recently moved to New York from Los Angeles, where one does not have to venture far to cross a location shooting.
My own experience in that regard was generally different from the East 117th Street filming described in your Dec. 3  article "How Hollywood Did a Deal."


Memories of a Wedding Rendered in a Form to See and Touch
LONG after the wedding bouquet has been tossed, the rice thrown or the ritual wedding glass broken, newly married couples have little besides their wedding photographs to recall their ceremony.
To provide a personal wedding object that can be incorporated into the ceremony and later added to the couple's home, Corinne Soikin Strauss began the  Artists' Wedding Studio two and a half years ago.


Kansas Gets an Eyeful And Then Gets Even
Kansas 91, Indiana 83


Lara Zises, Benjamin Segal
Lara Shawn Zises, a daughter of Susan Zises and Jay Zises, both of New York,  was married last night to Benjamin Joseph Segal, a son of Dr.
Aida Segal and Carol Segal of Union, N.J.
Rabbi Jay Marcus officiated at the Essex House in New York.
Mrs.
Segal, 28, graduated from George Washington University and is studying for a master's degree in social work at Yeshiva University.
Her father is the president of Associated Capital Inc., an investment company in New York.
Her mother is the owner of Susan Lawton Ltd., a decoration and residential construction company in New York.


Tick Tock on Ice


At Home on the Range
HARD TWIST Western Ranch Women.
By Barbara Van Cleve.
Illustrated. 162 pp.
Santa Fe: Museum of New Mexico Press. $50.


A Science of Contrasts
THE SAME AND NOT THE SAME By Roald Hoffmann.
Illustrated. 294 pp.
New York: Columbia University Press. $29.95.
TO savor the beauty of objects far too small to see or feel or taste requires a special sense -- one that develops in people who have a deep understanding of  chemistry and its wondrous transformations.
Most of us cannot share this sense,  and we may consider the delight chemists claim to take in the contemplation of molecular beauty a mere affectation.


In Rutherford, Ambassadors From the North
The directory in the lobby of the office building at 71 Union Avenue in Rutherford is sprinkled with a typically suburban mix of tenants: a few doctors, a handful of small businesses, two local assemblymen.
Then there's Suite 106, the one with the sign on the door that causes visitors to do a double take: "State of Minnesota," it says.


When Kids Fly Alone
AT holiday times, there is an increase in the number of children taking air trips alone, perhaps to visit a divorced parent, to see grandparents or to return from boarding school.
This department's mail on the subject of "unaccompanied minors" -- in airline parlance, children 5 to 11 flying without escorts -- is anything but soothing.
Over eight years, it has accumulated letters from parents whose children have been put on planes to the wrong places; a letter from a couple who waited for their grandchildren at 10 P.M. in  a darkened area of Logan Airport in Boston, where no one went to tell them of a  gate change, and a report about two sisters left unattended on a bench at an airport.
Statistically, none of these represents even a blip on the chart showing 528  million passengers took scheduled airlines in 1994.
But every one represents a breakdown of the protective system the airlines say they provide for children.


TAMING THE BULLIES OF BOSNIA
THE HELICOPTER LANDS near the summit of Mount Igman, just outside Sarajevo.
It's a cool morning with low clouds, the rain has just stopped and the city, encircled by the Serbs as it has been for more than three years, lies spread-eagled beneath the Americans.
It is Aug. 19, and Richard Holbrooke is on  the first of his Balkan shuttles, which will lead, some months hence, to Dayton, Ohio, and an agreement that will end -- temporarily, at least -- the brutal war in Bosnia.
This day he leads a team that includes Robert C. Frasure of the State Department, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense Joseph Kruzel, Col.
S.
Nelson Drew of the National Security Council and Lieut.
Gen.
Wesley K. Clark of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
These senior officials find themselves atop a waterlogged Bosnian mountain about to descend a twisting dirt track into the besieged capital because, the previous day, Holbrooke failed to obtain security guarantees from the Serbs for  a flight into Sarajevo.
He had demanded the guarantees from Slobodan Milosevic,  the Serbian President, saying it was "demeaning and dangerous" for his team to take the Igman road.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
COS COB IN ART


Buzzwords For Failure
THE grand prescriptions come and go, like education's answer to hemline lengths each fall from Paris.
Since John Dewey began talking about Progressive Education in the 1920's, concepts on learning have followed, including Life Adjustment Education, the New Math, Whole Language, Mastery Learning, Competency-Based Education, Outcome-Based Education and now Efficacy -- the favorite program of Rudy Crew, the New York City Schools Chancellor, for fostering self-esteem in children and  revitalizing the schools.


Corrections
A review on Nov. 26 about "Henry Miller: The Paris Years," by the photographer Brassai, misspelled the name of the translator at one point.
As noted at the beginning of the review, he is Timothy Bent, not Brent.


A Hint of Smoked Salmon and Holiday Dishes Past
EVEN though I eat it all year round, I still associate smoked salmon with holidays.
When I was growing up in England, it was served plain, with brown bread and butter as a first course for Christmas dinner or on New Year's Eve.
Now, an equally good first course can be a carpaccio made with very fresh raw salmon, cut into thin slices and sprinkled with extra-virgin olive oil and chives.
Another favorite of mine is inspired by Chef Anton Mossiman, who is based in  London.
He makes a terrine that consists of layers of smoked salmon wrapped around a creamy mousse of smoked trout spiked with fresh horseradish.


How to Survive In Business
For nearly four decades King's was a traditional family-owned office supply store.
In recent years, like so many other stores around the city, it has faced  competition from a large national chain -- in this case, Staples.
Its response was so drastic that these days longtime customers barely recognize King's, now a hybrid of Starbuck's, Staples, Kinko's and boutique.
Office items like yellow legal pads, paper clips and file folders are still big sellers, but have been relegated to the back of the 5,500-square-foot shop at 14 East 33d Street.


Wish You Were Here
The weather is fabulous, and so are the hip huggers.


TERROR ON AN EIGHT-HOUR SHIFT
We are constantly seeking role models for our children.
Your expose on the jail system found a model in Mike Hensley.
Working at what Porter so accurately  described as "the toughest job in America," Hensley shows great courage.
He has  taken on this horrendous work so that he can provide a better future for his family.
As an American, I am honored that we have men like Hensley on our front  lines fighting the worst of what society has produced.


INSIDE
What price Austerity?


Not a Hamburger Heaven
McDonald's wants to open a 24-hour drive-through franchise in Boerum Hill, on the southeast corner of Atlantic and Third Avenues.
The idea is unpopular with many local residents -- but in the course of fighting it last week, they turned  a municipal hearing into a forum on the very nature of Boerum Hill.
"What is the essential character of this neighborhood?" asked Joseph Mohbat,  president of the East Pacific Street Block Association, at the hearing before the Board of Standards and Appeals.
"It is urban, it is pedestrian and it is storefront. The McDonald's model that is before us is a suburban model. It would be better on Northern Boulevard or Staten Island."


Now Let Freud's Critics Honor Him Too
To the Editor:
The debate about the postponed Library of Congress exhibition on Freud (letter, Dec. 13) is evidence of the greatness of his work.
Anyone who can engage the disagreement of neurologists, English professors and feminists more than half a century after his death has clearly worked on important ideas.


MARKET TIMING
Tuesday The Federal Open Market Committee meets to discuss the state of the economy and  to determine monetary policy for the next six weeks.
There is no clear consensus among economists and Fed watchers as to whether interest rates will be cut, despite a slew of data indicating that the economy has slowed.


A Tiff Over Racing Revenues
There was one fight Friday that didn't take place at Madison Square Garden.
This one was between the New York Racing Association and the New York City Offtrack Betting Corporation and it once again concerned the revenues related to live racing broadcasts.
The one blow was struck by the N.Y.R.A., which pulled the plug on the "Race Day Aqueduct" television show at 11:31 A.M. and didn't restore it for more than  two hours.
The N.Y.R.A. put the show back on only after the intervention of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and State Senator Joseph Bruno.


Correction
A picture caption on Nov. 12 with an article about Sheila Burke, Bob Dole's chief of staff, misidentified a longtime benefactor of conservative organizations and politicians.
He is William K. Coors, not Joseph Coors.


War on Children
For several years, private relief organizations and international agencies have been coming to terms with a grisly reality: In an era when the threat of global nuclear attack seems to have receded, dozens of small but viciously fought wars are killing proportionately more civilians than any other wars in modern history.
Last week Unicef, the United Nations Children's Fund, took the tragic story a step farther, documenting the special plight of the youngest victims.
"It is the singular characteristic of warfare in our time that children suffer most," Unicef said in a report.
As a result, in the last decade about 2 million children have died, 4 million to 5 million have been disabled, another million orphaned, 12 million made homeless and at least 10 million affected by psychological trauma.
BARBARA CROSSETTE


Bagels, Bets and Bounced Checks
SUNDAY is always a great time to devour some bagels.
So, for today's column fare, settle in for a story of bagels with everything: Las Vegas casinos, criminal indictments, rubber checks, gambling debts and even toxic waste.
Don't see the connections?
Then take a close look at a chipper little public  corporation called the Manhattan Bagel Company.
Since opening its first store in 1987, Manhattan Bagel has exploded.
Today, the company -- which despite its name is based in Eatontown, N.J. -- has more than 130 stores, as well as several plants making bagel dough and cream cheese.


Financial World Names Publisher
Financial World magazine in New York, which was recently bought by Barry L. and Steven Rupp, has named Seth E. Hoyt its president and publisher.
Mr.
Hoyt, 52, assumes responsibilities from Douglas A. McIntyre, 40, president and editor  in chief, who left to "pursue other interests," the Rupps said.
Mr.
Hoyt was previously publisher for custom media at the American Heritage division of Forbes Inc. in New York.
He has also worked for magazines including Cosmopolitan, Money and Sports Illustrated.


Austrian Voters Stymie Far-Right Leader's Rise as Social DemocratsGain
In voting for a new Parliament today, Austrians refused to take the sharp right turn that the anti-immigration leader Jorg Haider had urged upon them.
Mr.
Haider finished with 22.3 percent of the votes, slightly less than he won in the last parliamentary election 14 months ago.
Chancellor Franz Vranitzky's center-left Social Democratic Party finished a strong first, meaning that Mr.
Vranitzky, who has led Austria for nearly a decade, will almost certainly remain in office.
With nearly all the votes counted, the Social Democrats had 38.2 percent of the vote, up 3.3 percent from  last year's result.


Big Egos Drove Dodgers From Brooklyn
To the Editor:
Re your Dec. 14 news article on the political wrangling between Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Borough President Fernando Ferrer of the Bronx over the fate of  the Yankees:


Papandreou Fights New Infection; Leadership Crisis Simmers
Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou of Greece, who has been on and off life-support systems for a month, was in critical condition today from a new secondary infection.
A hospital bulletin said that doctors were still uncertain where the infection was coming from and that they were using a wide range of antibiotics to fight it.


Doonesbury' and Apple Hatch a Comic Surprise
Egg freckles?"
No. it doesn't make much sense.
Which is why the cartoonist Garry Trudeau coined this apt (or inept) bit of idiocy to lampoon the original hand-held Newton computer's difficulty in deciphering handwriting.


Lintas Worldwide To Be Renamed
Lintas Worldwide, one of the three large agency networks owned by the Interpublic Group of Companies, will be renamed Ammirati Puris Lintas, effective on Feb. 1.
The announcement came 17 months after Interpublic bought Ammirati &amp; Puris, a creatively focused midsize agency in New York, and merged it with the New York office of Lintas.
The Lintas offices in New York and London have been called Ammirati &amp; Puris/ Lintas; that name will be adopted, minus the ampersand and slash, at all 155 Lintas offices in 58 countries.


Father, Son and Pet Take an Airing


Brunt of Federal Shutdown Falls on the Tourists Again
There was a steady parade of disappointed tourists at Battery Park yesterday  afternoon as the latest Federal Government shutdown closed access to the Statue  of Liberty and Ellis Island here and to hundreds of national parks around the country.
Despite the partial shutdown, hundreds of camera-carrying visitors trooped along Battery Place to the Ellis Island ferry.
It was only after they rattled the door and peered through the dark windows that most realized that the Federal Government's second budget shutdown this year had put a damper on their holiday  visit.


New York Botanical Garden Is No Longer Bronx's Secret
To the Editor:
"Garden Grows in New Directions" (news article, Dec. 13), on the New York Botanical Garden, strikes a particular chord for us Bronxites, past and present, who have been fortunate enough to live near the grounds of that institution.


Adding to the annual spectacle, NBC and the N.F.L. take the Super Bowl to cyberspace.
THE hoopla and hyperbole surrounding the Super Bowl are extending into cyberspace.
NBC, which will broadcast the Super Bowl XXX on Jan. 28, and the National Football League are teaming for an interactive, multimedia Super Sunday project that is the largest for any sporting event, they say, obeying an immutable law since Super Bowl I that superlatives must be invoked in connection with the game.


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
A Ballerina Evokes The Origins of a Classic 'The Nutcracker' New York State Theater


In New Stand, Dole Opposes Abortion Ban
Signaling a move toward a more moderate image, Senator Bob Dole, the Republican leader, said today that he would not support an unconditional ban on  abortion and hinted he might ask Gen.
Colin L. Powell to be his Vice-Presidential running mate.
His statement on abortion was a reversal from his previous position of favoring a constitutional amendment to ban the procedure.
The desire for General Powell on his ticket underscores Mr.
Dole's need to broaden his appeal as the leading contender for the Republican Presidential nomination and to spark some excitement about his candidacy.


Wrong Way on Sterling Forest
Newt Gingrich has now joined a growing list of prominent politicians who want to save Sterling Forest, a nearly pristine area on the New York-New Jersey border.
His support is welcome.
Unfortunately, the House bill to which he has given his blessing is a politically tortured and environmentally unsound approach to a problem that the Speaker could solve much more cleanly.
The bill would authorize $20.5 million to help acquire the forest from the Zurich Insurance Group, a Swiss company that is ready to develop the property -- 20,000 acres of wetlands and lakes 40 miles north of New York City that serve as a watershed supplying two million New Jersey residents with their drinking water.
If developed, a valuable piece of open space could be transformed into yet another source of regional pollution.


China's Challenge to Washington
If the United States intends to develop a relationship of mutual respect with China, it must defend its interests as vigorously as Beijing does.
Now is the time, for China has shown a dangerous new bellicosity in matters from human rights to military threats.
Last week Beijing again showed its contempt for the rights of Chinese citizens by convicting Wei Jingsheng of sedition and sentencing him to 14 years  in prison.
The activities the court cited included organizing art exhibitions to benefit democracy and writing articles that advocated Tibet's independence.
This heavy-handed muzzling of the country's leading dissenter is a measure of the Chinese belief that America and other Western countries will not make them pay a diplomatic or economic price for the abuse of human rights.


Treasury to Sell Bills and Notes This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week includes today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills and two- and five-year notes to be  auctioned Wednesday and Thursday.
At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was at 5.19 percent and the rate on the six-month issue was at 5.13 percent.
In when-issued trading, the two-year note was offered at a price to yield 5.36 percent, and the five-year note at 5.55 percent.


Boy Starts Fire That Kills 2
A child playing with gas burners caused a fire Saturday night that took the lives of his two brothers and left him severely injured, the authorities said yesterday.
Firefighters pulled Shakazulo Edwards, 4, and Tackle Edwards, 2, from a second-floor bedroom.
Both boys were pronounced dead at Muhlenberg Regional Medical Center, said Charles Angione, deputy fire chief for Plainfield.
Their brother, Okechuku, 6, was in critical condition last night at St.
Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston.


2 Silent-Film Classics And a 3-Member Band
Two classic films, Fritz Lang's "Metropolis" (1926) and Dziga Vertov's "Man With a Movie Camera" (1928), are at the Cinema Village, 22 East 12th Street, through tomorrow, with live musical accompaniment by the Alloy Orchestra.
The three-member percussion and synthesizer ensemble can simulate almost any sound imaginable, from a symphony to a 1920's German bar band.
"Metropolis" is Lang's futuristic nightmare of urban industrialization and decadence.
"Man With a Movie Camera" is a dawn-to-dusk portrait of a city by Vertov with strikingly advanced movie effects, including split screen, multiple superimpositions and variable speeds.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Double Celebration, Secular and Sacred Westminster Choir Carnegie Hall This year's Christmas concert by the Westminster Choir carried an extra festive  note.
Joseph Flummerfelt is celebrating his 25th anniversary as the choir's conductor, and a presentation was duly made by officials of Westminster Choir College of Rider University on Tuesday night.


Gambling's New Winnings: A Special Report;Gambling Owners Spend Lavishly To Gain a Voice in Many States
In only five years, the gambling industry has bought its way into the ranks of the most formidable interest groups in American politics, spending huge sums  to gain the kind of influence long wielded by big business, big labor and organizations of doctors and lawyers.
From the Empress riverboat casino in Joliet, Ill., to the Mashantucket Pequot tribe in Ledyard, Conn., gambling interests, which now run casinos in 24 states, have used vast profits gleaned from their craps tables and slot machines to fatten the campaign coffers of political candidates and wage multimillion-dollar lobbying offensives.


INSIDE
Haiti Vote Calm, but Meager


The Family That Produced Tennessee Williams
TOM The Unknown Tennessee Williams By Lyle Leverich Illustrated. 644 pages.
Crown Publishers. $35.


From Mainframes to Global Networking;I.B.M. Gazes Into Its Crystal Ball and, Hey, Where Did the Hardware Go?
Two decades ago, I.B.M. stumbled into the world of computer networking when several of its large customers began asking for an easy way to exchange data between their mainframes.
In response to its clients, and as a way to keep in touch with its own international sales and service offices, I.B.M. later began setting up a series of data networks around the world.
But the company's focus remained what had made it the giant of its industry:  selling hardware and software.
That was where most of its annual revenue was derived; electronic mail and other network services came as an afterthought.


A Life of Resistance: A Special Report;Gunman's Ardent Credo: Black Self-Sufficiency
On May 26, 1967, Roland J. Smith Jr. stood before Judge Alfred L. Luongo in Federal District Court in Philadelphia.
Mr.
Smith was 23 years old, a hard-luck  car thief and self-taught ideologue who called himself a laborer.
He made his argument with an inalterable simplicity.
As a black man, Mr.
Smith told the judge, he considered himself a "subject" of the United States and not a citizen, and thus he refused to be inducted to fight in the Vietnam War.


A Venerable Vessel Changing Course
Life has changed for Alan Borg.
While battles may have been his subject for the 13 years he spent as director of the Imperial War Museum in London, he was seldom in the middle of a skirmish himself.
But now, two months after taking charge of the Victoria and Albert Museum in London, one of the world's greatest  repositories of decorative art, Dr.
Borg has had a taste of the hot seat.
When he proposed a radical change for the 143-year-old institution -- an admission fee -- the London press jumped on him.
One newspaper went so far as to say that the museum was in a "disgraceful and appalling" state.


Dwindling Expectations
On a slate gray morning here last week, the Bell Atlantic Corporation unfurled its vision of the multimedia future.
The regional Bell company said it  had begun testing a video service delivered over telephone wires with 200 customers in this New Jersey shore town.
Its modestly delivered announcement came almost a year after Time Warner introduced its interactive cable system in Orlando, Fla., with an elaborate daylong presentation for 450 journalists from 10 countries.


Hugs, Tears, Victory: Browns Say Goodbye
The Cleveland Browns made their most emotional journey, and possibly their last, to the east end zone at Cleveland Stadium this afternoon.
When the clock reached zero for the last home game of a painful season, with the sound of breaking wood all around as scavenging fans pounded bleacher planks and hoisted rows of chairs, the Browns ran up the small hill at the open end to embrace the tightly packed residents of the Dawg Pound.
If the gesture of the Browns was a goodbye, if the proposed move by the owner Art Modell to Baltimore survives a series of legal and political challenges, the sight could be remembered as an increasingly rare sign of a genuine affection between a professional team and its followers.
The Browns hugged chilled fans on the other side of the fence after a passionate 26-10 victory over the Cincinnati Bengals in what may have been their last home game after a half century on the shores of Lake Erie, when all the barking died in sorrow.


Life and Art In the Worlds Of Families
Choreographers have been turning increasingly to social and political themes  in recent years.
But such themes have long been at the heart of much of the work of Pepatian, the company of Merian Soto and Pepon Osorio.
On Saturday night, they presented their latest piece, "Familias," at the handsome and comfortable new theater complex at Hostos Community College in the Bronx.
But the results this time were mixed.
Ms.
Soto, a choreographer, and Mr.
Osorio, a designer, developed the piece in a 15-month residency with their company at Hostos, working with men, women and children in the neighborhood and drawing on the stories of eight actual families.


Muller to Come Back to Islanders, for Now
Kirk Muller's paid vacation is now officially over.
And, for the time being,  it looks like he will be donning an Islander sweater.
Mike Milbury, the Islanders' coach and general manager, was unable to beat his self-imposed Saturday-night deadline and swing a deal for Muller, the unhappy forward whom the Islanders sent into exile five weeks ago.


Survey Finds People Linked With Gangs Are Migrating
A mass migration of gang members across the country has occurred in recent years, according to a new study, but most police officials surveyed said they believed that drug trafficking and other crime would have flourished in the communities even without the newcomers.
In the study, researchers at the University of Southern California asked law-enforcement officials, gang members and community group organizers in nearly 1,100 American cities about gang migration.
Of the nearly 600 cities that could  provide estimates, more than half reported the arrival of at least 10 new gang members in the previous year.


Gambling's New Winnings
In only five years, the gambling industry has bought its way into the ranks of the most formidable interest groups in American politics, spending huge sums  to gain the kind of influence long wielded by big business, big labor and organizations of doctors and lawyers.
Gambling interests, which now run casinos  in 24 states, have used their vast profits to fatten the campaign coffers of candidates for local, state and Federal offices and wage multimillion-dollar lobbying offensives.
A special report, page B12.


In Search of Furniture, She Finds Another Family
Lee S. stared out a window where an elevated train rumbled through Queens on  a gray December morning, and then noticed steam rising from the radiator, clouding the panes.
It would be warmer in South Carolina, she was sure.
Her thoughts took her back to her home state, her mother, who died last year, and the plans they had made together.
"It's so much better down there," she said.
"The environment, the people are  much warmer and concerned. You don't want for things and everybody's like family."


For the U.S. Mixed Success in U.N. Human Rights Votes
In a week when the Clinton Administration was criticized for not responding more forcefully to China's 14-year prison sentence for its most prominent dissident, Washington was pressing human rights issues in the United Nations General Assembly with mixed results.
American diplomats were left frustrated at the unwillingness of many countries to take tough public stands on human rights even with the end of cold  war divisions.


CHRONICLE
PATRICIA KLUGE, the former wife of the billionaire John Kluge, has become involved in a drive by students at the Broad Meadows Middle School in Quincy, Mass., to raise $50,000 to build a school in Pakistan in memory of Iqbal Masih.
Iqbal was a boy who spent half of his life in child labor and was shot to death  at age 12.
Mrs.
Kluge saw a report about the campaign recently on "NBC Nightly News."
When he was 4, Iqbal was sold for $12 to a carpet factory where he worked for six years, often chained to his loom.
At 10, he escaped and spent two years encouraging other enslaved children to do the same.


Murder Suspect Had Role In Queens Killing in 1990
The murder suspect who the police say fired on officers Saturday, starting a  shootout that left the suspect and two police sergeants seriously wounded, was involved in a 1990 killing and had a previous weapons conviction, law enforcement officials said yesterday.
The suspect, Sean Pritchard, 27, was originally charged with murder in the 1990 killing but eventually pleaded guilty to a charge of attempted manslaughter.


Gas Leak at Restaurant
A gas leak forced the evacuation of a Thai restaurant in mid-Manhattan on Saturday night, the Fire Department said.
The leak was reported shortly before 11 P.M. at Rungsit Thai Food, 208 East 34th Street, said George Semidey, a Fire  Department spokesman.
Firefighters evacuated the building to turn off the gas.
No injuries were reported.


Pincay Fractures 3 Ribs
LAFFIT PINCAY, the second-leading jockey in thoroughbred racing history with  8,367 victories, fractured three ribs yesterday in a spill at Hollywood Park in  Inglewood, Calif., a track official said.
Pincay, who turns 49 on Dec. 29, was thrown by his mount, Kris's Intention,  heading into the first turn of the mile-and-a-sixteenth race for 2-year-old fillies.
He was taken by ambulance to nearby Centinela Hospital Medical Center,  where X-rays revealed the fractures.
MIKE MOONEY, the director of publicity for Hollywood Park, said Pincay was scheduled to be released from the hospital sometime last night.
Mooney said he had no idea how long Pincay would be sidelined. (AP)


Orioles Get Mercker For 2 Minor Leaguers
The Atlanta Braves, trying to keep their payroll at about $50 million, traded their No. 5 starter, KENT MERCKER, to the Baltimore Orioles last night for two minor leaguers.
Mercker, 27, was 7-8 with a 4.15 earned run average last season with the World Series champions.
He had a $2.25 million salary and would likely have received more than $3 million next season.


Indictments Over Fax-Paper
Two fax-paper companies and two industry executives were indicted last week by a Federal grand jury on charges of fixing prices in the United States and Canada.
The companies indicted were the Nippon Paper Industries Company and Appleton  Papers Inc.
The executives were Jerry A. Wallace of Appleton and Hirinori Ichida of the Mitsubishi Paper Mills.
All were charged with conspiring between February 1990 and February 1992 to increase the prices of jumbo-roll thermal fax paper.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption yesterday about a shopping trip to 125th Street  by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani referred incorrectly in some copies to the man at the left.
He was Rudy Washington, the city's Commissioner of Business Services,  not a security guard.


Job Growth Likely to Slow
New Jersey gained nearly 57,000 new jobs in 1995, but job growth is expected  to slow dramatically next year, when only 39,000 new jobs will be created, the director of the Rutgers Economic Advisory Service said last week.
"We've seen an increase in employment in the service sector, in construction and in wholesale and retail trade," said the service's director, Nancy H. Mantell.
"But there has been a decrease in the hospital sector, in manufacturing and in communications and utilities, and that will continue."
TERRY PRISTIN


Man Who Got Baboon Cells Is Doing Well, Doctors Say
Jeff Getty, the 38-year-old man who received a baboon bone marrow transplant  last Thursday in a risky experiment to battle AIDS, was "doing very well" today, his doctors said.
Mr.
Getty shared a pizza with his family on Saturday night and had a big breakfast this morning, a hospital spokeswoman said.


POLITICAL LEADERS MAKE NO PROGRESS ON A BUDGET DEAL
In a brief, fruitless Senate session tonight, Republicans and Democrats rejected each other's proposals for ending the partial Government shutdown before its impact is felt Monday morning, when 260,000 Federal workers would be  furloughed.
There were no budget negotiations today.
Instead, both sides spent their time talking or trying to drum up public support.


2 Subway Robberies Fail
Armed men tried to rob two subway token booth clerks in Brooklyn and the Bronx early yesterday but came up empty-handed.
Yesterday's first robbery attempt came at 3:35 A.M. in the F train station at Jay Street and York Avenue in downtown Brooklyn when three men, one brandishing a gun, told a token clerk to open the door to her booth.
"She refused and the men left," Officer Ivette Serrano said.
"No one was injured." At 4:13 A.M., three men, one armed, demanded money from the clerk at the No. 4 train station at Mosholu Parkway and Jerome Avenue in the Bronx, Officer Serrano said.
The clerk refused to hand over money  and the suspects fled, the officer said.


First Car Pool Stretch Opening
One piece of a new car pool lane on Interstate 287 is opening today, six months ahead of schedule, transportation officials said.
The five-mile lane stretches from North Maple Avenue in Basking Ridge to South Street in Morristown.


Derring-Do and Cavorting at the New Victory
Without a tenant, a house is not a home.
So today's pleasure is to report that the lovely New Victory Theater, which has done so much to restore 42d Street's historic soul, has taken in its very first boarder: a show with the sort of edgy energy and youthful pizazz that seem just right for a theater dedicated to the young and situated at the Crossroads of the World.


Abbey Road Opens a Unit
Abbey Road Studios opened a new unit last week for the production of compact  disks that combine music, video, graphics, animation, text and speech.
Abbey Road Interactive was developed by the studio's owners, EMI Music, part  of Thorn EMI, and Apple Computer.
It is a Macintosh-based studio capable of producing the multimedia disks.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Pianist's Voyage Through Musical History Caroline Kyungnan Park Merkin Concert Hall


Cowboys Have a Victory at Williams's Fingertips
Leave it to Nate Newton, the Dallas Cowboys' full-time offensive guard and part-time prankster, to find the meaning of this victory that breathed new life  into the Cowboys.
This 21-20 cross-your-fingers, hold-your-breath, make-that-kick victory at Texas Stadium that kept Dallas from losing its third straight game.
It was a victory that preserved the sanity of the Cowboys' over-the-edge fans for at least another week.


About Lilco, Hard Questions
Customers of Long Island Lighting Company pay the highest utility rates in the continental United States, thanks in part to the costly Shoreham nuclear plant that was blocked from opening by public and political opposition.
Two New  York Governors, first Mario Cuomo and now George Pataki, have offered plans to cut those rates, but the reaction indicates that significant rate relief is still far distant.
Governor Pataki would rely on both public ownership and market competition to reduce rates by up to 12 percent.
He would dismantle Lilco, selling its generators and gas business to private companies and its transmission and distribution lines to the Long Island Power Authority, a state agency.
The chief savings would come from the public takeover of Lilco's transmission system.
The  power authority would issue $4.5 billion in tax-free revenue bonds to refinance  Lilco's debt.
The agency's tax-exempt status as a public body would enable it to sell bonds at lower interest rates than Lilco's current debt.


Quadriplegic Student Found Alone in Coma
Ellis Mather, a quadriplegic, enrolled in Arizona State University because the university makes a special effort to make disabled students feel welcome.
But when he fell into a coma last month in his dormitory room, nobody missed him for a week.
The police found Mr.
Mather on Nov. 19 slumped in his wheelchair, dehydrated  and unconscious.
Another resident of the same dormitory had last seen him on Nov. 13.
He remains in a vegetative state.


U.S. and South African Labor Join Hands
To the Editor:
In an account of Vice President Gore's visit to our Union Building Trades Program in South Africa (news article, Dec. 7), you state this is a joint project of our union and South African construction companies.


His Goal: Keeping the Web Worldwide
By now, the World Wide Web is a full-fledged media star, hailed and hyped, part technology and part fashion accessory.
The Web is the popular multimedia branch of the Internet, and it has helped bring the Internet to the masses.
So suddenly, the addresses of corporate Web sites are plastered on billboards and on television ads.
Without the Web, there  would be no Internet craze.
No Wall Street fixation with Internet stocks or instant Internet millionaires.
And no striking declaration from the Microsoft Corporation this month that it would alter its strategy to adjust to the changes the Web portends for the software business.


Patents;From the mouse-in-a-glove to liquid-crystal sunglasses, inventors have had a busy year.
LIKE little elves, inventors have been hard at work in the last year dreaming up gizmos that may someday make great presents:
For those spending New Year's on a beach, Michael Black and Vladimir Kupershmidt, both Californians, offer sunglasses that can sense when the wearer has been in the sun too long.


An Early Stir Of Challengers To Giuliani
Ruth W. Messinger, the Manhattan Borough President, acknowledged loud and clear yesterday what has hardly been a secret for the last two years: she intends to oppose Rudolph W. Giuliani for mayor in 1997.
"It's much too early for any kind of formal announcement," she said on "News  Forum" on WNBC-TV.
"But I do anticipate being a candidate for mayor and becoming the city's next mayor." When asked if her reply amounted to an informal announcement of her candidacy, the 55-year-old Democrat responded: "Correct."


As Baby Boomers Near 50, Magazines Try to Keep Pace
Boom. Boom. Boom.
That's the sound of the clock chiming midnight on New Year's Eve.


Choosing Some From Ballot A and Some From Ballot B


Woolward to Handle Echostar Account
The Echostar Communications Corporation, a satellite broadcast company, has named Woolward &amp; Partners in San Francisco as the first agency to handle advertising for its DISH Network brand in the United States.
The billings were estimated at more than $15 million.
Barbara Sullivan, vice president for marketing at Echostar in Denver, said that Woolward was awarded the account after a monthlong review that began with six agencies and was narrowed to Woolward and two other finalists: McClain Finlon Advertising in Denver and Mering &amp; Associates in Sacramento, Calif.


Police Question Man in Protests Before Harlem Fire
More than a week after a man burned down a Harlem clothing store, killing seven people and himself in what the authorities say was a racially motivated attack against the store's white Jewish owner, the police questioned another man who, according to a witness, threatened to "burn the Jew store down."
The man, Tracy Lagan, 37, of the Bronx, was taken in for questioning on Saturday after the police spotted him at at rally in Harlem led by the Rev.
Al Sharpton, said Tom Kelly, the Deputy Police Commissioner for Public Information.


On AIDS Drug, Profits Over Patients
To the Editor:
The approval by the Food and Drug Administration of the Hoffmann-La Roche protease inhibitor Invirase (news article, Dec. 8) comes as welcome news to many H.I.V.-infected patients and health care providers.


Dodgers Deal Offerman
The Los Angeles Dodgers have traded shortstop JOSE OFFERMAN to the Kansas City Royals for the left-handed pitcher BILLY BREWER, the team said yesterday.
Offerman, who made the National League All-Star team, batted .287 in 119 games last season with 4 home runs and 33 runs batted in.
However, he led the league with 35 errors.


60 Years Later and Still a Success
It was like a vision plucked from heaven and plastered on the grimy wall of a Lower East Side tenement.
The advertisement described a one-bedroom apartment with a private toilet and hot running water for $4.40 a week.
To Frank LiCausi,  a 22-year-old father struggling to survive the Depression, it was nothing short  of miraculous, a millionaire's flat for a working man's wage.
No more pounding on pipes for hot water.
No more squirming in a chilly hallway waiting for the shared toilet to be free.
No more bathing in the portable tub in the kitchen.
This meant the end to tenement life.


A Church Opens Its Heart For a Fragile Community
Sylvia Romera and her two children, ages 4 and 6, stood patiently outside the First African Methodist Episcopal Church on a chilly night, hopeful that when the sun rose they would receive all the fixings for a plentiful Christmas dinner, some new clothes, and, just as important, presents.
"Last year, I didn't have any toys for the kids," said Ms.
Romera as her son, Hyunjin, 4, clung to her side, trying to absorb a bit of his mother's warmth.
"I went to a different place and they said I had come too late."


Telecommunications Giants Join Internet Security Quest
For all the commercial promise of computer networks, some big drawbacks remain.
Companies have spent billions on private data networks in recent years,  but these were mainly in-house conduits.
And the Internet, while widely accessible, is still regarded as unreliable and not secure enough to conduct essential corporate business.
In recent months, I.B.M.'s Lotus unit has been quietly working with a group led by the world's big telecommunications companies -- the AT&amp;T Corporation, the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation, Deutsche Telekom and others -- to try to combine the advantages of private networks with the Internet.


Books, Not Bureaucrats
The children at P. S. 27 in the Bronx must share their math books one for every two students.
When a class ends, the books are collected and sent down the hall where another class is waiting.
Are spending cuts to blame for this shortage?
Hardly.
From 1980 to 1993, spending on New York City public schools increased 148 percent, even though the number of students increased only 3 percent.
Even after taking inflation into account, New York City spent 37 percent more per pupil in 1993 than in 1980.


To G.I.'s, Disputed Corridor Will Test Path to Peace
Ferid Pamukcic bought a large American flag this morning, and he plans to hang it on the wall of a paneled, low-ceiling bar he has just finished behind his Caffe King.
Mr.
Pamukcic started building the hideaway, which has colored spotlights on the wall, well before he knew the Americans would be coming, and while he expects them to patronize his bar, he harbors a hope for something more.


Phillips May Stay
Nebraska tailback LAWRENCE PHILLIPS, sidelined for six games after beating a  former girlfriend, said he will probably return for his senior season if he isn't projected as a first-round draft pick.
Phillips said he has sent a letter requesting a draft projection to a National Football League committee that advises underclassmen on where they might be picked.


Equity Offerings Set for This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Amisys, Rockville, Md., an initial public offering of 2 million shares.
Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons.


Getting Personal and Global in Farm Broadcasting
Back in 1956, when Orion Samuelson first thought he hit the big time as a farm broadcaster for a television station in Green Bay, Wis., the high points of his year were trips in the company's painted station wagon to the 4-H and livestock conventions in Chicago and to the state fair.
Daily programming was mainly wire service reports, local livestock prices, weather reports and music from a live studio polka band.
Animals and the newest  tractors were shown either by driving them into the studio or by propping Polaroid photographs in front of the camera.


New Premium Beer From Miller Brewing
The Philip Morris Companies' Miller Brewing subsidiary will introduce a flagship premium beer, to be called Miller Beer, early in 1996.
The full-calorie, heavier-tasting beer is intended to fill a void created when the company let Miller High Life slip in price starting two years ago.
"Miller High Life is no longer what it was," said Benj Steinman, associate publisher of Beer Marketer's Insights, a trade newsletter.
"It was selling 23 million barrels, and now it's around 5 million."


Ex-President of South Korea Goes on Trial on Bribery Charges
Solemn and tense, his arms folded into the loose sleeves of a traditional white Korean jacket, a former President, Roh Tae Woo, was taken to trial today in a vivid reminder of how quickly the fortunes of rulers can change.


A Tribute to Manhattan
To jazz composers, New York means brains and bustle, elegance and romance, traditions and experiments; it's where the blues meets European ensemble methods and a few Latin rhythms.
That was the gist of "We'll Take Manhattan," a Jazz at  Lincoln Center program on Saturday night at Alice Tully Hall featuring two jazz  quartets, a septet and two big bands.
The concert featured premieres of compositions by Art Baron and Joe Lovano, each leading his own group, and by Christian McBride and Stephen Scott, performed by the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra with Wynton Marsalis conducting.
Mr.
McBride's "Bluesin' in Alphabet City" was an ebullient suite of time-tested  blues riffs, tossed around the big band's sections with brassy assurance.
Mr.
Scott's "Postcards From Home" was more modernistic and rhapsodic.
It roved from  introspection to gleaming declamations up to burnished, brassy chorales and back to a languorous dirge, thinking all the way.


Against the Oilers, Jets Can't Defend Offense
How bad was the Jets' offense in their 23-6 beating from the Oilers today?
"Absolutely embarrassing," quarterback Boomer Esiason said. "It's ridiculous."


In America;Sorrow on 125th St.
They came wrapped in their heavy winter coats and the dead weight of their grief to the Francisco Funeral Home on First Avenue to pay their respects to Olga Garcia, who died for no good reason at the age of 19.
They sat on folding chairs and prayed and wept softly.
A crucifix and a picture of the Blessed Mother rested beside the body, and above the casket was a large photograph of Olga, dressed casually in white and smiling that gorgeous  and easy smile that is one of God's great gifts to the young.


OPPOSITION GAINS AS RUSSIANS ELECT NEW PARLIAMENT
Russian voters registered their deep frustration with four years of faltering reforms on Sunday by voting for Communists and nationalists in even larger numbers than many people expected, according to early returns in the parliamentary election.
It had long been assumed that Communists would win the most parliamentary seats, and with results streaming in from the 100,000 polling points across the  country, that seemed certain.
But the ultranationalist party of Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky again confounded predictions by performing well in early results.
When Mr.
Zhirinovsky's Liberal Democratic Party received more votes than any other party in 1993 it produced a shock that reverberated across Russia and into the West.


Some Old Saws Rehoned, by Steve Martin
In "The Zigzag Woman," a genial barfly remembers the wife who left him 21 years earlier.
She was a termagant, but the man continues to hope that she will  suddenly appear one day, full of repentance, to sit beside him in a bar or a theater or maybe even a laundromat.
He always keeps a seat ready for her.
"She issued a declaration of independence every time she entered the room," he remembers with pride.
"Her hair was practically edible."


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
White, Radiant Yet Opaque, No Matter How You Spell It Ann Carlson and Todd Gilens Dance Theater Workshop


East Meets West on a Mysterious Shore
Blondell Cummings's "Women in the Dunes," presented on Friday night at the Japan Society, comes well in advance of a planned springtime symposium at Columbia University on Kobo Abe, who wrote "The Woman in the Dunes." But the theater and dance piece is a fitting start for such a commemoration, for it uses the 1962 novel as a springboard for an interestingly stylized exploration of Asian and American cultures and ways they reflect on each other.
Both Ms.
Cummings and Junko Kikuchi, who danced with her, are among New York's most compelling and intelligent performers.
And they make the most of Ms.
Cummings's departure from the Abe novel and the film made from it, in which a man wanders into the lair of a mysterious woman and is trapped there, deep in sand dunes from which the couple must dig out each day in order to survive.


Trade Surplus Falls in Japan
Japan's trade surplus with the United States marked its biggest decline in five and a half years in November, thanks to falling auto exports and rising imports of computers, airplanes and semiconductors, the Finance Ministry said today.
Japan's trade gap with the United States fell 45.2 percent from a year earlier, to $2.82 billion, the sixth straight decline.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Appeals to the Public, But No Budget Negotiations Unable to reach a compromise on the Federal budget, the White House and the Republican Congressional leaders turned their attention to trying to sway public opinion about who was to blame for the second partial shutdown of the Government in a month.


No Headline
The Zoo's closed but the Senate's open.
That ought to tell you something.
Maybe we ought to have it the other way around. -- SENATOR BOB DOLE. [A1:1.]


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Wagnerian Touch And Echoes of Shostakovich Beaux Arts Trio Metropolitan Museum of Art


Yemen and Eritrea Fight Over Islands in Red Sea
Yemen and Eritrea fought today with warships and aircraft in a dispute over islands in a Red Sea shipping lane.
Yemeni military officials said Eritrean forces were firing from warships at Yemeni positions on the Red Sea island of Greater Hanish.


Female Models Try to Sell Rain Forest Issue on Disk
Multimedia is still a new field, so it is not surprising that many offerings  combine video, sound and text in ways that seem experimental or downright zany.
Still, even by the eclectic standards of this infant industry, "Supermodels in the Rainforest" has to qualify as one of the more curious combinations of material to find its way onto a CD-ROM disk recently.
It mixes the worthy and the well-endowed, a cause celebre that is politically correct (the rain forest) and a media tradition that is decidedly not (female swimsuit models).


U.S. and Mexico Try to Halt Nafta Provision on Trucking
American and Mexican officials continued negotiating today in search of a way to delay the implementation of a central provision of the North American Free Trade Agreement that would allow trucks from Mexico to travel freely in American border states starting this week.
While the border technically opens to wider trade on Monday, firms on both sides have to register their trucks with American or Mexican authorities before  they can freely go beyond the current limit of 26 miles beyond the border.
That  gives negotiators a number of days to complete the delicate negotiations, which  are politically sensitive in both countries.


In California, Life in the Fast Lane Gets Faster
Life got a little faster in California today as the speed limit was increased to 65 miles an hour on most freeways.
Crews fanned out along 2,800 miles of freeway throughout the state to cover the first 5 on 55-m.p.h. signs with large black 6's made either of metal or of peel-and-stick vinyl.


Pathologist Fights Charge On Evidence Tampering
A New Jersey pathologist who has consistently criticized the state's handling of autopsies says the State Medical Examiner's office has framed him in a criminal case, and he is seeking to have the indictment against him dismissed.
The pathologist, Dr.
Claus P. Speth, has been indicted on a charge of tampering with evidence in a suicide case.
In court papers filed on Friday in Newark, the pathologist said he was "the victim of a frame-up engineered within the State Medical Examiner's office -- in all probability by the Acting State Medical Examiner, Geetha Natarajan, M.D."


'Cultural' or Religious?
Lawyers for Mayor Bret Schundler of Jersey City will appear today before Judge Dickinson R. Debevoise of Federal District Court to defend the Mayor's decision to place a menorah and Nativity scene outside City Hall even though the judge barred him from displaying religious symbols.
The Mayor's spokesman, Tom Gallagher, said that because the display now includes a plastic Santa Claus, a snowman and a sleigh, the overall effect was "cultural" rather than religious.
But Ronald Chen, vice president of the American Civil Liberties Union of New Jersey, which sought the ban, said he was  not satisfied with the explanation.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.


Though Discontented, Russians Are Glad to Vote
All fall, it was an election campaign propelled by fear, mistrust and anger.
But when the day of reckoning finally came, Russian voters seemed almost cheerful.
They turned out in high numbers despite freezing weather and a raging flu epidemic -- some wore gauze masks as they voted.
And many seemed pleased with the process, if not always the politicians.


Anderson Plans to Test The Free-Agent Market
Unhappy about diminished playing time and eager to join a winning organization, Kenny Anderson said today that he will go the free-agent route and not re-sign with the Nets this season.
"I want to be a free agent, I want to use my value," Anderson said.
"What's the sense of having free agency if you're not going to use it?"


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
The Speed of Garage-Rock, The Simplicity of 60's Pop The Amps Irving Plaza


Taking In the Sites;Need a Humor Implant? Help Is Near on the Web
So you've just been elected to the Hot Mix Asphalt Hall of Fame, and you want your acceptance speech to sizzle.
But when you try it out on your nearest and dearest, their lengthy yawns suggest that you just might have to jazz it up.
What you need is a good joke.
You heard one last month -- a light-bulb joke.
Now what was that punch line?


Sports of The Times;Tyson Is Ready, but Still Rusty, for Bruno
After only 10 minutes 1 second of real ring time since what he likes to call  "my return," Mike Tyson will now try to detach the World Boxing Council's share  of the heavyweight title from Frank Bruno on March 16 in Las Vegas, Nev.
But is Tyson ready to regain one-third of the world championship he once held?


Experimental School Ideas Are Afloat, by Land and by Sea
One school would hold classes aboard a 110-year-old British sailing ship docked at the southern tip of Manhattan.
Another already has a nickname, "P.S. Dance," and would be New York City's first public school devoted entirely to the study of ballet.


Snoring Suspect Arrested
A cooking student broke into a house here on Saturday, stole several items, mostly from the kitchen, then apparently fell asleep, the police said today.
The suspect, Martin Lotsberg, a 20-year-old student at the Culinary Institute of America in Hyde Park, broke into the house just before 6:30 A.M., left the house briefly to stash the goods, then returned and fell asleep in a spare bedroom, the police said.


Bridge
Tim Seres, one of the game's best, gives readers 62 deals to try to match his briliance.
Those most knowledgeable about the world's bridge players would agree that Tim Seres of Sydney, Australia, has been one of the very best for the last four  decades.
He recently reached the age of 70, but is playing as well as ever, challenging strongly for national titles.
His great partnership with Dick Cummings, going back to 1955, is in longevity second only to that of Edgar Kaplan of Manhattan and Norman Kay of Narberth, Pa.


Dec. 31, 1999: Dressed Up, But With No Place to Go?
Do you know where you're going to be on Dec. 31, 1999?
If not, you may have already missed the turn-of-the-century party.
Thinking about the Savoy in London?
Sorry.
The swank hotel has been fully booked for New Year's 2000 since 1990.
"We already have enough inquiries to fill the hotel's 202 rooms twice," Pam Carter, a Savoy spokeswoman, said on Friday.


A New Grinch Turns Up at the Mall
For all the commotion and clatter that surrounds holiday shopping, one sound  has traditionally symbolized the compassion and generosity of the season: the peal of the Salvation Army bell.
But now an increasing number of malls and stores around the nation are banishing the charity's bell ringers and donation kettles, part of a strategy to keep unions out.
These retail establishments, including Sears, Toys 'R' Us, Super Kmart Centers and hundreds of shopping malls, say that granting access to charities might require them to do the same for union organizers.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Rachmaninoff's Second, Complete and Unabridged Philadelphia Orchestra Avery Fisher Hall


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY


Saved From Freezing Waters
Rescue workers pulled three men from Greenwood Lake yesterday after they fell through the ice and spent 30 minutes in the water, The Associated Press reported.


Japanese Stocks Lower
Stock prices were lower here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 35.47 points, or 0.18 percent, at 19,311.08.
On Friday, the Nikkei fell 152.75 points.


Behind the Egyptian Facade Lies a Money-Making Marvel
Up from the fallow fields of northeastern Illinois rises the Empress.
A riverboat casino with an Egyptian theme, the Empress towers over the Des Plaines River behind an imposing facade of sphinxes, obelisks and hieroglyphic friezes, all made of sandstone-tinted stucco.
Behind the pyramids sits a gambler's paradise: two riverboats with 936 slot machines and 64 table games, an off-track betting parlor, a gift shop, the Cafe Casablanca dining room and the Marrakech Market food court with the "Wok Like An Egyptian" Chinese take-out.


Abroad at Home;An Atomized America
When Alexis de Tocqueville sought to explain democracy in America, 150 years  ago, he pointed to the fact that "Americans are forever forming associations." They get together, he said, for commercial, religious, moral and practical objectives -- or "to proclaim a truth." Civic groups, he argued, are an essential element of a democratic culture.
The phenomenon that de Tocqueville shrewdly saw -- America as a nation of joiners -- is now withering away.
So we learn from a fascinating article by Prof.
Robert D. Putnam of Harvard in the new issue of the quarterly The American Prospect.


Essay;Two for the Seesaw
Just one year ago, Newt Gingrich's star was on the most rapid rise: his contract was signed, his Speakerhood was at hand, his revolution was gaining momentum.
At the same moment, Bill Clinton's star was more like a plunging meteorite: his grandiose health plan had been rejected and his misjudgment had cost Democrats the House of Representatives for the first time in two generations.
He was reduced to making bleats about the Presidency still being relevant.


Fog Besieges U.S. Operation in Bosnia for 4th Day
Once again, weather defeated the American peacekeeping operation in Bosnia, with planes unable to land at the airport here for the fourth consecutive day because of heavy fog.
They could be heard but not seen from the ground as they made futile passes over the runway.


British Media Get New Ownership Rules
Britain's media industry appeared to be heading for a possible shake-up of ownership after the publication of new proposals on Friday aimed at increasing cross-holdings between the television and newspaper sectors.
The National Heritage Secretary, Virginia Bottomley, said the new Broadcasting Bill, which should take effect by the start of 1997, would prompt British companies to consider mergers between newspaper and television companies.


Teen-Agers Cross State Lines in Abortion Exodus
The decision to have an abortion was the easy part for a 16-year-old girl from Watsontown, Pa.
Getting one turned out to be the tough part.
She did not want to tell her parents, but under state law, she had to in order to get their  consent.
And like many other teen-agers in the 35 states that have parental-involvement law, she did not want to do that.
Since Pennsylvania's law  went into effect in March 1994, the number of Pennsylvania teen-agers terminating their pregnancies in state has dropped to 3,276 in 1994 from 4,037 in 1992, according to Bruce Reimer, a spokesman for the Pennsylvania Department  of Health.


French Premier Appeals For Labor Reconciliation
Prime Minister Alain Juppe of France appealed for reconciliation today after  three weeks of labor unrest, saying he would offer measures this week to stimulate the economy and promising to hold the line at current plans for tax increases.


Drug Suspect Crosses Ocean to Surrender
A Pakistani man accused of smuggling drugs into the United States flew to New York City last week and surrendered after years of eluding Federal authorities.
"We can't figure it out," Jodi Avergun, deputy chief of the narcotics unit for the United States Attorney's office in Brooklyn, said yesterday.
"He claims  he wants to prove his innocence."


Six Flags and Reckitt Change Agencies
Two large marketers have made changes on their accounts.
Six Flags Theme Parks named McCann-Erickson Worldwide in New York to handle the majority of its consolidated national creative and media account, with billings estimated at more than $40 million.
The account had been divided among  more than 10 shops, including four offices of McCann-Erickson, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies.


Palestinian Police Hold Anti-Israel Agitator
A leader of renegade street fighters surrendered today after a crackdown by the new Palestinian government in Nablus, officials said.
The Palestinian police arrested Ahmed Tabouk, 31, head of the Fatah Hawks, whose members had been heroes for many Palestinians for fighting the Israeli occupation of the West Bank.


U.S Shirked Role At Ozone Meeting
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 10 news article on the conclusion of the international meeting in Vienna where 149 countries met to amend the Montreal Protocol governing protection of the ozone layer did not convey the huge environmental disappointment over the weak results and the failure of United States leadership.


Haitian Presidential Voting Goes Smoothly, but Turnout Is Low
With a calm that bordered on indifference, Haitians trickled to the polls today to choose a successor to President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, confounding hopes that increased security and improved organization would encourage them to  exercise their hard-won right to vote.
Across the country, voter turnout was described by international observers and Haitian election officials as uniformly and disappointingly low.
By late afternoon, it was apparent that considerably fewer than halfHaiti's 3.7 million  registered voters would cast ballots.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day last Monday about improvements in the sound quality of personal computers misstated the ownership  of Altec Lansing Technologies Inc.
The company, whose products include loudspeakers that are sold with some computers, is based in Milford, Pa., and is privately owned.
It is not owned by Mark IV Industries.


Clinton's Card Goes to Wrong Governor
The White House remembered to send a Christmas card to the Governor of Alabama, but someone there forgot who was Governor.
Buried among the hundreds of Christmas cards sent to the Governor's Mansion were cards from President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore -- each addressed to Jim Folsom, predecessor of the current Governor, Fob James Jr..


A Berlioz Conception Of the Nativity Mystery
It would probably do Handel's "Messiah" much good to be relieved, at least now and then, from its obligation to the Christmas concert season.
The music, however enduring, long ago gave away all its secrets.
Berlioz's infrequently heard "L'Enfance du Christ" could be an ideal alternative, a tender and movingly understated telling of the world's most famous story.
The Orchestra of St.
Luke's has championed this work in Christmas  seasons past; the performance Sir Charles Mackerras led with the orchestra and the Canticum Novum Festival Singers at Carnegie Hall on Saturday night was serene, literate and deeply satisfying.


The prospect of Internet censorship raises troubling issues for business.
FREE-SPEECH activists and Netizens took to the streets and to their keyboards last week, condemning as unconstitutional the new measures for censoring the Internet that are being considered by Congress.
But while most of the outcry has raised valid concerns about the First Amendment and civil liberties, little of the discussion has focused on how censorship could cripple much of the Internet's commercial potential.


A Potpourri From Hong Kong And More Obscure Corners
Three dancers who are from, or who have been associated with, Hong Kong offered solos in a program called "Hong Kong Choreographers in Concert" on Friday night at the Harry DeJur Playhouse.
All the participants seemed familiar  with both traditional Chinese dances and international modern-dance styles.
But  their works resembled private rituals.
Even when standing still as if lost in thought, Wong Kwan Sun commanded attention in "Vice Versa." He proceeded to fall, rise, stumble and fall again.
These serious activities were interrupted by a lively jumping dance.
But this gave way to a sequence in which he thrashed as if attacked by an imaginary opponent.
The piece ended with him as a shadowy figure moving through almost total darkness.
Despite its intensity, the solo remained thematically obscure.


Tyson Finds His Timing After Short 'Warm-Up'
After he shook off the rust of inactivity and knocked out Buster Mathis Jr. in the third round Saturday night, Mike Tyson approached his groggy victim and said, "You're my brother."
Mathis is an exceedingly friendly man, but the right uppercut, left hook and  two hammering rights that put him on his back seemed an odd way to cement familial bonds.


Digital Equipment Offers Web Browsers Its 'Super Spider'
If you build a better spider, the World Wide Web will beat a path to your door.
At least, that is the hope of the Digital Equipment Corporation, which released a high-speed system for finding information on the Internet's rapidly expanding World Wide Web multimedia service on Friday.
A prototype of the new search system, formally called Alta Vista but known popularly as a "super spider," was made available to the Web-browsing public at no charge.


Riley Doesn't Relish Return to Garden
Pat Riley solemnly walked off the court after the Miami Heat's latest loss Saturday night, wearing the grim expression of someone going through a difficult time.
Riley has many worries at the moment -- a four-game losing streak and an injury-riddled team that has slipped to 12-9 after an 11-3 start.
But between now and Tuesday, he must brace himself for an emotional confrontation that he would prefer to avoid.


Dolphins' Frustrations Are Only Compounded by Bills
The Dolphins knew beating the Bills at Rich Stadium this late in the season with so much on the line would be difficult.
But they were only 3 points behind  as the Bills lined up at the Dolphins' 41 on third-and-2 with two minutes to play.
And a stop there would put the ball back in the hands of quarterback Dan Marino, a craftsman of the last-minute, game-winning touchdown drive.


News Summary
International
A3-11


Algerian Chief Vows to Fight, But Offers Militants Clemency
President Liamine Zeroual of Algeria, in his first speech since being sworn after presidential elections last month, vowed today to fight with the full rigor of the law the Muslim militants trying to overthrow him.
But he also repeated an offer of clemency -- a pardon or reduced sentence --  to those who surrendered.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Tackling the Letter And Spirit of a Medieval Yule Boston Camerata Florence Gould Hall


Teshi Journal;A Whimsical Coffin? Not Just for Chiefs Anymore
Seated in his roadside workshop, where he put the finishing touches on a coffin in the form of a bush taxi that was realistic down to the curves of the front bumper, Laryea Okai seemed stumped by the question of how he would choose  to be buried.
As one of Ghana's master coffin makers, the decision was not simple.
Even if  he were to pick from the colorful menagerie on hand that day, the choices ranged from gigantic crabs and lobsters, which seemed to long for the surf, to man-sized pods of cocoa and ears of corn.


Welfare Cuts Will Leave Thousands Homeless;Right to Travel
To the Editor:
The Federal Health and Human Services Department's statement that Connecticut's two-tier welfare benefits proposal "raises issues of constitutionality" (news article, Dec. 9) is an understatement.
The Supreme Court has held in several cases that there is a constitutional right to travel and state statutes that deter or penalize travel are unconstitutional unless they are necessary to further compelling state interests.


Metro Matters;From Tourists, A Timely Gift Of Perspective
THE time is Sunday morning, the place is a cold and windy Battery Park, the players are tourists who came to catch a ferry to the Statue of Liberty or Ellis Island.
They couldn't, because parts of the Federal Government were shut down again, and they were disappointed.
But they were not all that upset about it.
This is New York, after all.
As 14-year-old Awenlue Kante of Oregon put it: "In  Portland, there is only one place to go, and that's the mall. There's always something to do here."
That there is.
And there is always something happening.
Too much, lately, a lot of it bad.
In one week alone, eight people died in one racially tinged attack in Harlem, a woman was pushed in front of a subway train, the subway clerk whose token booth had been torched died and two police officers were shot.
Enough to make the term New Yorker seem more like an accusation than a proper noun.


Large Drop In Killings Is Reported
The number of homicides reported to the police fell by 12 percent in the first half of this year, compared with the same period in 1994, which is the largest drop in at least 35 years, the Federal Bureau of Investigation reported  today.


Queens House Fire Kills a Woman, 20
A 20-year-old woman was killed in a fire in her Queens home yesterday, and firefighters did not find her body until an hour after the fire was declared under control.
Firefighters who searched the second-floor bedroom where the woman, Karen McKenzie, lay overcome by smoke did not see her because she was under a window,  hidden by draperies or blinds, said Chief Harry Norum of the New York City Fire Department.


Festival of Lights Begins


CHRONICLE
Before Willy Loman, there was Schoenzeit.
In a short story based on a true one and pulled from a dusty archive by a drama critic, a teen-age ARTHUR MILLER foreshadows his masterpiece "Death of a Salesman" in writing of a failed New York coat salesman.
JOHN LAHR, the drama critic for The New Yorker, discovered the manuscript at  the Arthur Miller Archive at the University of Texas, the magazine's Dec. 25-Jan. 1 issue reports.


Anthony Ingrassia, Playwright and Producer, 51
Anthony J. Ingrassia, a playwright, producer and director whose works were produced on and Off Broadway and abroad, died on Saturday night at Brunswick Hospital in Amityville, L.I.
Mr.
Ingrassia, who lived in Massapequa Park, L.I.,  was 51.
By his own admission a compulsive eater who weighed about 600 pounds and suffered from a breathing disorder and a heart ailment, Mr.
Ingrassia died of cardiac arrest, said a friend, Jill Johnson.


Hanukkah's Dreidel
To the Editor:
In explaining the rules for the Hanukkah dreidel game (Living section, Dec. 13), you state that the letters on the dreidel combine to mean "a great miracle  happened here."


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press last Monday about the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize misstated the role of Albert Einstein in the founding of the Pugwash antinuclear group in 1957.
The group was formed in response to an appeal made by Bertrand Russell and Einstein in 1955; Einstein died later that year and was not a founder.


For 59:55, the Giants Are the Better Team
When Giants quarterback Dave Brown took off running on a scramble in the second quarter against the Dallas Cowboys, Mr.
Pizza Hut himself, Deion Sanders, came up to make the tackle.
Brown wasn't going to have any of this sliding stuff.
No way.
He lowered his shoulder and ran over the $35 million cornerback.
When Brown got up, not only did he do some trash-talking to Sanders, but he also did the Brown version of a dance.
He may need some lessons from Arthur Murray or Janet Jackson, but the point was well taken: The Giants were not going to take any garbage from the Cowboys.
They were ready to fight.


10 . . . 10 . . . 9 . . . 8 . . .
1996 will be delayed briefly.
The nation's official clocks will add a "leap second" at the end of the year, the National Institute of Standards and Technology says.
Leap seconds are added  to keep atomic clocks in tune with the Earth.


Welfare Cuts Will Leave Thousands Homeless
To the Editor:
Re your Dec. 11 news article on Gov.
George E. Pataki's plan to reshape New York's welfare system:


Accounts
Browning-Ferris Industries, Houston, to Gigante Vaz &amp; Partners, New York, to handle national advertising for the waste hauler, previously handled by Fogarty  Klein &amp; Partners, Houston.
The billings were estimated at $3 million.
Gigante Vaz already handles the Browning-Ferris account in metropolitan New York, with billings estimated at $2 million.
Chelsea GCA Realty, Roseland, N.J., to Sacks &amp; Rosen Inc., New York, to handle advertising for the real estate investment company, which owns factory outlet shopping centers.
Those duties had been handled by various agencies on a project basis.
Billings were not disclosed.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:
MONDAY


Toxic Fire in South Africa Kills 3 and Routs 2,500
Clouds of toxic gas from a fire at a South African chemical plant killed 3 people and forced the evacuation of 2,500, rescuers said today.
The fire began late Saturday at the plant near Somerset West, 25 miles from Cape Town.
It sent poisonous sulfur dioxide clouds billowing over the small town of Macassar.


Branson Names Gtech in Defamation Suit
Richard Branson, the British entrepreneur, has sued an American company with  a stake in operating Britain's national lottery, contending that he was defamed  when it suggested he was telling lies.
The High Court suit was filed Friday, four days after Mr.
Branson said on a BBC program that the chairman of the Gtech Holdings Corporation had tried to bribe him to pull out of bidding for the contract to operate Britain's lottery.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week:
Monday


It's a Bye for Chiefs, And a Loss for Denver
Chiefs 20, Broncos 17


League Honoring Director
Emily Mann, the artistic director of the McCarter Theatre in Princeton, will  receive the Lee Reynolds Award today from the League of Professional Theater Women.
The award, named after a producer who died in 1989, honors women in the theater whose work has "helped to illuminate the possibilities for social, cultural or political change." Ms.
Mann directed the current Broadway play "Having Our Say."


Outspokenness on Simpson Case Has California Talk Show Host in aCaldron
During the early morning on the day that the jury in the O. J. Simpson case was due to return its verdict, Tammy Bruce, a radio talk show host here, was so  certain that he would be convicted of murder that she popped a bottle of champagne on air to celebrate his impending doom.
None of Ms.
Bruce's regular listeners on KFI-AM, the top-rated talk-radio station here, were likely to have been surprised by her effervescent mood on that October day.
For months Ms.
Bruce had been proclaiming loudly her contempt  for Mr.
Simpson -- based on his history of abusing his former wife Nicole Brown  Simpson, whom he was charged with killing.
And for a brief moment it seemed to her that he was going to get his due.


Al Stump, 79, Sportswriter and Chronicler of Ty Cobb's Life, Dies
Al Stump, the sportswriter and ghostwriter whose two versions of the life of  Ty Cobb provided contrasting portraits of the tempestuous baseball immortal, died on Thursday in Hoag Memorial Hospital in Newport Beach, Calif.
Mr.
Stump, who lived in Newport Beach, was 79.
The cause of death was congestive heart failure, according to his wife, Jo Mosher.


The Cowboys Were Slick. Too Slick.
From the opening of today's game, the Giants' offensive and defensive linemen noticed something drastically wrong.
When they would try to engage a Dallas lineman, it was hard to get a grip on the shoulder or upper-arm area because Cowboys players had their jerseys and arms covered with a slippery substance.
Several Giants linemen thought it was silicone, a substance banned in the National Football League.


Last Front of Arab-Israeli Warfare: Lebanon
Road signs here display posters of the Party of God's Islamic martyrs, but even so, people whisper with resentment about both sides in the conflict that has left southern Lebanon the last fighting front in the Arab-Israeli wars.
To the south is the Israeli Army, which still occupies one-tenth of Lebanon as protection against guerrilla attacks.
To the north are 40,000 Syrian occupying troops, who represent the most important champion of those assaults.


Senators Aim for Compromise
Since February, the Senate and the Assembly have disagreed on the best way to change binding arbitration procedures used to resolve contract disputes between  the police and local governments.
The Senate passed a bill that would allow arbitrators to pick and choose among points offered by each side.
The Assembly,  however, is opposed to that approach.
But today, Senate Republicans are expected to try to break the logjam by taking up the Assembly's bill.


Is Syria Ready to Deal With Israel?
While Israeli and American officials are clearly jubilant over their success  in getting Syria back to a negotiating table, the basic question remains the same: Is President Hafez al-Assad really ready to deal?
In the Israeli-American view, he has to be.
His former Soviet backers are gone, Israel has made peace with the Egyptians, Jordanians and Palestinians, and the Israelis have a new leader who has been proclaiming his longing for peace from every podium and hinting that it could well include returning the whole of  the Golan Heights and an endorsement of Syria's control over Lebanon.


Pataki's Budget Would Pare College Grants
Although Gov.
George E. Pataki has proposed a $250 limit on tuition increases next year for both the New York State and City university systems, his budget also would cut aid by as much as $1,170 a year for 144,000 of the state's poorest students.
Under the proposal, students at public and private colleges who receive Federal aid would face a cut in state aid.
For the first time, the state would apply half of students' Federal Pell grant -- the Government's biggest student aid program -- to their tuition payment.
Now, 90 percent of their tuition is covered by the state's Tuition Assistance Plan, so Federal money can be used for living expenses, books and fees.


A Strapped Vietnam
To the Editor:
Re "American Money Makes the Whole World Sing" (Week in Review, Dec. 17):


It's Tyson or Nothing for Free TV
Does Fox's 16.9 overnight Nielsen rating for Saturday night's Mike Tyson-Buster Mathis Jr. card speak to anything but the drawing power of Mikey?
Not likely.
Unless Tyson needs to make another return from prison, we witnessed his free television farewell at the Spectrum.
Fox's three coming Don King-promoted cards may feature Julio Cesar Chavez, Tommy Morrison or Michael Carbajal in prime-time or late-night slots; none can nearly triple Fox's usual Saturday night ratings, as Tyson did.
Fox's boxing ratings will sink like Mathis's pectorals during the post-Tyson Era.


Tubemakers Gets Bid
The Broken Hill Proprietary Company, the Australian steel and energy company, offered $1.17 billion (Australian), or $866 million (United States), yesterday for the 51.5 percent of Tubemakers of Australia Ltd. that it does not already own.
John Prescott, managing director of Broken Hill, said the Sumitomo Corporation had agreed to accept the offer for its 19.3 percent stake in Tubemakers.
Directors of Tubemakers, which manufactures steel pipes and industrial products, advised shareholders not to sell their shares until the board had considered the offer.
The Broken Hill offer of $4.05 (Australian) dollars was 12 percent higher than Tubemakers' closing share price yesterday of $3.60.
(AP)


Thyssen Stahl Reduction
Thyssen Stahl A.G., the steelmaking unit of Thyssen A.G. of Germany, said yesterday that it was cutting production and reducing working hours in the fourth quarter of 1995 because of a "clear reduction" in incoming orders.
The company is reducing overtime and other extra hours, and shortening regular working hours, the company said in its in- house magazine.
The company did not give specific order figures.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Boy Found Safe After Cold Night in Woods
A 7-year-old boy who was lost on a chilly night in a remote area of Mendocino County said on Sunday that he heard dogs that were looking for him, but thought  they were bears.
The boy, Christopher Kale, lost a boot and waded through chest-high water during his 20-hour ordeal alone in the woods on Saturday night.


William Ritchie, 92, Chief Archeologist
Dr.
William A. Ritchie, a retired archeologist for the State of New York who  conducted nearly 100 excavations of prehistoric sites, died on Thursday at St.
Peter's Hospital in Albany.
He was 92 and lived in Delmar, N.Y.
He served as chief archeologist at the New York State Museum and Science Service from 1949 until his retirement in 1972.
In 1987, he received the Distinguished Service Award of the Society for American Archeology, the society's highest honor.


Yemen and Eritrea Step Up Dispute Over Island
A dispute over a strategic island in the Red Sea intensified today, with Yemen contending that Eritrean forces broke a truce and captured the island, and with Eritrea denying the charge.
Greater Hanish, the main island in a chain between the two nations, sits astride one of the world's major shipping lanes, 100 miles north of the southern entrance to the Red Sea.


Counting the Wealth of Nations;G.D.P.'s Accuracy Is Under Attack From All Sides
Jean Brown is an energetic widow who works nine hours a day, four days a week doing clerical work and sometimes pushing the toiletries-laden "comfort cart" at the veterans hospital in downtown Baltimore.
Her pay?
Nothing, unless you count  a parking space, a $4 lunch chit or the offer of a free flu shot.
The V.A. hospital estimates that the work done by hundreds of volunteers like Mrs.
Brown is worth at least $350,000 a year.
But none of it registers on the gauge most widely used to assess the nation's well-being -- the gross domestic product -- which represents the estimated total of goods and services produced in the American marketplace.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
A-3 Holdings Inc., Los Angeles, a subsidiary of Act III Broadcasting Inc., is  selling $35 million of senior accrual debentures sold as part of a unit; each unit consists of a $1,000 note and 16 shares of common stock, due in 2006 through BT Securities Corp.
The debentures are rated Caa by Moody's Investors Service and B- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


Software Recall For Syncronys
Syncronys Softcorp said yesterday that it was recalling its Soft RAM 95 software and that the Federal Government had begun an inquiry into whether the memory-enhancing program worked as claimed.
The software, which is supposed to mimic the benefits of having more RAM, or  screen memory, works as advertised for Windows 3.1 but was ineffective with Windows 95, the latest version of the popular Microsoft operating system.


Land for Rail Link O.K.'d
The board of directors of New Jersey Transit voted yesterday to buy 29 commercial and residential properties in Montclair to construct a 1,200-foot-long rail link between the Booton Line and the Montclair branch of the Morris &amp; Essex Line.
Transit officials say the Montclair connection, an idea that has been under consideration for decades, would save some commuters to Manhattan 30 minutes, while opponents say it would split a neighborhood in half  and lower property values.


What's In a Name? For Jets, Confusion
The problem with the Jets all season, especially in Sunday's 23-6 embarrassment against the Houston Oilers, has been the offensive line.
And the problem with the offensive line Sunday was finding Mike.
Not Michael Jordan, not Michael Jackson, but Mike, the Middle Linebacker.
Pro football teams designate the middle linebacker as Mike (M for middle, M for Mike), the strongside linebacker as Sam and the weakside as Will.


Seoul Ex-Leaders: One on Trial, Another Fasting
As former President Roh Tae Woo stood humbled in a white prison smock before  a court tribunal today, another former President, Chun Doo Hwan, lay in a detention cell, so weakened by a hunger strike he began two weeks ago that the Government may delay his indictment and have him treated first in a hospital.
For millions of South Koreans, the spectacle of former leaders on trial or on hunger strike is shocking.
Everywhere today, at bus terminals, train stations and stores, South Koreans turned to televisions to watch the trial of Mr.
Roh, a man who helped expand South Korea's economy and usher in democracy, and who is alleged to have illicitly enriched himself along the way.


Anti-Terrorism Bill Is Stalled in Congress
The House Judiciary Committee has abandoned hopes of getting an anti-terrorism bill through Congress this year, lawmakers said today.
The bill, promoted with a sense of urgency and strong White House backing after the bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City last April, has been stalled in the House by an unusual coalition of some of the most liberal and the most conservative members.


A Snowman and Santa Make Jersey City's Holiday Scene Legal, a JudgeRules
Jersey City's holiday display in front of City Hall has been rendered constitutionally correct by adding a Santa Claus and a snowman to its traditional Nativity scene and menorah, a Federal judge in Newark ruled yesterday.
The city's addition of the nonreligious plastic figures this month "sufficiently demystified the holy," said the judge, Dickinson R. Debevoise of Federal District Court.
He had ruled on Nov. 28 that the Christian creche and Jewish menorah, displayed alone as they had been since the 1960's, violated the  First Amendment's prohibition against government endorsement of religion.


Metro Digest
NEW YORK CITY Crew Asks Raises for Managers


Game's Best Receiver Has His Best Game
The earth rose up to meet Jerry Rice tonight; the Minnesota Vikings did not.
If Rice appeared to be a member of Minnesota's secondary, it is because he was.
On a field full of divots, the wide receiver put the Vikings in the biggest hole of all.
He outgained them by his lonesome -- 14 catches for a team  and personal record of 289 yards and 3 touchdowns -- and San Francisco won this  track meet, 37-30, in front of 64,975 at 3Com Park.


In New Academia, a Day's Work Isn't Free;Teaching as Penance
To the Editor:
Re "Yale Teaching Assistants Vote for a Grade Strike" (news article, Dec. 13): Interesting, isn't it, that the students at Yale are prepared to pay (tuition) to do research, but insist on being paid to teach?
Yet as one department chairman has pointed out, the teaching is presumably also a part of their training, and for most, perhaps, a more important part.


BRUTALITY BEHIND BARS -- A special report.;Prison's Violent Culture Enveloping Its Guards
It began as a typically senseless prison fight: a knot of inmates scuffling in a crowded corridor at the Clinton state prison over a piece of candy on the floor.
Corrections officers stopped the brawl.
But then the violence began again.
This time, the officers went on a rampage, kicking and hitting handcuffed inmates, spitting on them and showering them with racial slurs.
One inmate needed 10 stitches to close a head wound; another was left temporarily deaf in one ear.


Senate Committee Says Files On Whitewater Are Missing
The Senate Whitewater panel said today that documents describing Hillary Rodham Clinton's work for a failing savings and loan vanished from her former law firm in Little Rock, Ark., sometime before President Clinton took office.
Republicans on the committee said the missing papers were crucial to understanding the role Mrs.
Clinton played in the 1980's, when her firm represented the savings and loan association, Madison Guaranty, before regulators appointed by her husband, then the Governor of Arkansas.
The missing  documents include billing records from the Rose Law Firm, where Mrs.
Clinton was a partner, and time sheets prepared in the 1980's that describe the work she did for Madison.


Cambodia to Exile a Prince
Prince Norodom Sirivudh of Cambodia, who has been in custody since Nov. 21 on charges linked to an assassination plot, was released today into the care of his half-brother, King Norodom Sihanouk, before an expected exile overseas.
The prince was linked to an alleged assassination plot against the Second Prime Minister, Hun Sen.
He has denied any involvement in such a plot and has said the arrest was political.


World News Briefs;U.S. Criticism of Panel Draws Colombia Protest
United States ties with Colombia took another turn for the worse today after  a State Department official criticized a Colombian congressional panel's decision to clear President Ernesto Samper of drug corruption charges.
The committee said last week that it was shelving an investigation that could have led to Mr.
Samper's impeachment, saying there was no hard evidence to support charges he used drug traffickers' money to win election last year.


Creditors Seen in Deal for Olympia &amp; York
Two big creditor groups fighting for control of the bankrupt Olympia &amp; York Companies (U.S.A.), the American subsidiary of Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., have forged a preliminary agreement to split the troubled real estate company's  property portfolio, according a person familiar with the situation.
If completed, the agreement would end a six-month dispute between a creditor  group led by the financier Leon Black and one led by the Bronfman family of Toronto.
It would also avert a potentially lengthy court fight for control of Olympia &amp; York U.S.A., one of New York's largest commercial real estate landlords.


Schools Chancellor Urging Raises for His Top Managers
Less than two weeks after New York City's public school teachers rejected a contract that would have frozen their wages for two years, Schools Chancellor Rudy Crew has recommended that the Board of Education raise the salaries of 370  top managers by an average of about 7 percent.
A spokesman for the Chancellor, David Begel, said that the timing of the recommendation, however awkward, was out of Dr.
Crew's hands.
A 1990 board resolution, he said, obligated the Chancellor to propose raising board managers' salaries whenever those of city managers went up, as they did 12 days ago.


Impasse Takes A Toll on Treasuries
The yield on the long bond surged to its highest level in nearly three weeks  yesterday, as prices fell, reflecting both traders' anxiety about the stalemated budget negotiations in Washington and their fear that as a result of the Government shutdown, the Federal Reserve will not cut interest rates today.
The 30-year benchmark issue dropped 117/32 , to a price of 1095/32 .
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction from its price, rose 11 basis points, to 6.20 percent, the highest since Nov. 28, when it was 6.23 percent.
A  basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Creel Journal;A Pianist Dreams His Own Unconquered Mexico
Romayne Wheeler has performed on the piano in many of the great concert halls of Europe and America.
He has studied at conservatories in Salzburg and Vienna, and had a full schedule of performances in as many cities as he could travel to.
It wasn't enough.
"After a time I had played all the concert halls I wanted to play in and performed all the concerts I wanted to perform," said the 53-year-old American-born musician.
"I came full circle and felt I was repeating myself. I knew there had to be more, or else I was just becoming a musical robot."


Dole's Switch on Abortion Leads Quickly to Furor on G.O.P. Right
Senator Bob Dole's statement on Sunday that he would no longer support an unconditional ban on abortion prompted a wave of anger today from the Republican right and escalated an already fierce ideological war in the party.
It also gave Mr.
Dole's Republican rivals an opportunity to accuse him of sacrificing principle for political expedience.


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day yesterday with the Technology column, about possible censorship on the Internet, misstated the date of a rally in San Francisco to protest proposed Internet restrictions in the Federal telecommunications bill.
It was Thursday, not Saturday.


Merger Plan For Steris And Amsco
Two companies that make surgical sterilization equipment agreed to merge yesterday, but the value of the deal plunged in later trading.
The Steris Corporation, which is based in Mentor, Ohio, agreed to buy the much larger Amsco International Inc. of Pittsburgh in a stock swap initially valued at about $660 million.
But Steris stock fell so much on the news that by  the end of the day, the value of the deal fell to $505 million.


Driver Survives 50-Foot Fall
A tractor-trailer that swerved to avoid another truck crashed through a guard rail yesterday on Interstate 78 in Newark and fell 50 feet to a grassy surface below, landing upright and leaving its driver with a back injury, the police said.
"I was surprised he was still alive," said Trooper James Muir of the state police.
The driver, Shawn J. Brey, 26, of Whitehall, Pa., was in stable condition last night at University Hospital.


Edberg to Quit After 1996
Deflated by a ranking that dipped from No. 1 to 23d in the world in the last  five years, yet eager to avoid becoming a tennis star who "just faded away," Stefan Edberg of Sweden announced yesterday that 1996 will be his final year on  the circuit.
"You can only stay up there so long," he said.


Victims In Store Fire Called 911
While the deadly fire was still raging through Freddy's clothing store in Harlem, workers were in the basement frantically calling 911 in a panicked bid for help, officials said yesterday.
By the time the Dec. 8 fire was brought under control, eight people had died, including Roland J. Smith Jr., the disgruntled street vendor who had set the blaze.
The bodies of four victims were found in the basement.


Welcome to St. Nick (Or Is It Mr. Claus?)
Sure, this Santa may look just like any other, but his presence outside City  Hall in Jersey City has solved a constitutional crisis.
His arrival, along with  that of a snowman, has given secular legitimacy to the city's holiday exhbit, which had been ruled illegal when it contained only a Christian Nativity scene and Jewish menorah.
Civil Libertarians say they are not mollified by the presence of the plastic visitors, saying the display is still overwhelmingly religious in nature.
Article, page B4.


Pep Boys Chooses Cliff Freeman
Pep Boys (Manny, Moe &amp; Jack), the chain of auto-supply stores, said yesterday that it had selected Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners in New York to handle the creative portion of its account, with billings estimated at $23 million.
Those duties had been handled by N. W. Ayer &amp; Partners in New York for the last three years, until that agency resigned last week.
Richard Hammill, vice president for advertising at Pep Boys in Philadelphia, said Freeman was awarded the account after a monthlong review that was narrowed  to Freeman; DDB Needham Chicago, a unit of the Omnicom Group, and the Leap Partnership in Chicago.
Freeman is owned by Cordiant P.L.C.
Ayer's resignation came about a month after Adweek reported that Pep Boys had begun getting in touch with other agencies.
Ayer said, however, that it had resigned because of "a shift in Pep Boys' strategy to a greater retail focus."


Team Owners Plan a Race To Challenge The Indy 500
The conflict between the Indianapolis Motor Speedway and the people who own the cars and hire the drivers who compete there took a turn yesterday that once  seemed unimaginable: a direct challenge to the Indy 500's position as the pre-eminent auto race in the world.
The team owners, who make up the board of Championship Auto Racing Teams, met in Rosemont, Ill., yesterday and voted unanimously to hold a 500-mile Indy-car race at Michigan International Speedway in Brooklyn, Mich., next May 26, the same day as the Indianapolis 500.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about the winners of 40 Marshall Scholarships, awarded by the British Embassy, misspelled one surname.
The scholar, at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, was Ciamac C. Mo allemi, not McAllemi.


CONAGRA UNIT BUYS MOGEN DAVID TRADEMARKS
Conagra Inc.'s National Foods division said yesterday that it had acquired the trademarks of the Mogen David Kosher Meat Products Corporation, including Mogen David, American Kosher, Isaac Gellis, Judea and Zion.
Conagra is based in  Omaha.
Mogen David distributes kosher products, including cured meats and sausage products, in the three-state New York metropolitan region and Florida.
The company said this acquisition reflected Conagra's growing interest in the kosher-meat market.
The newly acquired brands are to be marketed by National Foods, which reports to the Armour Swift Eckrich division of Conagra.
Three years ago, Conagra bought National Foods, which makes Hebrew National kosher meat products..


Prominent Freddy's Protester Was Record Store Employee
A protester who has been accused of making anti-Semitic remarks and threatening to burn down Freddy's clothing store in Harlem was an employee of the record store whose owner was locked in a bitter real estate dispute with Freddy's, the man's lawyer and the record store owner said yesterday.


For Students, the Runway Beckons
When fashion students at the Rhode Island School of Design say that Dec. 9 was a critical day for them, they mean it, literally.
Clutching a microphone and perched on a bar stool like crooners in a karaoke  bar, students ended the fall semester that day, presenting to a panel of industry critics the projects they had worked on from last summer till 4 P.M. (exactly) two days earlier.


World of Ancient Iceman Comes Into Focus
IT was four years ago that a vacationing German couple happened across a well-preserved body lying face-down in a slushy pocket of glacier in the Italian Alps.
Since this chance discovery of what turned out to be a 5,300-year-old corpse, the world's oldest known human-flesh remains, scientists and archeologists have teased out remarkable information on the man and his environment from the equipment and clothing found with him.
A bit of ember he carried to restart his campfire was from a tree likely to have grown south of the spot where he died.
That evidence suggested he was on his way from the fertile Venosta Valley in northern Italy and had probably made  his home there.
A grain of domesticated wheat clinging to his fur clothing indicated that he had had contact with civilization, which in those days and parts would have been a small farming village.


Bagel Officers To Resign Posts
Two executives of the Manhattan Bagel Company will resign following a report  published in The New York Times on Sunday that they face criminal indictments on charges of toxic-waste dumping by a company they own in Los Angeles, one of the  executives said.
The two executives, Allan Boren and Eric Cano, who face 24 felony charges relating to their Chatsworth Plating Company, a Los Angeles metal-plating company, joined Manhattan Bagel as executives in June, when it acquired their 16-store bagel chain, I. &amp; Joy Bagels.


Nina Verchinina, Ballet Dancer, 85
Nina Verchinina, a Russian-born dancer who was one of the first classically trained ballerinas to be influenced by modern dance, died on Saturday at her home in Rio de Janeiro.
She was 85.
Miss Verchinina was born in Moscow and reared in Shanghai and Paris.
She studied with many distinguished Paris-based teachers, among them the choreographer Bronislava Nijinska.
But her style was transformed when she studied with pupils of the pioneering modern-dance choreographer Rudolf von Laban, whose theories helped her make her dancing emotionally eloquent as well as technically brilliant.
She became noted for her mastery of dynamics and her fluid arm and torso movements.


In New Academia, a Day's Work Isn't Free;Lure of the Scholar
To the Editor:
Teaching assistants are universally misused, not only at Yale (news article,  Dec. 13).
As the parent of two recent graduates of prestigious universities, I was appalled to find out how much of their teaching was conducted by graduate students, and how rarely they saw those famous professors whose reputations drew them to the university in the first place.


Dole's Abortion Shift Denounced by Right
A day after Senator Bob Dole said he would no longer support an unconditional ban on abortion, the Republican right reacted with sharp criticism.
And those competing against Mr.
Dole for the Republican Presidential nomination used the opportunity to accuse him of sacrificing principle for political expedience.
The abortion issue already had the potential to divide the Republican Party's nominating convention next summer, and the latest exchange has added a new volatility to the subject.


Mayor Meets With Silver On State Cuts
In an indication of his concern over next year's state budget, Mayor Rudolph  W. Giuliani yesterday put aside his differences with the Democrats who control the State Assembly to meet with their leader, Speaker Sheldon Silver, to plot ways of getting more state money for the city.
Mr.
Giuliani and Mr.
Silver, who have repeatedly clashed in recent months, discussed the cuts in the new $63.8 billion state budget proposed on Friday by Gov.
George E. Pataki, a document that politicians across the city spent the weekend poring over, and, for the most part, denouncing.


Lincoln Center Elevates Status Of Jazz
In 1987, when Lincoln Center's director of visitor services, Alina Bloomgarden, started a small, three-concert jazz program to take advantage of the dark concert halls of August, she hadn't a clue what would happen to her series.
Yesterday, the Lincoln Center Board awarded the institution's jazz department, Jazz at Lincoln Center, equal status with the New York Philharmonic, the Metropolitan Opera, the New York City Ballet and the other so-called constituents of the center.


Turnpike Tolls Won't Rise
Tolls on the New Jersey Turnpike will remain at current levels through 1998,  officials announced yesterday.
The Turnpike Authority said it would avoid any increases by reducing operating expenses an average of 8.3 percent for the next three years.
Some of the money will be saved by eliminating 135 jobs and turning the toll plaza and building maintenance over to private hands, the authority said.


Moderate Growth Is Seen by Economists
The economy is expected to grow moderately in the short run with inflation easing, a semiannual survey by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia reported today.
It said inflation forecasts among the 56 economists polled were lower than its last survey, in June.
The Consumer Price Index is expected to grow at an annual rate of 2.9 percent in the first half of 1996, compared with projections  of 3.5 percent in the last survey.


Ailing Man Kills Ailing Wife and Himself
For years, according to neighbors in Midwood, Brooklyn, Fred Fichter had cared for his wife, Ruth, who had multiple sclerosis and used a wheelchair.
It was not easy, especially since Mr.
Fichter had heart problems himself.
Mr.
Fichter, a 75-year-old retired transit police officer, had a heart attack recently and the struggle became even more difficult, the police and neighbors said.
Sometime in the last few days, though, that struggle ended, when Mr.
Fichter apparently shot Mrs.
Fichter, who was 73, and then turned the gun on himself.


MARINE MIDLAND TO ACQUIRE RIVER BANK BRANCHES
Marine Midland Bank, a unit of HSBC Holdings P.L.C. in London, agreed yesterday to buy bank branches, loans and deposits from struggling River Bank America for $93 million.
The deal would give Marine Midland, based in Buffalo, 11 branches in New York City that River Bank operates as East River Savings Bank.
River Bank, based in New Rochelle, N.Y., recently shed assets and laid off employees to recover from several years of losses and bad loans.
Marine Midland would get $1.2 billion in deposits and $1.5 billion in loans.
Marine Midland has $19 billion in assets and 320 branches in New York.


Officer Quits Amid Inquiry
Bergen County prosecutors and the Federal Bureau of Investigation have been investigating allegations that a burglary ring operated within the Palisades Park Police Department.
On Monday night, Police Chief Alan Lustman, a 41-year veteran of the department, stepped down but said his retirement had nothing to do with the investigation.
His successor, John Genovese, defended the integrity of his officers yesterday but said he plans to begin meeting soon with community groups concerned about the unusually large number of break-ins in the borough.


Purchasing Units at Ford Are Combined
The Ford Motor Company has combined its two purchasing units into one global  organization to save money in buying parts and materials.
The company said it would not eliminate any of the 2,300 purchasing jobs and  that any cost savings would be put back into the division.
The new unit, which will combine procurement of auto parts, machinery and services, will be headed by Carlos E. Mazzorin, whose new title is vice president of purchasing.


Error in Design Makes L.I.R.R. Platforms Too High
The new $1 million platform at the Long Island Rail Road station here was built to exacting specifications.
It even tilts slightly away from the tracks for better drainage in wet weather.
There is just one problem: it is two to three inches higher than the boarding level of the trains.
That may not sound like much, but it is more than enough to make people trip, railroad officials say, especially distracted commuters who think they are walking across a level surface.
As a result, the railroad is considering raising the tracks.


Buckyballs: How to Make Chemistry Inviting
If it accomplished nothing else, the discovery of soccer-ball-shaped carbon molecules 10 years ago did wonders for popularizers of science who depend on striking images to help sell their wares.
On "Nova" tonight, "Race to Catch a Buckyball" is about as good as image-based popular chemistry gets.
The stars of this production are remarkable molecules consisting of 60 or 70  carbon atoms linked together in geodesic patterns of hexagons and pentagons to form hollow carbon spheres.
Unknown until their discovery in 1985, these molecules, known variously as buckminsterfullerenes, fullerenes and buckyballs,  constitute a form of pure carbon distinct from the other two known forms, diamond and graphite.


Sports of The Times;Talking Turkey on 155th Street
SIX fifteen Monday morning.
The sky is still dark, the air cold and heavy.
Two women sit patiently on folding chairs in front of the Prince Hall Masonic Temple on 155th Street in Harlem.
Cathleen Lee and Gwanetta Council arrived just after the truck carrying 1,200 10-pound turkeys was unloaded by the Shriners yesterday.


U.S. and Mexico Postpone Nafta on Truck Crossings
The Clinton Administration and the Mexican Government backed away from a politically volatile and highly symbolic provision of the North American Free Trade agreement today, indefinitely delaying the day when Mexican trucks can move freely through much of the Southwest.
The action came after days of round-the-clock talks in which the Administration sought to forestall the border opening, which was supposed to begin today.
Under pressure from labor unions and officials in the border states, the Administration complained that Mexican authorities have done far too little to improve the safety standards of its long-haul trucks.
The United States wants Mexico to be tougher on the training and licensing of drivers and to increase enforcement of drug laws to prevent the trucks from becoming a conduit for traffickers.


GLENDALE FEDERAL TO SELL MORTGAGE HOLDINGS
Glendale Federal Bank, one of the nation's largest savings institutions, said yesterday that it would sell its entire holdings of collateralized mortgage obligations and record an after-tax loss of about $30 million.
C.M.O.'s are complex securities that are tailor-made for investors using simpler mortgage pass-through securities -- for example, those issued by the Government National  Mortgage Association.
The sale was part of Glendale's plan to shift its focus to community banking, a spokesman said.
Glendale said it had sold about half of  its C.M.O. holdings and would record the entire loss in its fiscal second quarter, which ends on Dec. 31.


Times On-Line Pact
agreed to extend their relationship for one year.
Under the new agreement, the interactive and multimedia features on @times, the New York Times service that is offered on America Online, will be expanded.
In addition, Martin Nisenholtz,  president of The New York Times Electronic Media Company, said, the companies plan to explore a range of new services, either on the Internet's World Wide Web or on America Online, that would include advertising.
The @times service, which has been available to America Online subscribers since June 1994, was recently revamped, adding a reproduction of The Times's front page and a classified advertising section, among other features.


Fleet Expected To Acquire NatWest Unit
Fleet Financial Group Inc. of Boston has agreed to buy the United States banking operation of Britain's National Westminster Bank P.L.C. for $3.5 billion, according to several people involved in the transaction.
The details were being negotiated last night, and an announcement was scheduled for today in New York.
Spokesmen for both companies declined to comment.


Market Place;After Many Selloffs, a Rally. And Now?
Once again, Wall Street has thrown a small panic.
Now the question is whether individual investors will once again throw money into the market to combat weakness.
Recent history suggests they will.
Yesterday's plunge of the Dow Jones industrial average, in which it lost 101.52 points, or 1.96 percent, closing at 5,075.21, was the worst for the index in more than a year, and was the eighth worst day since the start of 1991.
That period has been remarkable for being the longest stretch in history in which the index has not had a 10 percent correction.


Corrections
An article in the Real Estate section on Sunday about changes in the business of managing residential co-ops and condominiums misstated the timing of reductions in monthly maintenance at 205 East 63d Street in Manhattan.
While the board has announced them, they have yet to take place.
The article also misspelled the surname of the board's treasurer.
He is John G. Marder, not Marden.


U.S. Responds Calmly to Communist Gains in Russian Vote
The Clinton Administration responded with equanimity today to the preliminary outcome of parliamentary elections in Russia, despite the revival at the polls of the once-moribund Communist Party.
"I think there's a sense of calm and perspective about this election," said Nicholas Burns, the State Department spokesman.


World News Briefs;Sierra Leone Army Says It Repelled Rebel Attack
Sierra Leone rebels attacked an army base and a village just 38 miles from Freetown but were beaten back, a military spokesman said today.
"We will not allow the rebels to take Magbontoso village because if they succeed they will move on to other towns close to the capital," Maj.
John Milton said in Freetown.


Mazda Mini-Van Price Cut
The Mazda Motor Corportion said today that it would introduce its redesigned  1996 MPV mini-van with a lower price than the 1995 model's, a sign of the strong competition in the mini-van market.
The Japanese auto maker's United States sales have fallen 23 percent this year.
The lower-priced mini-van will join other 1996 Mazdas whose prices have been cut, Mazda said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International
A3-14


U.S. Troops Still Trickle Into Bosnia
It was hardly a pleasant day, with the temperature struggling to stay above freezing, intermittent bone-chilling rain, and the sky depressingly gray.
But by noon, there was at least enough daylight between the snowy ground and  the clouds to allow the huge American cargo planes to begin landing for the first time in five days.


Capitals Are Brutal, Rangers Simply Smashing
The Washington Capitals wear spiffy, new blue uniforms on the road, but that's about the only thing pretty about them.
They play an aggressive style of  hockey -- crash, bash and smash -- that sometimes includes collisions with the opposing goalie.
The Capitals played pretty well last night in their first visit of the season to Madison Square Garden, but the Rangers beat them, 3-0.
Mark Messier scored twice for the other Blue Shirts, and Mike Richter made 30 saves in getting his second shutout of the season.
It was an impressive and important victory for the home team for at least three reasons.


In New Academia, a Day's Work Isn't Free
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 13 news article on the impending grade strike by Yale University teaching assistants fails to mention several key factors that inform the rise of labor organizing among graduate students.


No Headline
Our victory and success at these elections only strengthens our position.
We will have a more solid footing in the presidential elections."
GENNADI ZYUGANOV, the Russian Communist Party leader. [A1:5.]


Stocks Slip in Japan
Stock prices traded lower here today.
At the close of trading, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 170.59 points, or nearly nine-tenths of 1 percent,  to 19,140.49.
On Monday, the Nikkei fell 35.47 points, or about two-tenths of 1  percent.


448 Computers Identify Particle Called Glueball
AFTER solving one million trillion arithmetic problems by continuously running 448 computers for two years, physicists at I.B.M. believe they have demonstrated the existence of "glueballs," hypothetical subnuclear particles that had eluded experimenters for decades.
Theorists had long known that the glueball, if it existed, would be too short-lived to be observed directly.
It has no practical use, except to bolster a widely accepted theory called quantum chromodynamics, or QCD.


U.N. Warns of a Winter Famine in North Korea
Famine is already gripping parts of North Korea and the mass misery will worsen as winter temperatures drop further, the United Nations said today in its bleakest warning to date.
Both the United Nations and the International Red Cross said the devastation  wrought by floods in August was far more severe and long-lasting than originally thought.
They appealed for more funding for the Communist nation, which reluctantly turned to the outside world after decades of self-imposed isolation.


Children's Hospital Planned
Plans were unveiled yesterday for a $54 million children's hospital -- the first in central New Jersey -- to be located at Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital.
Under the joint project between the hospital's pediatric department and the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, children will have access to open-heart surgery and organ transplants, hospital officials said.


For Rizzotti, It's a Full-Service College
Maps.
Every time Jennifer Rizzotti turned around in that torturous fall semester of her sophomore year at the University of Connecticut, she had to produce more maps.
The work was part of a geography course that had nothing to do with her biology major, and complicated the work for the physics, chemistry and calculus courses she had somehow chosen to take at the same time.
The rare double honor Rizzotti achieved in last year's championship season, a spot on the Kodak all-America basketball team plus second-team academic all-America honors, created the image of a gifted, organized, disciplined athlete and student.
The image does not reveal the choices behind the commitment, the complex effort to balance intense, public demands of her game and the needs of her team with the opportunity to achieve on an equally high level elsewhere on campus.


Communication Legislation Stirs Talk of Mergers By Baby Bells
With Congress on the verge of sweeping away six decades of communications laws, the nation's telephone companies are jockeying furiously in preparation for a wide-open race for customers and profit.
Two regional Bell telephone companies, Nynex and Bell Atlantic, are reportedly exploring a merger that would create the second-largest telephone company in the United States.
Only AT&amp;T, the largest long-distance provider, would have more customer lines.


Fancy Food at Warehouse Prices;Upscale Supermarket Carves a New Niche in Harlem
On a windswept stretch of West Harlem, in a former meatpacking plant under Riverside Drive, the owners of an Upper West Side institution have built a supermarket that they hope will change the way many New Yorkers shop.
The store, offering everything from prepared salads to 50-pound bags of sugar, easily dwarfs any other supermarket in Manhattan.
In fact, it is eight times as large as the familiar one at Broadway and 74th Street.
The name: Fairway. The location: 133d Street and 12th Avenue.


Powell Stands Firm About '96 Campaign
Gen.
Colin L. Powell remains uninterested in running for Vice President on the Republican ticket, a spokesman for the general said, but Senator Bob Dole predicted that General Powell would run if asked.
Mr.
Dole and the general had not discussed the Vice Presidency, said Bill Smullen, a spokesman for General Powell.


Devils Get Dose of Deja Vu, With a Twist
The last time the Philadelphia Flyers came to New Jersey, they faced a Devils team that had one victory in the previous seven games.
The Flyers are visiting again Tuesday night and the Devils are in exactly the same predicament.
They hope to respond the same way they did last month, when they took a pair  of games from Philadelphia in building a three-game winning streak.
But there are a couple of major differences this time.
The Flyers have Eric Lindros, who was injured for that Nov. 11-12 home-and-home series, and the Devils do not have Chris Terreri, who was traded to San Jose four days after his 4-2 victory over the Flyers, his third in as many starts as the backup to Martin Brodeur.


T.W.A. Withdraws Suit Against Icahn
Trans World Airlines Inc. said today that it had withdrawn a lawsuit against  a travel agency headed by the investor Carl C. Icahn and would try to negotiate  a settlement to a disagreement about his sale of T.W.A. tickets.
Mr.
Icahn, in turn, dropped a default notice against T.W.A. concerning a $190 million loan.
Last summer, the airline gave Mr.
Icahn the right to sell as much  as $610 million face value of T.W.A. tickets over eight years as repayment.
The  loan came due in January.


Cadbury Schweppes In Canadian Purchase
The British candy and soft drink company Cadbury Schweppes P.L.C. agreed yesterday to buy Neilson Cadbury, Canada's leading chocolate bar maker, for $225 million (Canadian), or $164 million (United States). from George Weston Ltd.
Cadbury said the assets included the chocolate confectionery businesses of George Weston Ltd., William Neilson Ltd. and Cadbury Canada Marketing Inc., which holds the license for Cadbury brands in Canada.
Cadbury Schweppes said the acquisition would give it market leadership in the chocolate market in Canada, the 11th-biggest confectionery market in the world.
Neilson Cadbury had total sales of $228 million (Canadian) in 1994.
(AP)


A Wealth of Christmas Lights Dims in Little Rock
A Christmas display that once had 3.2 million lights, drawing thousands of sightseers and a lawsuit that ended up before the Supreme Court, is but a flicker of its former self this year.
When Jennings Osborne and his family turned on the display on Saturday, it was down to just 12,000 lights -- one-half of 1 percent of the number that caused such a commotion two years ago.


Executive Changes
BAXTER INTERNATIONAL INC., Deerfield, Ill., named Joseph F. Damico chief operating officer of the health care cost-management company it is forming as part of its plan to split into two companies.


Russian Crash Site Found
The wreckage of a Russian jetliner that vanished on Dec. 7 was discovered Monday by a helicopter pilot in mountains near the Pacific coast.
Russian officials said there were no signs of survivors.
The Tu-154 plane was carrying 97 people when it disappeared during a snowstorm.


Dollar Suffers From Stalemate Over the Budget in Washington
The dollar kept pace with the sliding stock and bond markets yesterday as the stalemate over the Federal budget made currency traders nervous.
In early trading in Europe, the dollar was hurt as traders sought out the Swiss franc as a safe currency after gains by Communists and nationalists in Russian elections.
Later drops in the United States bond and stock markets kept investors away from the dollar, as did the budget fracas, which sent some Government workers home for the second time this fall.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Roger McDowell, pitcher, on a one-year contract.


Nokia Wireless Contract
Nokia Oy A.B. received a contract yesterday that was initially valued at $50  million to supply equipment for the Western Wireless Corporation's mobile telephone network.
Nokia, the big Finnish company, said the contract included an option that could increase the value to $100 million in the first four years.
Western Wireless, of Bellevue, Wash., acquired six licenses for personal communication system services in auctions conducted by the Federal Communications Commission.
(Dow Jones)


Ha-Ha-Ha's From the Ho-Ho-Ho's
According to an awful lot of television commercials, this is the season to be jolly.
Sort of.
Prime-time entertainment certainly tries, working Christmas, Hanukkah and New Year's motifs into everything from "Frasier" to "Beavis and Butt-head."
In Christmases past, holiday specials tended to be caroling fests overseen by tranquilizing hosts like Bing Crosby or Andy Williams.
And that formula is still around, most notably on tomorrow night's CBS presentation of "Kathie Lee: Home for Christmas." Kathie Lee Gifford, her husband, Frank, and their two children can be found positively oozing with holiday cheer in Vail, Colo.
Traditionalists will be heartened to know that the guest list includes Mr.
Williams.


For the first time since '86, the holidays seem free of print ads that sing, pop up or mimic snow globes.
ELABORATE, expensive print advertisements with holiday themes, intended to help sales messages stand out when consumers are busiest and most besieged by marketing blitzes, might well be going the way of an appreciation for fruitcake.
The trend had begun in 1987, when Absolut vodka ran an ad embedded with a microchip that played Christmas carols.
Since then, consumers have been enjoying (or, depending on their tolerance for whimsical kitsch, wincing at) pitches that have sung, talked, moved, popped up and mimicked the snow globes and Advent calendars of childhood memory.
Another popular gimmick has been to enclose gifts, ranging from gloves and stickers to hosiery and handkerchiefs.


Amoco Venture In Gas for Israel
Amoco and the Paz Oil Company of Israel said today that they had signed an agreement to pursue opportunities in Israel's emerging natural-gas industry.
Until recently, oil companies avoided direct dealings with Israel because of  the Arab boycott.
Last year, the Arab League partly lifted its embargo.
In October, the Enron Corporation signed a memorandum of understanding to export liquefied natural gas to Israel from the Persian Gulf state of Qatar.


JAMES RIVER SHARES DROP ON EARNINGS FORECAST
The shares of the James River Corporation of Virginia plunged 18 percent yesterday after it said fourth-quarter earnings would fall below analysts' expectations of 43 cents a share because of weaker demand, lower prices and reduced production.
Shares were down $6.125, to $25.25, in New York Stock Exchange trading of 1.8 million shares.
Richmond-based James River, the maker of Dixie cups and Brawny paper towels, also said it would sell its plastic-packaging and inks businesses as part of a plan to reduce long-term debt by about $500 million.


LCI INTERNATIONAL TO BUY LONG-DISTANCE ASSETS
LCI International Inc. signed an agreement yesterday to acquire the long-distance telecommunications operations of Teledial America Inc. and ATS Network Communications Inc. for as much as $124 million in cash.
The companies had announced preliminary merger agreements in October that set the price near $115 million.
LCI, of McLean, Va., said it expected to complete both acquisitions in early 1996.
Teledial, based in Grand Rapids, Mich., does business as US Signal; ATS Network is based in Memphis.


Boy, 9, Dies in House Fire
For the second time in three days, a child has died in a fire at a Plainfield house.
Malcolm Jinks, 9, and his sister, Nakiyyah, 10, were unconscious when firefighters pulled them from their second-story bedroom early this morning, officials said.
The boy was pronounced dead at Muhlenberg Regional Medical Center, and the girl was listed in critical condition at Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick.
Their 12-year-old brother, Marcus, may have accidentally started the blaze when he tried to shut off a gas oven being used to heat the house at 939 Melrose Place but instead turned on a burner that ignited a piece of cardboard, said Fire Chief Henry Lariccia.
Two young brothers died in another fire Saturday night, and a third was critically injured.


At Garden, Long Gone but Not Forgotten
From the moment Pat Riley became coach, president and part owner of the Miami Heat, he knew Tuesday night was coming.
He would have to return to New York.
He would have to coach against the team  he spent four years with, striving for a championship that barely eluded him.
He would have to walk into a building where he experienced some of his greatest triumphs and most gut-wrenching defeats.
And he would have to face fans who have not seen him since he left.


200 New Caseworkers Set For Child Welfare Agency
Prompted by the death last month of 6-year-old Elisa Izquierdo, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced plans yesterday to add new caseworkers to the beleaguered  Child Welfare Administration and to begin a long-term study of how to restructure the city agency.
The Mayor said he was carrying out a series of recommendations from a task force he appointed three weeks ago to examine the agency after Elisa's death.
The panel suggested adding 200 caseworkers to the 700 who now investigate and act on reports of child abuse and improving their training, qualifications and supervision.


Critic of Attack on Homesteaders By Brazil Police Is Gunned Down
A local politician who had openly criticized military police and local landowners for an attack that killed at least 11 rural homesteaders and wounded  hundreds more in August was shot dead on his doorstep Saturday night.
Manoel Ribeiro, a councilman from the left-wing Worker's Party and a mayoral  candidate in the city of Corumbiara, had told friends he feared somebody might try to kill him for his insistence on justice after the attack.
His wife, who is three months' pregnant, said three men fired at her husband at close range.


Fixing TV Violence With a Gizmo
Why is the V-chip like chicken soup? Right. Because it couldn't hurt.
If you don't yet know what the V-chip is or how it is supposed to help parents keep their children from watching violent shows, then you are probably one of the many Americans who will manage to go through life without it.
But since Senate and House conferees have lately agreed to incorporate a V-chip requirement into the broad communications bill now creeping toward passage, a little attention ought to be paid.


Officer Indicted in Assault
The commanding officer of the Gang Intelligence Unit of the Newark Police Department was indicted yesterday on charges of kicking and stomping on a handcuffed suspect after chasing him through the Roseville section of Newark in May, the Essex County prosecutor's office said.
The officer, Lieut.
Carmine Russo, was also charged with his niece, Josephine Santaniello, of falsely claiming that the niece was a resident of Newark so she could get a job with the Police Department.
Lieut.
Russo, who was  indicted in November on assault and official misconduct charges in another case, has been assigned to administrative duties since September but retains his position with the gang unit, said Det.
Daniel Collins, the spokesman for the Police Department.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Two Men Accused Of Bilking Models
Roughly two dozen fashion models from leading agencies were bilked out of $1  million by two men posing as investment advisers who used the money to buy stocks for themselves, purchase big-ticket items like a Porsche and even pay off their income taxes, prosecutors said yesterday.
The two men, David Weil, 33, and Peter Bucchieri, 35, who operated Star Capital Management, a money management firm, were charged yesterday in a 26-count indictment with stealing money from the women by pretending to handle their bank accounts, pay their bills and offer investment advice, State Attorney General Dennis C. Vacco said.


Ross Thomas, 69, an Author Of Stylish Political Thrillers
Ross Thomas, the author of the political thrillers "Chinaman's Chance," "The  Cold War Swap" and "Briarpatch," died yesterday at St.
John's Hospital in Santa  Monica, Calif.
He was 69 and lived in Malibu.
The cause was lung cancer, said his wife, Rosalie.


Group Seeking Middle Ground In Politics Begins Its Conference
A group that includes former Congressmen and governors opened a two-day meeting here today at which it will try to find a middle ground in American politics.
But an organizer said the group did not plan to endorse a third-party  Presidential candidate for next year's election.
"We are trying to define the political center," said Timothy J. Penny, a former Democratic Representative from Minnesota who is an organizer of the movement.


The Nixon Tapes Still Draw the Curious
Across the decades and into the archivist's headset sounds the murky, oddly optimistic voice of President Richard M. Nixon as he conspires at further incumbency yet cannot resist an aside for the ages.
"On the other hand," he intones on an Oval office tape, "maybe we're not so smart."
For all the Nixons that ever were in his several political resurrections, it  is the richly haunting sound of that voice, tape recorded endlessly in one of the all-time White House follies that Nixon researchers continue to turn to here at the National Archives' trove of Nixon Presidential material.


When Doctors and Patients Decide To Test the Far Limits of Treatment
Why do researchers and willing patients test the boundaries of medical science when they are told by friendly and sometimes hostile critics that the risks are so daunting that the experiments are doomed to failure?
Part of the answer may be that as the 15th anniversary of the discovery of AIDS nears, many doctors are as frustrated as patients by the lack of more effective treatments for the disease, and are therefore joining their patients in pushing the limits of treatment.


Coming Together to Combat Bias


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the Bell Atlantic Corporation's experimental cable television system in Toms River, N.J., misstated the installation cost for each household involved.
It was $1,700, not $17,000.


COMPANY BRIEFS
HARKEN ENERGY CORP., Grand Prairie, Tex., a developer of oil and gas reserves, said it would buy certain oil and gas sites in the Texas Panhandle for stock, cash and notes worth about $19.6 million.


Bosnian Weather, and Standstill, Breaks


Patterns
A Casual Upgrade


Corrections
An article on Thursday about proposals to change the Constitution so that citizenship is not automatically conferred on those born in the United States misidentified the party affiliation of Representative Brian P. Bilbray, who asserts that public services in his home state, California, are being drained by illegal immigration.
He is a Republican.


Agency Adds Fujitsu But Gives Up Acer
Lai, Venuti &amp; Lai in Santa Clara, Calif., is changing high-technology clients.
Lai, Venuti has resigned after four years as the agency for the Acer America  Corporation, which markets personal computers, and has taken a "strategic creative marketing services" assignment in the United States for Fujitsu Ltd., the electronics company based in Tokyo.
The billings on the Acer account were estimated at $20 million; the billings on the Fujitsu assignment were not disclosed.


Averting a Constitutional Clash
President Clinton may be moving to avoid a constitutional confrontation with  Congress over the Senate Whitewater committee's access to notes taken by a White House lawyer at a Whitewater meeting two years ago that was attended by senior officials and personal lawyers for Mr.
Clinton and his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton.
If Mr.
Clinton relinquishes the documents, it would be a positive departure from the evasive tactics that have marked the Clintons' handling of questions about Whitewater since the 1992 campaign.
Mr.
Clinton's assertion that the subpoenaed material is protected by lawyer-client privilege, and his quieter claim of executive privilege, are legally dubious and risk a damaging precedent.


Wetlands Don't Need Twice Protecting
To the Editor:
"Brief Clause in Bill Would Curb U.S. Power to Protect Wetlands" (front page, Dec. 12) is a catchy headline but inaccurate.


Nuclear Plant Shutdown
The Oyster Creek Nuclear Generating Station automatically shut down early yesterday when an error during maintenance work changed the temperature of the water used to keep the main generator from overheating, a spokeswoman for the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission said.
But a spokeswoman for the plant, Suzanne D'Ambrosio, said there was no unusual release of radioactivity.


Orioles' Owner Angelos Enters the Cone Derby
Peter Angelos has already lost the early rounds of the skirmish for David Cone to George Steinbrenner and might not be able overcome the deficit to secure the free-agent pitcher, but the Orioles' owner does not believe the fight is over.
Angelos said yesterday that he was still willing to meet face to face with Cone this week to try to persuade him to play for Baltimore.
"Today I talked to Pat and told him I'm available," said Angelos, who, like General Manager Pat Gillick, depicted the Orioles as serious suitors for Cone.


California Economy Shakes Off Doldrums
The California economy is showing signs of a vigorous revival after five years of decline.
Job growth is running better than 2.3 percent a year, about 50 percent faster than growth nationwide.
The entertainment, technology and international trade sectors are leading the way.


MARK RESOURCES TURNS DOWN PEMBINA ACQUISITION BID
Mark Resources Inc., an oil and natural-gas producer in Calgary, Alberta, rejected an unsolicited offer by the Pembina Acquisition Corporation, worth about $370 million (Canadian), or $270 million (United States).
Industry analysts said improving gas and oil prices made a rival offer likely.
Mark Resources rose $1 yesterday, to $7.125, on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
The company called Pembina's $7-a-share offer inadequate.
Jim Watkinson, vice president and general counsel for Pembina, which was formed to buy Mark Resources, said the group could raise its offer if it gained access to Mark's confidential financial and operating information.
The main company behind Pembina Acquisition is Pembina Resources Ltd., an oil-drilling concern owned by  the Pembina Corporation.
The other investors are the Ontario Teachers Pension Plan, the investment firm Allen &amp; Company and TD Capital Group Ltd., a unit of Toronto Dominion Bank.


Representative de la Garza of Texas to Quit
Representative E. (Kika) de la Garza, a conservative Democrat known for his support of farm programs and the North American Free Trade Agreement, said today that he would not seek re-election in 1996, after 30 years in Congress.
Mr. de la Garza, 68, who has represented the rural, largely impoverished Rio  Grande Valley in South Texas, said he decided to retire because "it was just time."


Apple Warned On Debt Rating
Two leading debt-rating agencies warned yesterday that they might lower their ratings on the debt securities of Apple Computer because of worries about the company's earnings and revenue.
Last week, Apple said that its profit margins were slipping and that sales had not met projections, leading it to anticipate a loss for the quarter ending  on Dec. 31.


Minnie Langley, 83; Sought Recompense For Racist Rampage
Minnie Lee Langley, an early and persistent leader in the effort to have the  State of Florida compensate survivors of a white mob's rampage in the black settlement of Rosewood, Fla., in 1923, died on Saturday at a hospital in Jacksonville, Fla.
She was 83 and lived in Jacksonville.
She had cancer surgery earlier in the week, her family said.


Kovalev Is an Enigma Wrapped in Rangers Blue
Among the many people who still see the potential of Aleksei Kovalev is Mark  Messier, the captain of the Rangers.
Sometimes, Messier speaks of teammates adjusting to Kovalev's talents and adapting to his needs.
Messier occasionally compares Kovalev to Guy Lafleur, the former Montreal star, who struggled for the first five years of his career, despite tremendous gifts for skating, playmaking and shooting.
Eventually, Lafleur's maturity level reached his talent.
He became the hero of the Canadiens during a four-year Stanley Cup dynasty in the late 1970's.
He is now in the Hockey Hall of Fame.


Virginia McMartin Dies at 88; Figure in Case on Child Abuse
Virginia McMartin, who founded a preschool that became the center of the longest and most expensive criminal case in American history, died on Sunday.
She was 88.
Mrs.
McMartin had recently suffered a series of strokes and died soon after arriving at the Little Company of Mary Hospital in the Los Angeles suburb of Torrance, the authorities said.


INTEL SIGNS LICENSING AGREEMENT WITH PHOENIX
The Intel Corporation signed a seven-year licensing agreement yesterday with  Phoenix Technologies Ltd., a maker of software that runs key start-up operations of a personal computer, and agreed to buy about $11 million of Phoenix stock.
The arrangement, which is expected to be worth at least $20 million but could be worth much more, depending on shipment volumes over the seven years, allows Intel to use Phoenix software on motherboards, the main circuit boards for PC's, that it sells to manufacturers.
Intel, the largest maker of microprocessors that run PC's, is becoming a leading maker of motherboards as well.
The agreement was announced after the stock market closed.


English Skier Drops Out, Ending Antarctic Race
A RACE between an Englishman and a Norwegian seeking to be the first humans to cross the entire Antarctic continent on skis while hauling their own supplies ended on Saturday when the English skier, Roger Mear, was forced to drop out.
His competitor, Borge Ousland, was still going strong yesterday, however, and expected to reach the South Pole, the approximate halfway point, by Christmas day.
The grueling 1,700-mile race, in which the competitors have had to endure temperatures lower than minus 40 degrees Fahrenheit and high winds, began in November at the northern tip of Berkner Island in the frozen Weddell Sea.
Both men planned to ski uphill to the polar plateau, then to the South Pole and finally to McMurdo Sound on the opposite side of the continent.


Minnesota Throws Coach to the Wolves
Like BOB STEIN and JACK McCLOSKEY before him, it didn't take KEVIN McHALE long to see the Minnesota Timberwolves needed a change.
Now the National Basketball Association's worst franchise will find out if its new leader is any better than his dismal predecessors.


People
*
Richard Lefkowitz was named media and marketing services director at Emmerling Post Inc., New York, succeeding Roger Rochefort, who left.
Mr.
Lefkowitz was previously a senior vice president and associate media director at TBWA Chiat/Day, New York, a unit of the Omnicom Group.


Clinton Orders Drug Tests for Those Arrested on Federal Charges
President Clinton, seeking to take a tough stand on drugs, directed the Government today to require that all people arrested on Federal criminal charges face drug testing.
The move was one of an array of events planned by the Administration this week to tackle the social issues of crime and drugs.


Latest Shutdown Disrupts Services
Cold impersonal numbers were translated into blunt reality yesterday when the executive branch of the United States Government furloughed an estimated 260,000 of its two million nonuniformed workers in the continuing Congressional budget battle.
On an average day in December, according to the Office of Management and Budget, 383,000 people visit national parks, monuments and historic sites.


It's No More Mr. Nice Guy For Shylock (or Shakespeare)
No figure in literature is more vexing than Shylock, the proud, moneylending  Jew of Shakespeare's "Merchant of Venice" stubbornly demanding his pound of flesh.
What did Shakespeare mean to say about Jews, exactly?
On paper Shylock certainly appears by modern standards to be an anti-Semitic  caricature.
Nevertheless, at least since the 19th century, when Edmund Kean in 1814 and Henry Irving in 1879 gave famous performances of Shylock as a sympathetic character, Shakespeare has tended to get the benefit of the doubt.
But over the last few years a more malevolent interpretation has been taking hold, one increasingly in evidence in the theater, movies and new books by scholars.
The picture is of a Shylock who, some scholars say, accurately reflects Shakespeare's intentions in a Renaissance England even more anti-Semitic than previously imagined.
And the stereotype, those scholars say, is still deeply embedded in popular culture.


Orioles Get McDowell
DAVEY JOHNSON doesn't know whether he will have DAVID CONE on his Baltimore pitching staff next season, but yesterday he gained another member of the staff  he had when he managed the Mets.
Agreeing to a $750,000 salary for 1996, ROGER McDOWELL became the second relief pitcher Johnson had in New York to join him with the Orioles.
RANDY MYERS signed with the Orioles last Thursday.
McDowell pitched for Texas last season, compiling a 7-4 record and 4 saves.
BOB TEWKSBURY, McDowell's teammate with the Rangers last season, reached agreement with the San Diego Padres on a $1.5 million salary for next season on  a contract that also has an option for a second year.


2 More Spending Bills Vetoed, But Clinton Offers to Negotiate
With a sizable chunk of the Government shut down over stalemated negotiations on a balanced budget, President Clinton used both carrot and stick on Congressional Republicans today by vetoing two more spending bills but then holding out the possibility of renewed face-to-face talks and compromise.
The second partial Government closing in a month idled about 260,000 Federal  employees, who were sent home around the nation because the temporary spending measure that had financed their offices expired at midnight Friday.
The resulting uncertainty helped send the stock market skidding more than 100 points.


By Design;New Year's Dresses
It's not a minute too soon to think about something to wear to the New Year's Eve party.


NASA Plans New Series of Cheaper Spacecraft
ON the day of the Galileo spacecraft's rendezvous with Jupiter this month, Daniel S. Goldin, head of the nation's space agency, struck a boldly optimistic  note about the future of planetary exploration.
By the turn of the century or soon afterward, he predicted, his agency could be launching spacecraft once every month -- small, relatively cheap machines designed to explore the solar system and search for Earth-size planets around other stars.
"People say the best of the space program is behind us," Mr.
Goldin said.
"But I disagree. The best is yet to come."


For Pedestrians, New York's Mean Streets Just Got Friendlier
To the Editor:
We applaud Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's initiative to make New York City's streets friendlier to pedestrians.
Our organization has completed a community-based plan for improving the hazardous Mulry Square intersection in Greenwich Village, where West 11th Street, Greenwich Avenue and Seventh Avenue meet.
We did this in collaboration with the Department of Transportation's Pedestrian Projects Group and Community Board 2 in Manhattan.


Deal Is Set for Encyclopaedia Britannica
Encyclopaedia Britannica Inc., the troubled publisher of the venerable encyclopedia, said today that the company would be sold for an undisclosed amount to an investment group led by Jacob E. Safra, a Switzerland-based financier.
Company officials said the selling price was affected by the company's debt level, which stemmed from its practice of selling encyclopedias on installment.


Heating Oil and Gas Prices Soar As More Cold Weather Is Seen
Prices for heating oil and natural gas soared yesterday in reaction to forecasts for more cold weather and signs that demand for heating oil is straining the delivery system.
Heating oil reached its highest price since early 1993 and natural gas surged to its highest level since early 1994.


Heavy Traffic Expected
The New Jersey Turnpike Authority is predicting that holiday traffic this weekend and next will be heavier than last year's because Christmas and New Year's Day fall on Mondays.
With fewer people likely to have Friday off, regular commuters as well as holiday drivers are expected to jam the road, said  James Robinson, an authority spokesman.
It is anticipated that 1.8 million vehicles will use the roadway from Dec. 22 to Dec. 25, and another 1.7 million from Dec. 29 to Jan. 1.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.


Bill on Under-Age Drinking
Under a bill passed unanimously by the Assembly yesterday, the police who see people they believe to be under age 21 and drinking alcohol would be allowed to  enter private property to make an arrest, said Assemblywoman Rose Heck, Republican of Hasbrouck Heights and a sponsor of the bill.
The bill is now before the Governor.


OTB Starts Review Of Its Account
The New York City Offtrack Betting Corporation has begun a mandated review of its account, with billings estimated at $1.3 million.
The account has been handled for the last four years by Bozell Worldwide in New York, a unit of Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt.
Thomas Werblin, vice president for marketing  at OTB, said the review would begin with 30 to 40 agencies from the New York area and would be narrowed to 10; he added that a decision was expected at the end of January.


Awaiting CD-ROM's Under the Tree? You Might Prefer a Nice Fruitcake
LOOKING for a present for people you dislike?
Consider a CD-ROM.
As the recipients try to fathom messages like "Screen resolution 640 X 480 not supported: try, 800 X 600, 1024 X 768 or 1280 X 1024" and master convoluted interfaces that do not always work, their patience will soon be exhausted, and they will waste even more time and temper muttering darkly about modern technology.
A Grinchlike exaggeration?
The Interactive Multimedia Association says that "more than 30 percent of some CD-ROM titles are returned by consumers, most often due to system incompatibility issues." It has proposed a scheme called CD  Match in which software manufacturers will label each package uniformly with hardware requirements.
Free software will sniff out the hardware on a consumer's system and print out a list resembling the ones on the boxes.


The Communist Comeback
Less than five years ago as Communist Party leaders fled their Moscow offices, frantically destroying files as they went, the very survival of the party seemed in doubt.
Sadly, Sunday's parliamentary election erased that doubt.
Though a final count will not be available for several days, the Communist Party seems likely to finish with better than 20 percent of the vote, double the nearest rival.
That makes it the strongest political force in Russia.
Together with the robust showing by the ultra-nationalist Liberal Democratic  Party, led by the firebrand Vladimir Zhirinovsky, the election was a reversal for the forces of reform, and an undeniable rebuff to President Boris Yeltsin.
His party is running third, with about 10 percent of the vote.


Anger Got the Votes
There has long been a feeling among political leaders here and in the West that the road to reform in Russia has passed the shaky stage at which it could be reversed.
Democracy, openness and freedom are established rights in this country -- people have quickly learned to rely on them -- and even the most fiery extremists have stopped pretending these liberties do not matter.
But if the early trends from parliamentary elections on Sunday showed anything clearly, they once again pointed out the futility of assuming that the  future course of Russian life is certain.
As expected, voters supported almost anybody but the Government that now leads them.
With 43 parties to choose from,  anger got the biggest response of all.


World News Briefs;Spain's Embattled Chief Says He Will Run Again
Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez ended months of doubt today by reluctantly agreeing to run again as the Socialist candidate in general elections next March, his party said.
Battered by scandal and facing probable defeat at the polls, Mr.
Gonzalez, Spain's Prime Minister for 13 years, has often said he would prefer to give up power.


Ford Sets Some Rebates
The Ford Motor Company said today that it was offering across-the-board rebates on several car lines, including the 1996 Taurus and Sable sedans, in three regions of the country.
But a Ford spokesman said the move did not represent a change in pricing strategy for the redesigned Taurus and Sable cars.
Although the models have posted disappointing sales results since being introduced in late September, Ford had said it had no plans to put nationwide incentives on the new Taurus and Sable models.


Former Publisher to Bowne
Bowne &amp; Company has named the former Newsday publisher Robert M. Johnson as its president, chief executive, vice chairman and a director.
Mr.
Johnson succeeds Richard H. Koontz, who retired as president and chief executive in October but remains chairman.
Mr.
Johnson had also served as chief executive at  Newsday.


Mr. Pataki's Block Grants
The welfare and Medicaid proposals made by Gov.
George Pataki last week would apply to those New York State programs the same misguided reform principle that  Congressional Republicans are using to refashion Federal poverty programs.
In his own variation of a block-grant system, the Governor would turn over parts of Medicaid and welfare to counties to run with fixed allotments of state money that would not change as local poverty rolls changed.
Block grants would make for bad Federal policy -- and even worse state policy, encouraging counties to skimp on New York's neediest families.
Specifically, Mr.
Pataki would turn over home-care and Medicaid coverage of able-bodied single adults to the counties.
He would have counties run employment and other non-cash assistance programs for welfare recipients and give counties  the option of taking over cash assistance for the poor.


Russian Forces Prepare to Attack City in Chechnya Held by Rebels
Russian forces are preparing an all-out attack on Chechnya's second city, Gudermes, where hundreds of Chechen guerrillas were pinning down more than 150 Russian soldiers today, military officials said.
Some of the Russian officials said air strikes and heavy artillery would be used to break the siege of the town's military headquarters and rail station.
Civilians have been told to leave the area or take shelter.


Corrections
A picture caption on Dec. 13 about a meeting of ministers to discuss the arson attack at a clothing store in Harlem misidentified the church of which the Rev.
Herbert Daughtry is pastor.
As the article noted, he leads the House of the Lord Pentecostal Church in Brooklyn; the Canaan Baptist Church in Harlem was the site of the meeting.


Graffiti Wars In the Subway: It's Round 2
MARILYN SULLIVAN doesn't like the layers of scratched gibberish that make it  difficult for her to see out the windows of the No. 6 subway train.
No, that's putting it too mildly.
She really hates the scrawlings, etched into the glass by vandals who, when you can read the junk at all, assign themselves names like ICE and DIMS and SHAWTS.
"It's disgusting," said Ms.
Sullivan, who rides the Lexington Avenue line to  her job as a nanny on the Upper East Side.
"You're already depressed being on the subway, and this just makes you feel more frightened, like no one's in control. You feel trapped in a scratched-up hell, and nothing they do makes it better."


Chess
Against faltering opponents, the best strategy is to play conservatively: let them go on making mistakes.
Yes, you can sometimes defeat them by charging in brilliantly, but just as often, if they are really good players, you might just  provoke them to return to form.
And then, zap!, and they crush you.
That's what happened to the 18-year-old Russian grandmaster Aleksandr Morozevich against Gary Kasparov, in the Round of 16 of the Intel Quickplay Grand Prix in Paris, Nov. 9 through 12. ("Quickplay" means each player has 25minutes for all moves.)


INSIDE
Big Phone Deals Expected


U.S. Is Cast in the Role Of Serbia's New Best Pal
In a play that is drawing packed houses here, the Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic, returns from the peace talks in Dayton, Ohio, with a souvenir bed cover fashioned from an outsized American flag.
And his wife, Mira Markovic -- played by a man in drag with a Stalin mustache -- jealously berates her husband about the new love affair he seems to be having with Richard, as in Richard C. Holbrooke, the Assistant Secretary of State, who  held lengthy tete-a-tete sessions with Mr.
Milosevic on the Bosnia peace plan.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Financial Markets Plunge On the Budget Impasse Financial markets tumbled in what analysts called a resoundingly negative reaction to the failure of Congress and the White House to resolve the budget impasse.


Truckers Face Safety Crackdown on Day Border Was to Open
The battered Mexican tractor-trailer seemed to groan under its burden of coiled steel as it coasted onto the scales at a truck inspection yard just north of the International Bridge over the Rio Grande today.
But the load weighed in half a ton below the 80,000-pound limit.
"You can't win them all," said Roberto Gonzalez, a Texas public safety inspector.
"He's not overweight, but we'll get him on something else."


Solstice, Rituals, High Steps And Carols
Song and dance are always part of the rites, often pagan, recalled by the annual production known as "The Christmas Revels." Last weekend, the ever-cheerful solstice celebration accented Celtic traditions and featured some  spectacular Irish step dancing.
Seamus Egan, an Irish-American virtuoso on the uilleann pipes, was the star musician.


Reeves's Fate Will Wait for the Holidays
Now that the season is about over, what are the Giants going to do with Dan Reeves?
Don't look for a decision the day after the season ends next Monday.
The Giants hierarchy will not meet with Reeves until well after the holidays and perhaps not until the first week of January.
The co-owners Wellington Mara and Bob Tisch and General Manager George Young  will meet to decide Reeves's fate, but it may not be as early as some people think.
At least one of the principals will be out of town until possibly late next week or even longer.
The delay would only be because of logistics -- it could be difficult to get everyone to sit down right away because of varying schedules.


David Warrilow Memorial
A memorial service for the actor David Warrilow is to be held tomorrow at 6 P.M. at St.
Mark's in the Bowery.
Mr.
Warrilow, a founding member of the Mabou Mines theater company and a leading interpreter of the works of Samuel Beckett,  died in Paris on Aug. 17 at the age of 60.


Hampton Is Making Giants' Job Harder
Rodney Hampton was supposed to run into the Giants' sunset after the season.
But one day after running all over the Dallas Cowboys, he has forced the Giants  into making a decision that could keep them awake at night for months.
Teams wish they could have such a problem.
The Giants have a stacked backfield in Hampton, a great runner who simply destroyed the Cowboys with a career-high 187 yards and still has a lot of years left in him, and Tyrone Wheatley, the No. 1 draft pick, a big back with sprinter speed.


Looks Like Landslide for Aristide's Choice
Rene Preval, handpicked to succeed President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, appeared today to be well on his way to the landslide victory expected of him, as the first unconfirmed and unofficial results from the vote on Sunday began trickling in.
An official tally is not expected until Dec. 27, but people close to Mr.
Preval's campaign said early figures showed him with more than four times as many votes as the nearest of his 13 competitors, a percentage even higher than Mr.
Aristide received in 1990.
But the dimensions of the victory may have been diminished by a low voter turnout.


Planning New Ferry Terminal
Plans were announced yesterday to begin engineering and design work on a $27  million, 56,000-square-foot ferry terminal that will replace the existing New York Waterway terminal.
The new terminal will be next to a light-rail station that is expected to open in 2003.
About 8,000 people cross the Hudson to 38th Street in Manhattan from Weehawken each day -- a figure that is expected to grow to 22,000 by 2005, New York Waterway officials said.


Help Eases Burden of Woman With Ill Children
On some nights, Leonora A. feels like little more than a pendulum with a purpose, swinging back and forth from one sick child to the other.
Janigris, 4, severely asthmatic and gasping for air, needs her oxygen mask.
Selena, 9, born with spina bifida, which is a spinal defect, and urinary tract problems, requires help with her catheter.
Then Janigris, breathing easier, needs her mask removed.


Student Charged in Attack
A Brooklyn high school student was arrested on assault charges yesterday in an attack on a teacher last week, the police said.
The student, Boise Pinckney,  17, of 295 Stanhope Street in the Bushwick section, was arrested at Bushwick High School, at 400 Irving Avenue, shortly after noon yesterday, said a Police Department spokesman, Doram Tamari.
The attack happened after a 47-year-old special-education teacher, who has not been identified, told Mr.
Pinckney to leave a classroom where he did not belong, Mr.
Tamari said.


Bolivian Power Sale
The Bolivian Power Company said yesterday that it would sell certain assets to the Spanish electric utility Iberdrola S.A. and an affiliate for $65.3 million.
The Bolivian electric utility will sell two distribution units to Iberdrola for $62.3 million.
The units distribute electricity to the Bolivian cities of La Paz and Oruro.
(Dow Jones)


Con Ed Cited In Intimidation Of Employees
Months after Consolidated Edison was ordered to pay a $2 million fine and improve its environmental record in the wake of a steam pipe explosion in 1989,  a Federal monitor yesterday harshly criticized the company's efforts and said that several employees had been punished for reporting environmental mishaps.
The monitor, who was appointed after Con Ed admitted that it failed to report that asbestos was released in the explosion, found that even after pleading guilty to environmental violations the company still had a "corporate culture" that discouraged employees from reporting environmental problems.


Kvaerner Loses Bid For Britain's Amec
Kvaerner A.S., Europe's largest shipbuilder, lost its bid to buy the British  engineering and construction company Amec P.L.C. after failing to persuade enough of Amec's shareholders to accept an offer of L1 a share.
Kvaerner, based  in Oslo, had offered L360 million ($554 million) for Amec P.L.C. last month in an effort to expand its oil and gas offshore platform building business.
Amec's management said that Kvaerner's bid "significantly undervalues the company." Kvaerner had said it would probably sell off Amec's housing and development unit, which was expected to raise substantially less than its book value of L160 million.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Israeli Town Unpanicked At Change Next Door
When Roval Elimelech woke up today on the edge of this tidy suburban town north of Tel Aviv, she found that a new border had sprung up overnight not far from her doorstep.
About a mile away, Palestinian policemen had moved into Qalqilya, a town on the West Bank's border with Israel, taking it over from Israeli soldiers who had withdrawn on Saturday night in keeping with an agreement signed in September on  expanding Palestinian self-rule.


Accounts


At 15, Life of Crime Continues
A 15-year-old boy, who was convicted for drug dealing when he was 8, was sentenced yesterday to two years' probation after pleading guilty to two armed robberies and one attempted robbery, prosecutors said.
Judge James Walsh of the Union County Superior Court also ordered the boy to complete a six-month rehabilitation program, said Michael Lapolla, first assistant prosecutor for Union County.
The boy became the object of public attention seven years ago when he sold marijuana to an undercover officer.
TERRY PRISTIN


Week of Last Chances and Crossed Fingers
Heading into the final week of the regular National Football League season, the playoff picture has cleared up significantly.
But it will remain a nail biter for several teams in the National Football Conference's Central Division and the American Football Conference's West Division.
Only San Francisco, with all its stars healthy and peaking right now, seems above the playoff maelstrom.
With Dallas (11-4) still a little shaky and missing Charles Haley, the team's top pass rusher who is out after back surgery, the 49ers appear to have a step on the Cowboys in the race for the N.F.C. championship.
San Francisco (11-4) needs to win its last game -- at Atlanta next Sunday -- to be assured of home-field advantage throughout the playoffs.


Any Male Moth Worth His Salt Must Be Able To Drink Deep
LEAVE it to the modern food scene to so tarnish the reputation of a nutrient  that the essential sounds immoral.
Fat and cholesterol have been sufficiently vilified that people may forget that it is impossible to build a body cell or whip up a sex hormone without them.
As for salt, groceries today are like an Ancient Mariner's nightmare, so drenched in added sodium that you could die of thirst, or at least high blood pressure.
Who needs salt, except our spoiled taste buds?
The answer, as a type of indefatigable moth makes spectacularly clear, is any creature that wants to stay alive.
Researchers from Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y., have reported their detailed analysis of male Gluphisia moths, which spend many hours of their brief life span parked beside puddles on the ground, drinking in enormous quantities of water and then expelling it from their behinds with the force of a firefighter hosing down a blaze.


With Cheap Fixes Completed, the Cost of Clean Air May Exceed theBenefits
The retreat sounded by California last week from its commitment to a tough mandate for electric cars reflects the larger quandary facing the officials who  must grapple with the increasingly stringent demands of the Federal Clean Air Act.
The problem with the effort to reduce air pollution further is that most of the relatively cheap fixes have already been made, economists argue, and the expensive ones may not be worth the price.
The very premise of the cleanup -- that smog can be reduced to such low levels that it no longer poses any health risk at all -- is now being questioned by serious academics as well as industry.
"The technology now available will not meet the legal standard," argues Ted Russell, an environmental engineer at Carnegie-Mellon University in Pittsburgh.


Circumcising Babies
To the Editor:
Meserak Ramsey, an Ethiopian nurse, is leading the battle to eliminate female genital mutilation in this country and abroad (news article, Dec. 10).


Stadium Plans Advance
Plans to attract a minor league baseball team to southern New Jersey moved forward yesterday when the Senate sent Governor Whitman a bill that would authorize the Delaware River and Bay Authority to build a sports stadium.
The measure would allow the authority to construct and own the stadium and lease it  to a minor-league franchise.
The Governor has not taken a position on the bill,  her spokesman, Carl Golden, said.


Nets Lose Their Way And Game In 2d Half
Kenny Anderson played all 12 minutes of the fourth quarter tonight.
Good for  him.
Not so good for the Nets.
While Anderson, who sat out the final 12 minutes in a loss Friday night at Detroit, got his minutes down the stretch tonight, his presence wasn't nearly enough to overcome the offensive versatility of Utah, which outscored the Nets by 16 points in the third quarter and cruised to a 110-103 victory at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Light Shed on the Tiny
SCIENTISTS at I.B.M. report that they have overcome a fundamental obstacle to the improvement of microscopes that work using visible light, and that they can  now directly examine and analyze fragments of matter as small as genes.
The device, called a scanning interferometric apertureless microscope, or Siam, can also speedily scan ultracompact optical data storage devices like compact disks.
Company scientists said the Siam opens the way to making and using memory diskettes the size of pennies, each storing data equivalent to 30 full-length movies.


On My Mind;The American Way
Americans really have to feel sorry for the French.
They just don't have a clue how to run a country during a budget crisis.
Over there the people, millions of them, go on strike against the Government.
The American way is that  the Government goes on strike against the people.
Our way is far better, anybody can see that.
First, it takes only a handful of people, politicians in Congress and the White House, to get the job of shutting down the Government done.


A Night of Song to Combat Hunger


U.S. Commander in Bosnia Is Known for Bluntness and Political Acumen
Maj.
Gen.
William L. Nash blew a cloud of cigar smoke from his lungs -- he actually inhales the stuff -- and recalled the moment years ago when he abandoned his chemistry studies to follow his father's footsteps into the Army.
This plain-speaking two-star general, now commander of the troops in the United States sector of Bosnia, had finally overcome his doubts about a career in the military.
"I couldn't see myself living in a chemistry lab the rest of my life," General Nash said at his home on an Army base here, days before he led the first major wave of American troops into Bosnia.
"And the adventurous life of a soldier appealed to me."


Glaciers Are Star Witnesses to the History of Earth's Climate
JUST a short eagle's flight from the highest peak of Europe, amid rolling rocks and a sudden blizzard, Louis Reynaud was drilling deep under the skin of an aged glacier.
"This ice is hundreds of years old," he said.
Overhead, in shreds of mist, drifted the summit of the Mont Blanc.


NIKE INC. (NKE,N)
Nike Inc., the world's largest athletic footware maker, reported quarterly profits yesterday that exceeded analysts' expectations.
The company, based in Beaverton, Ore., said that with sales strong for running shoes and athletic apparel, its earnings in the second fiscal quarter ended Nov. 30 had risen 39 percent, to a record $118.2 million, or 80 cents a share, from $84.9 million, or 58 cents a share, in the corresponding period last year.
Wall Street's consensus estimate was 75 cents a share.


Q&amp;A
Horse of Another Color


Ankle Hobbles McElroy
The all-America running back LEELAND McELROY sprained his already-tender left ankle during Texas A&amp;M's practice yesterday, leaving him questionable for the Aggies' Alamo Bowl game.
McElroy, a junior, hurt the same ankle that he sprained earlier in the season, causing him to miss half of the Aggies' loss to Texas Tech and all of a  narrow victory over Southern Methodist.


Nixon Family Assails Stone Film as Distortion
Two days before the release of Oliver Stone's film "Nixon," the former President's family issued an angry statement today calling portions of the movie "reprehensible" and saying it was maliciously designed to "defame and degrade President and Mrs. Nixon's memories in the mind of the American public."
The statement, released by the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace in Yorba  Linda, Calif., said that Mr.
Stone's movie was nothing less than a "character assassination" of the 37th President.


Mason Goes to Georgia
Coach GLEN MASON, who led Kansas to nine victories and a berth in the Aloha Bowl, was hired yesterday by Georgia to replace the dismissed RAY GOFF.
Georgia Athletic Director VINCE DOOLEY said he picked Mason because of his experience as both an offensive and defensive coach and because of "his record of successfully rebuilding programs in what were two of the most difficult coaching assignments in the country."


TANDY TO BUY BACK SHARES AND INCREASE DIVIDEND
The Tandy Corporation said yesterday that its board had authorized the company to buy back as many as five million shares on the open market.
The consumer-electronics retailer also raised its quarterly dividend to 20 cents a share from 18 cents.
The company said it would pay the first 20-cent dividend on Jan. 23, 1996, to shareholders of record on Jan. 1.
Separately, Tandy said it had named Leonard H. Roberts president, effective Jan. 1.
He is now president of Tandy's Radio Shack unit.
Tandy shares rose 37.5 cents, to $37.625, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Tandy, based in Fort Worth, has 6,800 Radio Shack and 99 Computer City stores.


Canada Increases Its Limits for Seal Hunters, Prompting Protests
Risking the wrath of animal rights activists, Canada said today it will increase its seal harvest quota by one-third next year, letting hunters kill as  many as 250,000 harp seals along the Atlantic coast.
The announcement by Fisheries Minister Brian Tobin raises a quota that was set at 186,000 in 1982.
It is a show of Government determination despite a vehement protest campaign by international animal rights groups.


Low-Income Loan Plan at Nationsbank
The Nationsbank Corporation and a Boston-based housing group announced today  that they would provide $500 million in unusually flexible and inexpensive mortgages for homes in low-income urban areas.
The agreement between the nation's fourth-largest bank and the the National Assistance Corporation of America is believed to be the largest commitment yet for such mortgages.
The loans feature no down payments, no closing costs, no application fees and "liberal underwriting at a market rate."


CHRONICLE
LINDA McCARTNEY, the wife of the former Beatle Paul McCartney, had surgery last Tuesday at the Princess Grace Hospital in London to remove a malignant lump from her breast.
While she was in the hospital, thieves ransacked the McCartneys' London mansion.
Yesterday's Evening Standard quoted Mr.
McCartney, who spoke to reporters on  Sunday from the driveway of their farm in East Sussex, England, as saying: "Linda was positively diagnosed as having breast cancer 10 days ago. She has since had the lumpectomy operation, which was 100 percent successful, thank God."


SCHWAB STOCK FALLS ON LOWER EARNINGS ESTIMATE
The shares of the Charles Schwab Corporation dropped more than 13 percent yesterday after the company released estimates of earnings for the fourth quarter and the year that fell short of Wall Street expectations.
The San Francisco-based discount broker said it expected to earn 22 cents to 25 cents a  share in the fourth quarter and 95 cents to 98 cents for 1995.
A survey of nine  analysts yielded estimates of 26 cents a share for the fourth quarter and 99 cents for the year, according to First Call Inc., a firm that tracks earnings forecasts.
Schwab posted 1994 earnings of 19 cents a share in the fourth quarter and 77 cents for the year.
Schwab shares slid $2.625, to $17, in New York Stock  Exchange trading.


TRINOVA PLANS TO BUY CINCINNATI MILACRON UNIT
The Trinova Corporation plans to acquire Cincinnati Milacron Inc.'s electronic systems division for $105 million in cash, the companies said yesterday.
The deal included a long-term supply agreement under which the division would supply electronic controls to Cincinnati Milacron for seven years.
The division, which expects to have sales of about $90 million this year, designs and makes computer hardware and software for factory automation.
Trinova, which makes and distributes engineered components for industry, is based in Maumee, Ohio, and had 1994 sales of $1.8 billion.


An Italian Company Sues Bankers Trust
Gemina S.p.A. said today that it had sued the Bankers Trust New York Corporation for losses at Gemina's publishing unit that the company contends were caused by risky derivative securities sold by Bankers Trust.
Gemina filed a civil suit seeking compensation for losses at the publishing unit, RCS Editori, a Gemina spokeswoman, Noris Morano, said.
She would not say how much the company was seeking in damages.


Schnellenberger Moves On
Howard Schnellenberger unexpectedly resigned as coach of the Oklahoma football team today, ending a one-year stay that started with high expectations  but dissolved into a disappointing 5-5-1 season.
Schnellenberger made his announcement in a statement issued through the school's sports information office.


Lilco Says Pataki Plan Would Hurt Service
Dismantling the Long Island Lighting Company will mean less reliable service, the company said today in its first detailed response to Gov.
George E. Pataki's plan to lower electricity rates.
In a three-page letter to the Long Island Power Authority issued on the eve of an expected snowstorm, Lilco's chairman, William J. Catacosinos, said the plan was "not workable" because breaking up the company among six or seven competing private owners would "jeopardize the reliability of the electric system," particularly during storms and other emergencies.


A Rail Union That Could
The hope was that Paris and the rest of France would limp back to normal this week after a paralyzing national rail strike and a struggle between public-sector labor unions and the Government over austerity measures to reduce  the federal deficit.
But after three weeks in which many hundreds of thousands marched to support  the strikers, it seems clear that it will take a long time to heal the wounds.


Two Banks to Merge Their U.S. Subsidiaries
The Royal Bank of Scotland P.L.C. and the Bank of Ireland agreed yesterday to merge their United States subsidiaries into a bank with more than $14 billion in assets.
The merger of Royal Bank's Citizens Financial Group Inc. and Bank of Ireland's First Holdings Inc. would produce New England's third-largest banking  company, with 222 branches.
First Holdings owns First New Hampshire Bank, the largest bank in New Hampshire.


Chaim Pearl, Rabbi and Religious Scholar, 76
Rabbi Chaim Pearl, who was active in religious and community affairs in the Riverdale section of the Bronx before becoming a scholar and lecturer in Israel, died yesterday in Jerusalem after a long illness.
He was 76.
Rabbi Pearl was associate editor of the Jewish Bible Quarterly in Jerusalem,  where he moved in 1980 and became a frequent radio commentator and writer on religious subjects.


In a Stock Deal, Healthsouth Will Buy Advantage Health
The Healthsouth Corporation, which provides surgical and rehabilitation services on an outpatient basis, said today that it had agreed to buy the Advantage Health Corporation for stock worth about $325 million.
The deal would add 150 rehabilitation facilities to Healthsouth, including a  network in the Northeastern United States.
Healthsouth, which is based here, would then have more than 850 outpatient and rehabilitative facilities in 44 states.


Conyers Journal;'Miracle' Farm's Flocks Are Pilgrims
At a time of year when many Americans seek to rediscover their faith, there is no shortage of it on Nancy Fowler's farm.
Hundreds of pilgrims flock to her farm here on the 13th of every month, when  Mrs.
Fowler has said she is visited by Mary and Jesus.
The worshipers pray and sing, and aim their camcorders at the sky, hoping to record the flickering of the sun or perhaps the opening of the door to heaven.


Arch Communications Set to Acquire Westlink
Arch Communications Group said today that it had agreed to acquire the privately owned Westlink Holdings Inc. for $340 million.
The purchase is the second announced by Arch this year and the 33d since its  founding in 1986.
Arch will have almost 2.5 million subscribers when it completes the Westlink acquisition, which is expected in the second quarter of next year.


Down for 5 Years, California Economy Shows Signs of Regaining ItsGlitter
Battered for five years by Mother Nature and the worst recession since the Depression, California is finally beginning to recover its standing as the nation's most powerful economic machine.
Job growth in the state is now running better than 2.3 percent annually, about half again the national rate of 1.5, thanks to an employment explosion in  the entertainment industry, advanced technology manufacturing and international  trade -- the new Big 3 of the California economy.


Vandals Hit Klan's Cross
A 12-foot wooden cross erected on the lawn of the Ohio Statehouse by members  of the Ku Klux Klan was quickly vandalized on Sunday, a repeat of an incident two years ago.


Standard &amp; Poor's Delays A Decision on Kmart's Debt
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation said today that it would not decide whether to downgrade Kmart's debt until the week of Jan. 8, giving the troubled retailer time to pump up holiday sales and negotiate a deal with debt holders.
The Kmart Corporation, which is based in Troy, Mich., is in talks to change the terms of $681 million in real estate debt, and the outcome could play a central role in the company's financial future.


CHRONICLE
DAVID RANDOLPH, who stepped down three years ago as conductor of the Masterwork Chorus and Orchestra, wants to put to rest rumors that he has retired from music altogether.
"Everyone remembers the word 'retirement,' " he said yesterday.
"But they don't realize it applied only to the Masterwork Chorus. One friend who moved to  California even called thinking I was dead. And people at concerts, gatherings and parties are constantly asking if I'm enjoying my retirement. I just sigh and say that I'm busier than ever."


Marine Center Needs to Move
Since it opened 18 years ago, the Marine Mammal Stranding Center has taken in hundreds of sick and stranded seals, dolphins and sea turtles.
But now the nonprofit organization needs more space and is looking for another home, perhaps in a nearby town.
But many people in Brigantine would be sad to see the  center go.
"It's not only the work the center does, in terms of environment and  science, but it gives the town good publicity," Councilwoman Anne Phillips told  The Associated Press.
TERRY PRISTIN


Ex-Official's Lawyer Asking for Leniency
The probation report for the treasurer who presided over Orange County's financial debacle will recommend that he serve no more than a year in county jail despite his guilty pleas to six felonies, the sentencing judge was told yesterday.
The report on the former county treasurer, Robert L. Citron, by a San Diego County probation officer will recommend probation with no time in state prison,  said Mr.
Citron's lawyer, David W. Wiechert.


Managed Care Squeezes Psychotherapy
To the Editor:
Jeffry Klugman, M.D. (letter, Dec. 13), seems comfortable that certain psychotherapy patients are getting less treatment than they used to because of managed-care companies' restrictive definition of when treatment is "medically necessary."


COMMUNISTS LEAD THE RULING PARTY BY 2 TO 1 IN RUSSIA
The Communist Party appeared certain today of having defeated the Government's party by more than two to one in parliamentary elections on Sunday, a victory that gave the party a strong head start in a pivotal presidential campaign that effectively began today.
With 40 percent of the vote counted, the Communist share was holding firm at  about 22 percent, and Gennadi Zyuganov, the party leader, was talking of forming a "nationalist-patriotic" coalition with Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, leader of the  ultra nationalist Liberal Democratic Party, which according to the latest figures was second in the parliamentary vote with about 11 percent.


Bomb Is Found Outside the I.R.S. Office in Reno
A bomb in a 30-gallon drum was found in a parking lot outside the Internal Revenue Service office here today, but it failed to explode, officials said.
The incident was the fourth time in two years that bombs have been used against targets related to the Federal Government in northern Nevada.


Digital Outlets for Your Holiday Generosity
BEFORE hyperlinking directly to the traditional roundup of last-minute holiday computer gift suggestions, it seems appropriate to switch the computer off for a moment to consider gifts that cannot be measured in megabytes or dollars.
The headlong rush to the Internet and the Information Age has left many people behind, and others befuddled.
True, many people have no desire to log on  and get sucked into what they consider cybernonsense, but others are worried that they will be at a social and economic disadvantage in years to come if they do not learn to surf the Internet and the World Wide Web.


Pressure on Fed Grows With Budget Standoff
When the Federal Reserve's interest-rate policy committee meets on Tuesday, nervous budget negotiators and nervous financial markets will be watching closely.
And that makes the Fed itself nervous.
The recent record-setting climbs on Wall Street have been based in part on interlocking assumptions about what would happen in Washington: that President Clinton and Congress would strike a deal to balance the budget, and that the Fed would give its blessing in the form of an interest rate cut that would allow the markets to continue their climb.


Nelson Can Relate To Riley's Struggle
He said he gave as much effort as he could during his coaching tenure.
When his exit became messy and entangled, and his reputation had become tainted, all  he wanted was for everyone to look fondly on the good times and think of the end as only an aberration.
Don Nelson can relate to the predicament of Pat Riley, who returns to Madison Square Garden on Tuesday night for the first time since his departure last summer.
With the Miami Heat, Riley brings a new team into his old home.
But he also brings the baggage of a nasty off-season dispute with the Knicks, and there is no telling what kind of reception he will receive.


Problems at Advanced Micro Add to Selloff in Technology Issues
Stung by its inability to produce the latest generation of microprocessors, Advanced Micro Devices Inc. said today that it expected its fourth-quarter earnings to be lower than last quarter, which would put the company's earnings below Wall Street analysts' consensus estimate.
This morning's announcement by Advanced Micro added to a broad selloff in technology issues and was the latest in a string of bad news for technology companies.
Last Friday, Apple Computer said it would report a loss for its current fiscal quarter; the day before, the chip maker Micron Technology announced lower-than-expected profits.


At Church, Scripture, Song and Celebrity
In the beginning, there was James Earl Jones.
"At the beginning," he began.


Nominee for Justice Panel
A man who has worked with young offenders in Texas and Maryland was nominated yesterday by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman to direct the newly created Juvenile Justice Commission, The Associated Press reported.
The nominee, Paul Donnelly, recently served as deputy director of the Texas  Commission on Children and Youth.
If confirmed by the State Senate, he will oversee new laws intended to overhaul the juvenile justice system, including a bill to create a military-style "boot camp" that was sent to the Governor yesterday.


They're Off. No, They're On.
The New York Racing Association and New York City Off-Track Betting reached an agreement yesterday for the racing association to continue to make its live broadcasts available for home viewing.
The deal ended a squabble that escalated  last Friday when N.Y.R.A. pulled the plug on the "Race Day Aqueduct" cable television signal for two hours.
Allie Sherman, OTB's president, and Kenny Noe, Jr., chairman of the N.Y.R.A,  met in Albany with Jerry Bilinski, chairman of the state racing and wagering board, where the agreement was struck.
No details were released.
Bilinski brokered a deal on Dec. 1, under which OTB made several financial concessions, including paying the racing association about $3 million to $4 million annually  from OTB's telephone handle.
But that deal was not made final.


Two Manhattan Seniors Are Put on Probation
Ted Ellis and Keaton Hyman, senior starting guards who were key contributors  to Manhattan College's run in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament last season, have been suspended from the basketball team for the rest of the season.
The ban was "for unacceptable behavior in residence halls" on Saturday, school officials said last night.


CHRONICLE
MICHAEL JACKSON, you've just beaten a life-threatening illness.
What are you  going to do now?
Go to Disneyland, of course.


STOCKS AND BONDS IN SHARP RETREAT
In what analysts called a resoundingly negative reaction to the failure of Congress and the White House to resolve their budget impasse, Wall Street sent stock and bond prices down sharply yesterday, a day before the Federal Reserve's policy-making panel meets to consider a second cut this year in short-term interest rates.
The Dow Jones industrial average plunged 101.52 points, or 1.96 percent, to 5,075.21, its largest percentage decline in more than a year.
Even sharper declines were felt in the Nasdaq composite index, which is rich with the technology companies that have fueled much of the broad market's gains this year.
As bond prices plunged, the yield on the Treasury's 30-year bond jumped to 6.20 percent, from 6.09 percent on Friday. [Page D20.]


Cobra Golf In Agreement On Takeover
Cobra Golf Inc., a maker of premium clubs, said today that it had agreed to be acquired by American Brands Inc. for $700 million.
Cobra's stock jumped on the news, gaining $7.875, to $35.50 in afternoon trading on the Nasdaq market, just under American Brands' $36-a-share offer.
American Brands was off $2.25 at $44.125 on the New York Stock Exchange.


H.I.V. Danger Level For Fetus Is Found
Researchers in New York have determined the levels of H.I.V., the AIDS virus, in the bloodstream of pregnant women that are required for the infection to be transmitted to their babies.
In a study of 30 pregnant women, New York State Department of Health researchers projected that patients with 50,000 viruses per milli liter of blood had a 75 percent probability of transmitting the disease to their babies.
Below  that level, the odds are 3 percent, the study found.


Trucks at the Border
The North American Free Trade Agreement permits freer movement of Mexican and American trucks on both sides of the border.
That promises dramatically increased commerce.
But fears of accidents involving Mexican trucks in the north, along with Mexico's concerns over American competition, have prompted both countries to postpone a general border opening scheduled for Monday.
This delay is no cause for worry over holding up a key Nafta measure -- provided both countries use the time to strengthen safety rules.
Nafta's long-term workability is well served by making sure that when national standards are meshed, they are "harmonized up" to higher U.S. standards.


An Act From Florida Opens to Boos Before 20,000 Critics
Spike Lee, unofficial fan No. 1 at Madison Square Garden these days, was asked how he thought the Garden crowd would respond to the return of Pat Riley.
"They're going to be on him," said Lee before taking his courtside seat for Riley's first appearance since he jumped the Knicks to become a part-owner/general manager/head coach of the Miami Heat.


Perot's Party Is Set Back, Failing to Make Ohio Ballot
In the first organizational setback for Ross Perot's new Reform Party, Ohio officials announced today that party organizers had failed to collect enough signatures to secure a spot on the state's March 19 primary ballot.
The ruling is likely to have little effect on the new party's role in the 1996 Presidential race.
By continuing to collect signatures, the Reform Party can still run Presidential and Vice-Presidential candidates in Ohio in the general election.


Japanese Stocks Higher
Stocks traded higher here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 226 issues was up 308.10 points, or 1.61 percent, at 19,448.59.
On Tuesday, the Nikkei fell 170.59 points, or nearly nine-tenths of 1 percent.


Natural Gas Surges on Concern About Cold Weather Forecasts
Natural gas futures prices surged to a record yesterday as cold weather forecasts threw traders into a panic over supplies.
Wholesale natural gas for January delivery soared 36.4 cents, to $2.868 for 1,000 cubic feet, on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
It traded as high as $2.90, a record for a near-term futures contract, surpassing the high of $2.80 set on April 23, 1993.


New Delhi Journal;Why Is India Giggling? The P.M.'s Naughty Novel
Since P. V. Narasimha Rao became India's Prime Minister nearly five years ago, he has been called many things.
Some have described him as visionary, for using a debt crisis in 1991 as the occasion to begin dismantling 45 years of socialism.
Others, noting his habitually dour demeanor, have suggested that he has raised dullness to an art.
But nobody, until recently, questioned Mr.
Rao's character in quite the manner of a columnist in The Times of India, which for much of its 150-year existence has been regarded as an arbiter of official proprieties.
The columnist, Soli Sorabjee, a former Attorney General and one of India's most distinguished legal scholars, did not mince words.


Evidence Keeps Mounting on Link Between Apnea and Heart Disease
ONE of these days, it might pay to locate sleep laboratories next to heart catheterization laboratories, some medical researchers say.
The reason is that sleep apnea, a common yet rarely diagnosed problem, is turning out to play a major, insidious role in heart disease, including congestive heart failure, high blood pressure and chest pain.
Yet many cardiologists and heart disease patients are not aware of the problem, researchers into apnea have found.


Players Prefer to Blend
Emerging string quartets ripen slowly if at all.
What withers many young groups is not so much a lack of compatibility as unequal distribution of talent.
There is also the question of what ensemble means.
Do quartets, in other words, take blend as their watchword?
Do they seek one voice made from four?
Or should there be the air of hard-won consensus: an agreement tinged with confrontation?


2 in Bosnia Try to Calm Ethnic Fears In a City
The Rev.
Stipan Radic, the Roman Catholic priest to the Croats who remain in  this predominantly Muslim town, has found an unusual partner in his efforts to encourage Croats who fled to come home.
He is working with perhaps the most powerful member of the local Muslim elite, Hamdija Kulovic, head of the huge Zenica steel mill, the most important plant in the region.


Gadget Sells Out
A potato-chip maker mentioned in The Living Section's Dec. 6 article "Kitchen Gadgets That Work" is no longer available.
Shortly after the article appeared, Damark International, which was selling the potato-chip maker, sold out its stock.
A spokesman for the manufacturer, the West Bend Company, said it no longer makes the machine and has no plans to make it again.


Modest Interest-Rate Cut by Fed Helps to Move the Dollar Higher
The dollar moved higher against other leading currencies yesterday after the  Federal Reserve's interest-rate cut was seen as a token measure.
Typically, lower interest rates would hurt the dollar, but the Fed chose to cut a short-term rate by a quarter of a percentage point rather than a half and  left alone the more influential discount rate.


U.S. Diplomat to Head Bosnia Mission
An American career diplomat, Robert Frowick, was appointed today to supervise civilian peace efforts in Bosnia.
Mr.
Frowick will head a task force supervising elections, arms control and human rights in Bosnia, as provided by the peace agreement formally signed in Paris last week.


C-COR STOCK PLUNGES ON WEAK PROFIT OUTLOOK
The stock of C-Cor Electronics Inc. fell 24 percent yesterday after the company, a maker of cable-television equipment, said its earnings and revenues in the fiscal second quarter would be below Wall Street's expectations.
C-Cor, of State College, Pa., said the costs of installing a new company computer system and customer requests to change orders were the major reasons for the weak earnings.
A company spokeswoman said analysts had predicted revenues of $41 million to $42 million and earnings per share of 26 to 28 cents for the three months ending Dec. 29.
In the corresponding period a year earlier, C-Cor earned $1.95 million, or 20 cents a share, on sales of $29.7 million.
C-Cor's shares were down $6.75, at $21, yesterday in Nasdaq trading.


William Marchant, 72, 'Desk Set' Playwright
William Marchant, who wrote "The Desk Set" and other plays, died on Nov. 5 at Bergen Pines County Hospital in Paramus, N.J.
He was 72.
His body was unclaimed in the hospital morgue until this week.


Fighting in Kabul Renewed
Rebel rocket attacks killed 2 people and wounded 27 in the Afghan capital today, just hours after the military repelled two guerrilla offensives.
The Government blamed the rocket assault on the Taliban, a rebel group camped just south of Kabul that is fighting to impose strict Islamic rule.


Bulger Should Prove Boon to UMass
To the Editor:
"Boss Bulger's New Job" (editorial, Dec. 14), on the new president of the University of Massachusetts, William Bulger, hardly does justice to this great public person.


I.B.M. Is Set to Acquire a New Subsidiary
Taligent Inc., which was formed by Apple Computer Inc. and the International  Business Machines Corporation to develop a new computer technology, will become  a wholly owned subsidiary of I.B.M., the companies said today.
Formed in 1992 and operating as an independent company, Taligent was created  to develop a new application system based on object-oriented technology.
The Hewlett-Packard Company became the third investor in 1994.


DISNEY'S OVITZ TO EARN $1 MILLION A YEAR, OR MUCH MORE
Michael Ovitz, the president of the Walt Disney Company, will earn a base salary of $1 million a year for the next five years, Disney said yesterday.
But  bonuses and stock options could bring Mr.
Ovitz, the former Hollywood agent, 20  times that much.
Documents filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission showed that Mr.
Ovitz, who left the Creative Artists Agency to join Disney on Oct. 1, will earn more in base salary than Michael D. Eisner, the company's chairman, earned this year, when his base salary totaled $750,000.


Metropolitan Diary
A FRIEND writes:
With the usual mentions of pizza and cake, the birthday party invitation from one of my son's friends included a page-long "assumption of risk, release and indemnification" from the party site, Go Vertical, a rock-climbing club in Stamford, Conn.
The host is turning 6.


Cabbies Gain Access to Restrooms
Elaine Launius of Staten Island has been driving a cab for 28 years and has had a gun pointed at her head five times.
But day in and day out, she says, the  most annoying part of her job is the challenge of finding a restroom.
"This is truly, truly a blessing," she said recently when she saw that the restroom in St.
Vartan's Park, near the Queens-Midtown Tunnel's Manhattan entrance, was lit and open, albeit battered and smelly.


Sports of The Times;Knicks' Fans Can't Forget Good Times
THE walked back into New York's life as late as he possibly could.
He blew one theatrical kiss to the crowd.
He tapped his two elegant shoulders as if to say, "Hit me with your best shot."
Their best wasn't much.
I've heard worse in this joint for hockey referees missing an icing-the-puck call.
New York fans are pretty savvy, but the Garden crowd didn't seem to know how it really felt about Pat Riley.
Or maybe the fans  sensed they had been manipulated by the WAR DECLARED coverage in recent days.


When All Goes Wrong, Rice Delivers
The San Francisco 49ers once again had a valet: Jerry Rice.
Their running game is in Philadelphia (Ricky Watters) and their quarterback is still in physical therapy (Steve Young), but when all else fails -- or punts -- it is Rice who checks the team into the end zone.


Beauty of the Flag
To the Editor:
Please count me among those who are grateful for the defeat of a constitutional amendment that would empower Congress to pass laws against desecrating the United States flag (front page, Dec. 13).


Bradley Likes the Sound Of His New Home and Role
Shawn Bradley's stat line in the Nets' 110-103 loss to the Jazz Monday night  wasn't overly impressive: 6 points, 7 rebounds, 2 blocked shots, 5 fouls.
Still, it was enough to earn a nice ovation from the crowd when he entered or left the  lineup.
It's a nice change from his days in Philadelphia when he was booed nearly every time he touched the ball.
"The crowds have been really supportive," Bradley said recently.
"They've welcomed me and it's been a great reception. It's helping me relax when I get out on the court and work hard to become a better player."


27 Reported Killed in Fighting in Burundi
Twenty-seven people have been killed and several wounded in the latest ethnic clashes in Burundi, the state radio service said today.
Eighteen people died in fighting between the Tutsi-dominated army and armed elements in the Murwi commune in the northwest Cibitoke province, said the radio, which was monitored by the British Broadcasting Corporation.
No date was  given for the report.
Nine people, including three soldiers, were killed Monday  in the Buganda commune, the radio added.


Vatican Draws Criticism For Embrace of Andreotti
It is said that Italy's curse is to be the home of three world powers: Italy, the Roman Catholic Church and the Mafia, of which the feeblest is the Italian state.
It might also be said that Giulio Andreotti, seven times Prime Minister and a devout Catholic now on trial for Mafia crimes, has become the symbol of the relationships that bind all three.


These Are Tough Times For the Jets' Tackles
The worst record in Jets history is 60 minutes away.
And for all that, it may not even guarantee the No. 1 pick in the National Football League draft.
The Jets wind up this season of stunning failure at home against the Saints (6-9) on Sunday, while the Jacksonville Jaguars, the only other 3-12 team in the league, finish against the downtrodden Browns.


CHRONICLE
CHRISTIE BRINKLEY and RICKY TAUBMAN were married last Dec. 22 in a ceremony atop Telluride Ski Mountain in Colorado.
This week, a few days before their anniversary, the couple reached an agreement in what had been expected to be an acrimonious divorce.
Ms.
Brinkley,  42, had sued Mr.
Taubman in Colorado for divorce and nearly $2 million in cash and property that she said he owed her.
She had filed in New York for custody of their 6-month-old son, The Associated Press reported yesterday.


Daluiso Encounters Season Of Struggle
For most of his five seasons in the National Football League, Brad Daluiso has made a living by booming kickoffs into or through the end zone.
But now his  job is different and kickoff rules are different, and he is struggling.
Not to worry.


At the Nation's Table
Seattle


Let Aristide Move To Keep U.N. in Haiti
To the Editor:


U.S. Bars an Unruly Group After an In-Flight Fracas
Perhaps the captain never should have turned off the seat-belt sign.
A food fight broke out aboard a Northwest Airlines flight from London on Monday, and when the plane landed here 17 passengers were sent back to Europe.


In Performance: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Rugged, Unsentimental Style In an All-American Program Ole Bohn, Violinist Merkin Concert Hall


Knicks Defeat the Heat, but Fans Take on Riley
At the sound of the third-quarter horn, after Derek Harper had hit a 3-pointer and the Knicks were on their way to an 89-70 victory over Miami, Pat Riley stood on the sideline.
His arms were folded across his chest, and not even the Armani suit, the gel or the carefully constructed image could hide a look of resignation.
The Madison Square Garden crowd began to chant his name derisively.
If the Knicks won a basketball game last night, the people who pay to fill the Garden won the bullfight.
With insults and boos and taunts and, finally, an obscene chant, they managed to catch up with their former coach, who abruptly left town  last June for the wealth and power of south Florida.


Russians Shell Rebel-Held Chechen Town
Russian heavy artillery and missiles pounded the rebel-held town of Gudermes  in Chechnya today as senior military commanders said they were launching an operation to retake it.
Soon after noon, the intensity of the bombardment grew as refugees left the town, five miles from Kurchaloi, where reporters heard the bombardment, the Interfax news agency said.


3 Hobbes Essays Renew Debate Over Machiavelli
It has taken more than 300 years, but Thomas Hobbes, the 17th-century English political philosopher, has a new book out.
And what its editors suggest about the birth of modern political thought has reawakened an old debate and set scholars to hurling metaphorical ink pots at each other.
The attribution to Hobbes of a collection of three essays published anonymously early in his career -- currently reissued under Hobbes's name by the University of Chicago Press -- is chiefly due to decades of perseverance by  one of the editors, Arlene W. Saxonhouse, a professor of political science at the University of Michigan.


Market Place;Fleet buys NatWest cheap, in a deal that's widely applauded.
EVEN bankers sometimes can live well shopping at the bargain basement.
Fleet  Financial Group confirmed yesterday that it had agreed to buy NatWest Bank, the  New York and New Jersey operation of National Westminster Bank P.L.C. of Britain, for $3.26 billion.
That price represents 1.05 times the book value of NatWest and 12.3 times its earnings.
It is far less than the multiples in other bank deals this year, especially the sky-high premiums paid in New Jersey by First Union, which bought the First Fidelity Bancorporation for $5.6 billion, and the PNC Bank Corporation, which bought the Midlantic Corporation for $3 billion.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Clinton and G.O.P.
Leaders To Negotiate on Budget President Clinton and the Republican leaders of Congress agreed to negotiate personally an agreement that would balance the Federal budget in seven years.


Bombing Plotter in Plea Deal Is Given Probation and Time Served
A New Jersey man who pleaded guilty to conspiring with a group of militant Muslims convicted of a terrorist-bombing plot in the New York region was sentenced yesterday to the 29 months he had already served in jail and placed on three years' probation.
Matarawy Mohammed Said Saleh, a 39-year-old native of Egypt, received the sentence in Federal District Court in Manhattan from a judge who said, "I assume, Mr. Saleh, you understand you got a break."


On Medicare, Congress Takes Backward Aim;Home Care Gap
To the Editor:
Re "Medicare vs. Medicaid" (Op-Ed, Dec. 14): John F. Cogan says neither Congressional Republicans nor the White House would eliminate any medical procedure or service available to Medicare beneficiaries.


PRAXAIR RAISES OFFER FOR CBI AND SETS A DEADLINE
Praxair Inc. sweetened its hostile bid for CBI Industries yesterday and pressured CBI to accept it by imposing a deadline of tomorrow.
Praxair, based in Danbury, Conn., increased its offer by $1 a share, to $33.
If CBI does not accept by 5 P.M. tomorrow, Praxair's bid, valued at about $2.2 billion, plus the assumption of $750 million in CBI debt, will revert to the original $32-a-share  offer that was rejected on Nov. 16.
A spokesman for CBI, which is based in Oak Brook, Ill., was unavailable for comment.
The acquisition would combine CBI, the world's largest maker of carbon dioxide, with Praxair, one of the world's largest producers of industrial gases.
CBI shares were up $1 at $32.375 on the New York Stock Exchange.


Ward Tries To Impress Old Teacher
Charlie Ward said it was nothing personal.
He had nothing but good things to  say about Pat Riley.
But Ward could have been forgiven if, deep down, he felt the ever-so-slightest bit of vindication after his performance against Riley and the Miami Heat last night at Madison Square Garden.


OPERATION IN COSTA RICA IS SOLD FOR $100 MILLION
Chiquita Brands International Inc. said yesterday that it had sold the Costa  Rican business of its Grupo Numar unit to Costa Rican and Panamanian investors for $100 million.
It said that half of the selling price was in cash.
Grupo Numar, a maker of margarine, shortening and other vegetable oil products, had sales last year of $90 million.
Chiquita is based in Cincinnati.


Korea Parliament Clears Trial of Ex-Presidents
South Korea's Parliament passed a law today to allow the punishment of two former Presidents for the Kwang-ju massacre, a tragedy that scarred the nation,  Yonhap news agency reported.
Chun Doo Hwan, the former president most closely associated with the army's 1980 slaughter of pro-democracy demonstrators, was reported to be dangerously weak today on his 17th day on a hunger strike.


On Medicare, Congress Takes Backward Aim
To the Editor:
Re "Medicare vs. Medicaid" (Op-Ed, Dec. 14):


Autumn's Snowy Farewell Comes in Two Bursts
A pair of snowstorms rolled into the New York region on Tuesday, delivering a one-two punch that closed schools and offices, disrupted airports, complicated holiday shopping and guaranteed what meteorologists said would be the first white Christmas in 12 years.
For much of the day, people were caught up in a guessing game.
Based on forecasters' exuberant predictions, communities and families battened down their hatches in what looked, at least for a time, to be a slightly over-enthusiastic seasonal state of siege.
By late afternoon Central Park had recorded only two inches of snow.


Call Him Mr. Flexible
The importance of Bob Dole's decision to soften his views on abortion lies in what it says about the struggle taking place within the Republican Party.
Surprisingly, despite all the caterwauling from Pat Buchanan and from Ralph Reed and his Christian Coalition, the party's mainstream majority may slowly be bending G.O.P. policy to fit their libertarian views on abortion.
Their headway  on reclaiming this issue from the militant fringe is part of a process pushed along by the party's most popular non-candidate, Colin Powell.
Mr.
Dole's appearance on "Meet the Press" last Sunday was notable for two things.
One was his statement that he would no longer support the constitutional ban on abortion favored by the right-wingers.
"I would not do it again," he said.
The other was a powerful hint that he would welcome General Powell on the  ticket.
This was a telling juxtaposition, for it was General Powell who got the  moderate Republican position on abortion out on the table and gave it new and stronger currency.


Offtrack Betting Settles Dispute Over Television Show
The New York Racing Association will get at least $1.4 million retroactively  from the New York City Offtrack Betting Corporation to keep the television signal of its races from Belmont, Aqueduct and Saratoga available for home viewing.
The availability of the N.Y.R.A.'s signal on cable television since last spring has quadrupled OTB's telephone wagering to $121 million from 1994, an increase spurred by the lack of a minimum balance needed for an OTB account.
N.Y.R.A's phone handle has lagged because its accounts required a $450 balance.


I.B.M. and Ameritech Set Service Accord
With the computer and the telephone becoming ever more intertwined, I.B.M. and the Ameritech Corporation announced a new partnership yesterday to service both.
The first customers of the new service, which has not been given a name, will be the two companies themselves.
Under a seven-year, $400 million deal, I.B.M. will manage Ameritech's 35,000 desktop computers, while the regional Bell will provide a large part of I.B.M.'s voice and video services around the country.


Journal;Christian Coalition Chutzpah
For 24 hours, at least, Bob Dole did what no other leading Republican has had the guts to do since Arlen Specter left the Presidential race: He stood up to the religious right on Sunday's "Meet the Press," refusing to mimic its take-no-prisoners stand on abortion.
Senator Dole said he was now against a constitutional amendment to reverse Roe v.
Wade and welcomed a pro-choice candidate, Colin Powell, as a running mate.
By Monday, though, Mr.
Dole had been dressed down by the Christian Coalition's Ralph Reed, and he immediately retreated from his seemingly candid Sunday remarks, fudging them beyond recognition.
To watch this World War II hero cower before Mr.
Reed and his boss, Pat Robertson, is a sad sight.
But luckily for those who regard the Christian Coalition as an affront to the very Christian values of charity and pluralism it purports to uphold, not everyone is so easily muscled.
In this holiday season, angels of all sorts are battling the coalition  on fronts where politicians fear to tread.


Giorgio Fini; Italian Food Magnate, 70
Giorgio Fini, a restaurateur who first packaged and sold homemade pasta, died on Monday in a Rome clinic.
He was 70.
Mr. Fini died several days after entering the clinic for heart trouble.


MOLSON DISMISSES THREE EXECUTIVES IN REVAMPING
Molson Breweries, Canada's largest brewer, said it had dismissed three executives as part of its move to establish three regional offices.
The brewery, owned by the Molson Companies, named a president for each of the offices.
The changes come one month after the company, which is based in Toronto, named John  R. Barnett chief executive.
The managers who were dismissed are Charles Fremes,  former senior vice president of corporate and public affairs; Gary Burkett, senior vice president of personnel, and Craig Prentice, a senior vice president  for the Ontario office.
David Perkins was named president of the new Ontario and Atlantic provinces office, Andre Tranchemontagne was named president of the Quebec office, and Blair Shier was appointed president of the Western Canada region.


A Blood Pressure Risk
Men with high blood pressure in midlife are much more likely to have trouble  thinking and remembering things when they are old, a study found.
The finding adds yet another reason to control high blood pressure, which is  already known to be a risk factor for stroke and heart disease.


BEVERLY ENTERPRISES IS FORCED TO DELAY JUNK-BOND SALE
The shares of Beverly Enterprises Inc. fell 11 percent yesterday after the company said its earnings would be lower than expected in the fourth quarter, forcing the postponement of a $150 million junk-bond sale.
Beverly also deferred plans to sell or spin off part of its prescription-drug benefits unit, the source of its earnings problems.
Beverly, the nation's largest operator of nursing homes, said its profit would be less than half what it had projected.
The shares of Beverly, which is based in Fort Smith, Ark., were down $1.125, at  $10.125, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Book Notes
Moving South With a Winner


Fed Rate Cut Spurs Prices Of Treasuries
Prices of Treasury securities rebounded sharply yesterday as the Federal Reserve lowered short-term interest rates.
The price of the 30-year bond rose 1 10/32, to 110 15/32; its yield, which moves in the opposite direction of its price, dropped to 6.11 percent, down from 6.20 percent on Monday.
The benchmark issue lost a point and a half on Monday on fears the cut would not occur while Federal budget talks were stalemated.
Before rising, bonds faltered in early trading on follow-through selling generated by Monday's steep drop.


University of Pacific Is Dropping Football
The University of Pacific, which has had a football team for 77 years, is dropping the sport next season to save money.
The Board of Regents voted in a special meeting today to disband the team for at least one year.
The decision does not affect any of the school's other Division I-A sports programs.


Bosnian Civilians' Hopes for Peace Are Modest
As the first American combat troops took up their duties today, the people in this town on the periphery of the American base had wish lists for the peacekeepers, but their desires were modest.
"I would just like to see my children," said Vlako Dragicevic, 61, as another American plane carrying troops droned in the gray clouds overhead.
Mr.
Dragicevic, a Serb, said he has not seen his three sons, three daughters and eight grandchildren in nearly four years.


Scheming Italian Entrepreneurs in Troubled Albania
Lamerica" was shown as part of this year's New York Film Festival. Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 4. The film opens today at Lincoln Plaza Cinema, Broadway at 63d Street, and Angelika Film Center, Houston and Mercer Streets, Greenwich Village.
Gianni Amelio's magnificently humane "Lamerica" takes place in 1991 in an Albania visibly coming apart at the seams.
After nearly 50 years in isolation under the Communist dictatorship headed by Enver Hoxha and his successor, Ramiz Alia, Europe's poorest country is in turmoil, led by a Socialist Government that will hold power for only one year.
Meanwhile, the streets are strewn with rubble and the populace is volatile and anarchic.
It is either a scene of devastation or a land of opportunity, depending on one's point of view.


Executive Changes
BOSTON CHICKEN INC., Golden, Colo., named Saad J. Nadhir, its president and vice chairman, to the additional position of co-chairman; he continues as president.
Mark W. Stephens, the chief financial officer, was named to succeed Mr.
Nadhir as vice chairman.
Scott Beck will continue as co-chairman and chief executive, while Jeffrey J. Shearer will continue as a vice chairman.


Maine Nuclear Plant Is Told to Cut Power
Acting on an anonymous tip, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission has ordered the Maine Yankee nuclear power plant to reduce its power level because it is not clear whether the plant can withstand even a small water leak in its cooling system without a meltdown.
The tip came in a three-page letter from someone with detailed knowledge of the 23-year-old reactor four miles south of Wiscasset on the Maine coast.
The letter said that plant managers considered the commission "a nuisance" and, in 1989, manipulated data and a computer program in an application to increase the  power level of the plant.


Weather for Coffee and Philosophizing
Lingering over coffee and a theology tome in the Sip n' Dunk Donut Shop, Gregory Cerstvik gazed out at the snowflakes whitening the grit of his hometown  today and savored the serenity they brought on.
"I guess I'm in a holiday frame of mind," he said, taking a deep draw on his  Antonio y Cleopatra cigar.
His white load was waiting to be laundered, he said,  but when it snows, "You take it easy and observe nature more -- how clean it gets."


Rates Are Rising on Policies That Cover Gaps in Medicare
Adding new fuel to the budget debate, the largest suppliers of private health insurance supplements to Medicare said today that their premiums would rise by an average of about 30 percent next year.
The increase was disclosed by the American Association of Retired Persons and the Prudential Insurance Company of America, which provides supplemental coverage to 3.1 million members of the association.
Other companies are also raising premiums for these policies, which help fill gaps in Medicare by paying  hospital charges, doctors' bills and other expenses not covered by the Government program.


Personal Health
GAIL GREENBERG was a New York high school student when the signs of depression first appeared in the guise of a succession of bodily complaints.
She developed one physical symptom after another, consulting the family doctor almost weekly.
Each time he ordered a series of tests and each time he found no  physical explanation for her symptoms.
At no time, however, did the doctor ask Gail about what was going on in her life at school, at home and beyond.
At no time did he ask the leading questions  that would have revealed a persistent emotional depression to be the real cause  of her symptoms.
Not until college did a counselor find the reason for her misery and prescribe a treatment that could remedy it.


Last-Minute, Double-Duty Gifts
At downtown branch of Pottery Barn, two 20-somethings hovered between the ornaments and the tea-making accessories.
One fondled the tree decorations lovingly.
"Yeah, yeah, they're nice," her friend said, clutching a crumpled gift list.
"But at this late date, we've got to focus. Keep your eye on the ball."


Tomba's Return to the Top Comes With Perfect Timing
Alberto Tomba celebrated his 29th birthday today by winning a World Cup slalom event for the first time this season.
Tomba, the defending World Cup champion, had two third-place finishes as his  previous best this season.


Massachusetts Files Suit Against Tobacco Industry
Massachusetts today became the latest state to bring suit against the nation's largest tobacco companies in an effort to recoup Medicaid and other health-care costs for treating smoking-related illnesses.
In a complaint filed this morning in Massachusetts Superior Court in Middlesex County, Attorney General Scott Harshbarger accused six tobacco companies, two tobacco trade associations and two tobacco distributors of conspiring for decades "to mislead, deceive and confuse" Massachusetts and its citizens about the dangers of smoking.
The suit seeks more than $1 billion in damages.


Trying On Shoes, 3 in Family Become Statistics
The shooting started when 12-year-old Rafael Gonzalez had one shoe on and one shoe off.
The police said that Rafael was trying on a new pair of shoes when he and his brother, Ricardo, 13, were killed.
Their mother, Maria Carrasquillo, 38, also died in the gunfire.


Clinton Vetoes Bill Restricting Securities Suits
Ending weeks of suspense for several of the nation's powerful interest groups, President Clinton vetoed a bill late today that would have made it more  difficult for shareholders to bring fraud suits against underwriters, corporate  officers and accountants.
The legislation would have fundamentally altered the system, in place since 1933, that was designed to discourage fraud in the securities market by relying  on a blend of private and government sanctions.
While the measure preserved all  the authority of the Securities and Exchange Commission to pursue fraud claims,  it would have placed formidable obstacles before individual investors seeking to have their claims heard in court.


Welfare in the Real World
Can states be trusted to administer basic welfare programs fairly and equitably, or will they simply embark on a wholesale "race to the bottom," as President Clinton suggests?
Congress might look to Connecticut for an early answer to this important question.
Last spring, the Connecticut Legislature overwhelmingly adopted a welfare reform package that imposes the nation's shortest time limit on benefits -- 21 months -- and reduces payments under the Aid to Families with Dependent Children program by an average of 7 percent.
Does this mean Connecticut is shredding the  social safety net?
Hardly.


Falling Ratings Threaten All Except Top Talk Shows
After much hubbub this fall about salacious topics being discussed by exhibitionist guests on daytime television talk shows, industry insiders expect  half a dozen such shows to be terminated next month, at the industry's convention in Las Vegas.
But did William Bennett and Joseph Lieberman drive them out, or are they dying the natural death that comes of television's Darwinian ratings race?


Reserve Board Cuts Key Rate; Markets Climb
Nudged along by a slowing economy and nervous financial markets, the Federal  Reserve lowered a key interest rate today by a quarter of a point.
The cut in short-term rates, which the Federal Reserve said was justified because of the lack of any threat of inflation, allowed the stock and bond markets to regain some of their big losses on Monday.
But it left considerable uncertainty about whether Wall Street would be cheered by President Clinton's agreement with Republican Congressional leaders this afternoon to come up with a framework for a budget accord that would be concluded by the end of the year.
The announcement at the White House came after the markets closed.


Countdown to a Suicide
The manslaughter indictment of George Delury for helping his wife commit suicide is a salutary reminder of the terrible pressures that can beset desperately ill people and those who care for them.
Most such suicides are presented as cases in which a selfless and courageous spouse or relative helps a loved one gain the peace of an eagerly sought death.
But the striking element of the Delury case is its revelation of how mixed and ambiguous the motives of both parties can sometimes appear.
What makes the Delury case different from most is a diary, entitled "Countdown," that Mr.
Delury kept on his home computer for three months as he agonized over the deterioration of his 52-year-old wife, Myrna Lebov, who was chronically ill from multiple sclerosis.
By the time of her death last July she  could not brush her teeth by herself and had difficulty reading or holding a thought.
Her ideas about taking her own life were clearly mixed.
One diary entry has her thinking suicide might be the best solution; another describes her as euphoric and "interested in everything."


Renata Calabresi, An Anti-Fascist, 96
Dr.
Renata A. Calabresi, a clinical psychologist who was active in the anti-Fascist underground in Italy in the 1930's, died last Friday at her home in New Haven, Conn.
She was 96.
Dr.
Calabresi, who was born in Ferrara, received her Ph.D. from the University of Florence in 1923 and went to teach at the University of Rome.
With her brother, Dr.
Massimo E. Calabresi, she helped publish and distribute the leading underground newspaper of the Italian Resistance, Non Mollare (Don't Give Up) and was jailed for a time by the Mussolini Government.


CIRRUS LOGIC AGREES TO INVEST IN CHIP PLANT
Cirrus Logic Inc. said yesterday that it would pay $355 million to the Digital Equipment Corporation to enable Cirrus to produce semiconductor chips at Digital's plant in Hudson, Mass.
Digital has been seeking a partner to defray the cost of the plant, where it produces its Alpha microprocessor.
Under the terms of the agreement, which is not final, Cirrus Logic would buy equipment for the plant and lease it back to Digital.
The company would also agree to buy silicon wafers produced at the plant, raising its output to capacity.
The announcement was made after Digital stock closed at $61.625, up $4.125, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Cirrus stock was up $1.125, at $26.50, in Nasdaq trading.


Gov. Chiles Apologizes For Misdeed By Campaign
Gov.
Lawton Chiles says he prides himself on running clean political campaigns, not on his attention to detail.
When members of his re-election campaign staff did not tell him they had arranged for calls to be made to elderly voters last year in the name of other organizations, he told a Florida Senate committee today, he felt "used" and "misled."
But while the Democratic Governor took responsibility for the calls, which he termed "a major mistake," he was contrite only about the misrepresentations to voters.
In his testimony before the panel investigating the campaign tactic, he  stood by the calls' message that his Republican opponent, Jeb Bush, had failed to pay taxes and was "no friend of seniors" because his running mate wanted to abolish Social Security and cut Medicare.


Recusal Halts Court Appeal In a Gay Case
A closely watched constitutional challenge of the military's policy on homosexuals was postponed yesterday when a Federal appeals court judge in Manhattan excused himself moments before legal arguments were scheduled to begin.
The judge, Guido Calabresi, recused himself after Government lawyers notified the court that he was one of 119 legal scholars who co-signed a letter to Congress in March 1993 maintaining that legislation banning homosexuals from the military was unconstitutional.


Stocks, Bonds Surge After Fed's Action
For financial markets, it was almost as if Monday never happened.
Following one of the bigger one-day selloffs in recent years, stock and bond  prices both snapped back smartly yesterday after the Federal Reserve lowered a key short-term borrowing rate by a quarter of a percentage point.


Holbrooke Tells Congress He Will Leave Post Soon
Richard C. Holbrooke, the American diplomat who helped negotiate the Bosnian  peace accord, told Congress today that he will leave his post early next year.
Officials said he would be succeeded as Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs by John Kornblum, a career diplomat.
"It will be an orderly process," Mr.
Holbrooke told the Senate Appropriations subcommittee on foreign operations.


POLAROID PLANS TO CUT 1,300 JOBS
The Polaroid Corporation said yesterday that it planned to cut 1,300 jobs by  the end of the first quarter of 1996.
Polaroid, based in Cambridge, Mass., said  the move would result in pretax charges totaling $195 million.
One, of $155 million, will be taken in the fourth quarter, and the other, of $40 million, in  1996.
The jobs will be cut through voluntary severance packages, early retirement and, if needed, dismissals.
The move is the first broad stroke by the company's new chief executive, Gary DiCamillo, to reshape Polaroid, the maker of instant cameras, which said it expected to break even financially in the fourth quarter.


In Performance: THEATER
The Darker Side Of a Holiday Fantasy 'The Nutcracker' Nada


Filene's Basement Picks Agency
Filene's Basement Inc., the discount retailer based in Wellesley, Mass., said yesterday that it had selected the Boston office of North Castle Partners to handle the creative and media parts of its account, with billings estimated at $6 million to $12 million.
Deutsch Inc. in New York had handled the creative part of the account and Pro Media in Needham, Mass., had handled the media part.
North Castle was awarded the account after a two-month review that was narrowed to that agency, Houston Effler Herstek Favat in Boston and Leonard/Monahan in Providence, R.I.


New Group Trying to Nudge Both Parties Toward Center
A group of centrist politicians met for a second day today to refine its message but acknowledged that it has no Presidential candidate to carry it.
And  two of its most prominent members, including Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey, have distanced themselves from the group.
"We've got the right ideas," former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts  said on Monday.
"We just don't have a vehicle."


3 Are Charged in Killings at Queens Bodega
Three men have been arrested and charged with killing four people in a Queens bodega last month, thanks in part to a survivor who managed to pick out their mug shots from his hospital bed.
The suspects -- Almein Cain, 25, and Amaury Rossario and Sean Estralla, both  18 -- were picked up without incident on Monday, the police said.
Each was charged with murder in the execution-style slaying of four men at Los Compadres bodega in Corona on Nov. 15.
Mr.
Cain and Mr.
Rossario live near the bodega; Mr.
Estralla is from the Bronx.


Council Hearing on Child Welfare Derailed by Dispute
A City Council hearing on the child welfare system was derailed yesterday when the Giuliani administration refused to let the head of the Child Welfare Administration testify because she would not be speaking first.
In response, City Council members voted to subpoena Kathryn Croft, the agency head, to force her to appear before them.
It was the first time the City Council had subpoenaed anyone to compel his or her cooperation since 1990, when the revised City Charter granted the Council broader powers.


Free Agency Crosses the Atlantic, Anxiety on Board
Is it a revolution, or isn't it?
That is the question soccer players, administrators and fans are asking all over Western Europe in the wake of what is now known simply as the Bosman verdict.


Corrections
Because of a production error, two picture captions on Friday about scenes relating to Bosnia were reversed in some copies.
A woman shown pouring coffee was in Ilidza, Bosnia and Herzegovina; two couples embracing were United States  Army soldiers saying goodbye to loved ones in Mannheim, Germany, before shipping out to Bosnia.


Fluor Unit Gets Pact
Fluor Daniel Inc. said today that it had received a $465 million contract from Pertamina, Indonesia's state oil and gas mining company, to raise the production capacity of a petroleum refinery.
Fluor Daniel will provide engineering and construction services and will add a lube oil complex at the Cilacap refinery in Indonesia.
Work will begin early next year and should be completed by early 1999, the company said.
Fluor Daniel is the primary unit of the Fluor Corporation, the engineering and construction company based in Irvine.


Aetna Health Plans Sued Over Flat-Fee System
A customer of Aetna Health Plans of New York filed a lawsuit in a Federal court yesterday to stop the health plan from adopting new arrangements that would pay some doctors a flat fee for each patient rather than a fee based on the services they provide.
The complaint by Marla Maltz, who has two children with a chronic intestinal  disease, said that the widely used flat fees violated a Federal law that covers group-health insurers.
Mrs.
Maltz, who lives in North Bellmore, L.I., contended that her children were being harmed because the flat-fee arrangement,  known as a capitation agreement, was forcing her doctor to leave the Aetna plan, and would effectively limit the amount of medical care that the children received.


Dorothy Porter Wesley, 91, Black-History Archivist
Dorothy Porter Wesley, a librarian who played the primary role in building Howard University's collection of books and other materials for the study of black history and culture, died on Sunday in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., at the home  of her daughter, where she had moved recently from Washington.
She was 91.
Mrs.
Wesley retired in 1973 as the curator of the Moorland-Spingarn Research  Center, a center for research involving documents about black history and kindred fields.
The center is on the Howard campus in Washington.


Fraschilla Sheds Some Tears, but Stands by Dismissals
Manhattan Basketball Coach Fran Fraschilla said goodbye to Ted Ellis and Keaton Hyman yesterday, a day after they received season-ending suspensions for  what school officials called "unacceptable behavior in residence halls" on Saturday.
"We cried and we hugged," said Fraschilla, just before he assembled his players for practice.
"Their feelings were one of disappointment and remorse. They know they made a mistake. They know they violated college rules."


CHRONICLE
While diplomats and negotiators work to create a peace agreement between Israel and its neighbors, LEWIS BERNSTEIN is working to foster understanding there through a new version of "Sesame Street."
The Children's Television Workshop, Israeli Educational Television and the Jerusalem Film Institute, a Palestinian nonprofit organization, are working on a production of the show for Israel, the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
There will probably be two versions in Hebrew and Arabic, said Mr.
Bernstein, the project director.


Wetteland Still Waits, So Yanks Wait for Cone
With reliever John Wetteland still not having been offered a contract by the  Yankees, David Cone still had not signed one yesterday.
The status of the free-agent starter remained uncertain while the Yankees and Baltimore Orioles continued pursuing him.
After meeting with George Steinbrenner in Tampa, Fla., last Friday, Cone said that he would like to decide his future by early this week.
Now, the middle of the week has arrived and the wait continues.


Giuliani Signs a Bill Raising Official Pay
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani signed legislation yesterday that raised pay for him and New York City's 63 other elected officials.
It ended a political struggle that has undercut Mr.
Giuliani's labor strategy, created new tensions at the Board of Education and subjected the Mayor to public outrage.
Mr.
Giuliani said he wanted the raises, including his own $35,000 increase, because  they cleared the way for increases for scores of deputies, commissioners and other managers who have toiled without raises for at least four years.
Article, page B3.


Shakespeare, Milton, Chaucer Get Demoted at Georgetown
A loosening of requirements at Georgetown University will allow undergraduates to earn a degree in English without taking courses in Chaucer, Milton or Shakespeare.
Currently, English majors at Georgetown are required to take classes in at least two of those three masters.
But a recently announced change adopted by the English department, due to take effect next fall and intended to give students greater flexibility in designing their own curriculums, does away with that standard in favor of allowing them to choose one of three concentrated areas of  study: literature and history, culture and performance, or writing.


New York's Law on Lead Paint Removal Compromises Safety
To the Editor:
Each year more than 2,000 children in New York City are diagnosed with lead poisoning, and landlords and city agencies fend off hundreds of millions of dollars in legal claims by families who contend that deteriorated residential lead paint caused the poisoning.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Dec. 15
Dec. 8
Dec. 16
1995
1995
1994 Gasoline production, daily
7.6
7.7
7.6 Distillate production, daily
3.4
3.4
3.2 Gasoline stocks
197.4
196.1
211.8 Distillate stocks
131.2
134.6
142.1 Crude imports, daily
7.2
7.4
6.7 Product imports, daily
1.9
1.8
1.2 Crude stocks
319.1
314.9
335.6 Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.5 Refinery utilization (%)
91.6
93.4
95.5


About New York;The Feeling of Security Dies in Pelham Parkway
WITH a hint of street swagger, Jason strode through the gray and white slush  along White Plains Road, slowing down as he saw the small army of police streaming in and out of Little Chester Shoes.
"Whassup?" he asked a bunch of his buddies who stood on the street, stamping  their feet for warmth in this cold season.
Somebody tried to rob the store and shot some people, a friend said.
Four died, maybe more.


White House Makes Little Gain in Resolving Whitewater Fight
Hoping to avoid a constitutional showdown on the floor of the Senate, President Clinton's lawyers today asked the Whitewater independent counsel and other investigators to agree that if the White House turned over notes to the Senate Whitewater committee, the investigators would not regard the move as a waiver of the President's lawyer-client privilege.
For weeks, the White House has defied the Senate committee's subpoenas for the notes, which involve a 1993 meeting on Whitewater among senior aides and lawyers of Mr.
Clinton.
In recent days, however, White House lawyers have said the President would turn over the notes if he received acknowledgment from investigators that they would not consider the step a precedent in which Mr.
Clinton waived his right to keep Whitewater conversations with his lawyers confidential.


Association Names New Officers
The Magazine Publishers of America in New York yesterday reshuffled the ranks of its top officers to replace executives who resigned only a month after being  named because they are leaving the magazine industry.
Thomas M. Kenney, 48, president for global magazine and corporate development at the Reader's Digest Association in Pleasantville, N.Y., was named chairman after serving briefly as secretary.
He suceeds D. Claeys Bahrenburg, 48, who was ousted late last month as president of the Hearst Magazines division of the Hearst Corporation in New York.


INSIDE
Rabin Slaying Trial Delayed


Warner-Lambert in a Deal For Rights to 5 Top Drugs
The Warner-Lambert Company stepped up its drive to become the world's biggest maker of nonprescription drugs yesterday, saying it would pay $1.05 billion to buy full rights to five popular over-the-counter drugs from Glaxo Wellcome, dissolving their joint venture.
Warner-Lambert and Glaxo Wellcome will continue with their 50-50 agreement to market a nonprescription version of Zantac, an ulcer treatment that will have almost $4 billion in worldwide sales this year, and is the biggest selling prescription drug in the world.
The Food and Drug Administration gave approval yesterday for Glaxo 75, the over-the-counter version, as a heartburn remedy.


In Performance: DANCE
Spiraling Through Space, Both Feet on the Ground Risa Jaroslow and Dancers Playhouse 91 92d Street Y


Draft Direct Revamps Structure
Draft Direct Worldwide in Chicago revamped its executive management structure yesterday with a hiring and several promotions at its New York office.
Don Zuckert was named to the new post of worldwide vice chairman in New York, reporting to Howard Draft, chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Zuckert, 61, was previously chairman and chief executive of the Arcature Corporation in Stamford, Conn., an investment and marketing consulting company; before that he  held top posts at what is now the Bates Worldwide unit of Cordiant P.L.C. in New York.


Blood Center Liable in H.I.V.-Infected Transfusion
A jury in Manhattan has found the New York Blood Center liable for providing  H.I.V.-infected blood to a 4-year-old boy during a transfusion 11 years ago, and it awarded him $1.5 million in damages.
But in its decision yesterday, the jury in State Supreme Court absolved three doctors and Downstate Medical Center in Brooklyn of any fault in the case.
It did so even though the hospital and two of the doctors had settled out of court two years ago, agreeing to pay a total of $1.6 million.


4 Companies To Announce Hotel Accord
The National Gaming Corporation, together with its former corporate parent, HFS Inc., and the privately owned Motels of America, will announce today that they have agreed to acquire the North American operations of Travelodge hotels from Forte P.L.C., for $170 million.
In a separate transaction, National Gaming will announce that it has sold 900,000 shares, or about 17 percent, of its common stock for about $8.5 million to Chartwell Leisure Associates.
National Gaming closed at $9.875 a share yesterday, up 12.5 cents, in Nasdaq trading.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.


New Look At Nixon Era, By the Memos
The National Archives released a 50,000-page grab bag of long-classified documents from President Richard M. Nixon's White House today -- no smoking guns, but fascinating fragments, from a slew of favor-seeking memos by Senator Bob Dole to an early draft of a plan for spying on left-wingers.
A glance at the files revealed the 25-year-old thoughts of several present-day Presidential contenders: admiring notes by Patrick J. Buchanan, then a young Nixon aide; querulous and commendatory letters from Mr.
Dole, Republican National Committee chairman from 1971 to 1973, and internal White House messages contemplating setting Mr.
Dole to work digging up dirt on the President's political foes.


Financier Loses Bid to Keep Plea Bargain
A Federal judge in Manhattan refused yesterday to reinstate a plea bargain that could have led to a shorter jail term for Steven Hoffenberg, the New York financier who pleaded guilty in April to criminal fraud charges arising from his operation of the Towers Financial Corporation.
Mr.
Hoffenberg, who was accused of defrauding investors of more than $460 million through a Ponzi scheme, agreed to plead guilty and to cooperate with prosecutors if they would support a more lenient sentence for him.
He faced a potential jail term estimated at 7 to 10 years under Federal sentencing guidelines.


In Performance: DANCE
Sex, Love and Videotape In Mixed Media Program Interaction Dance Foundation Merce Cunningham Studio


Peugeot Seeking Partner To Build a U.S. Plant
PSA Peugeot Citroen, France's largest car maker, is in talks with potential partners about building an assembly plant in the United States.
The company's chairman, Jacques Calvet, is considering building two or three models in the United States, a Peugeot spokesman said yesterday.
Mr.
Calvet said the company was seeking a partner to share the costs of the  venture.
He would not name any of the companies he has been talking with but said that Peugeot would not embark on the venture alone.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Serbs at U.N. Blame Bosnia Muslims in Killings
With its campaign to rejoin the United Nations and other international organizations barely off the ground, the Government of Yugoslavia ran into serious trouble in the Security Council today by declaring that Bosnian Muslims  who died in the fall of Srebrenica in July were killed by other Muslims, not by  the Bosnian Serbs who overran the town.
The charges were made in a three-page letter sent to the Security Council on  Monday by Vladislav Jovanovic, a former Yugoslav Foreign Minister and the representative here of the present Yugoslavia Federation, which now includes only Serbia and Montenegro.
The United Nations has declared that the General Assembly seat occupied by the former Yugoslavia is vacant, and President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia, which dominates the present Yugoslav Government, had hoped to claim it.


Common Sense for Gingrich's Revolution
To the Editor:
In light of proposals to limit book royalties received by members of Congress (news article, Dec. 14), inspired by Speaker Newt Gingrich's original intent to  receive a multimillion-dollar advance from HarperCollins, the following historical note would seem to be of relevance.


Jaguars Put Lageman on Injured Reserve
The Jacksonville Jaguars placed the veteran defensive end JEFF LAGEMAN on injured reserve yesterday.
He will miss the season's finale Sunday at Cleveland.
Lageman has not played since severely spraining his right foot on Nov. 19 against Tampa Bay.
He spent his first six seasons with the New York Jets.
(AP)


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY


Bubbly Attire'? 'SoHo Casual'? Just What Is That?
OH, for the days when partygoers knew what partygivers wanted them to wear.
The invitations were straightforward.
"Black tie" meant one thing, and "business attire" meant something else, and social X-rays did not fret about receiving a dressing-down for dressing up: there was no in between.
Now, the lines of demarcation are blurry, the raised-letter wordings less exact.
Consider the invitation to the recent reopening of La Cote Basque, the restaurant at 60 West 55th Street.
It called for "city attire." What, exactly, is that?
The restaurant said that "city attire" meant jackets and ties and that  it wanted guests who R.S.V.P.'d to understand its S.O.P.: jackets and ties are always required there.


Token Separation Anxiety
Since the new secret-allow tokens with the pentagonal cut-out were instituted a month ago, it seems that many New Yorkers have been reluctant to part with the comfortingly solid bulls-eye tokens that opened subway turnstiles for close to a decade.
Of the 90 million bulls-eye tokens minted, only 70 million have made their way back to the Transit Authority.
The other 20 million?
Time to check under those sofa cushions. . .


USA Waste Services Plans A $510 Million Purchase
USA Waste Services Inc. announced today that it would buy Western Waste Industries for approximately $510 million, creating the nation's third-largest trash hauler.
The purchase will lift USA Waste, an aggressive acquirer in a consolidating industry, to $800 million in sales from $3.7 million five years ago.


Edward L. Schuman, Film Executive, 79
Edward L. Schuman, a film and theater executive, died on Saturday at his daughter's home in Detroit.
He was 79 and lived in Seattle.
In the early 1950's, Mr.
Schuman was director of the Film Society at the Detroit Institute of Arts.
He was also part owner and chief operating officer of the Art Theater Guild, which operated movie theaters throughout the Middle West.
From 1963 to 1974, he was senior vice president of the Walter Reade Theater Organization and served on its board from 1973 to 1983.


Corrections
An article in The Living Section last Wednesday about food-related points of  interest in cyberspace, with a listing of Internet addresses, referred incorrectly to Conde Nast's food site on the World Wide Web.
It is Epicurious, at this address: http://www.epicurious.com -- not the Internet Epicurean, at http://rampages.onramp.net/ ricsmith/epicure.html, which is an electronic magazine.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Asylum Seekers Lose in Immigration Bill
To the Editor:
Re "Mexican Asylum Cases Must Be Reduced" (letter, Dec. 14):


CLINTON, GINGRICH AND DOLE PLEDGE A DEAL ON BUDGET
In the first sign of a break in the budget impasse, President Clinton and the Republican leaders of Congress agreed today that they would personally negotiate an agreement to balance the Federal budget in seven years.
After the White House made a concession the Republicans had sought, the Congressional leaders said they hoped to reach the agreement before the new year.
Speaker Newt Gingrich and Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, said they would meet with Mr.
Clinton on Wednesday to try to work out the framework of an  agreement for balancing the budget.
"It's a big step," Mr.
Dole said.
"We're serious about this now."


Mets Get a Backup Catcher At Bargain-Basement Price
Once upon a time, the Mets traded a catcher to the Kansas City Royals for a young pitcher.
David Cone went on to become a 20-game winner for the Mets, and Ed Hearn was hardly ever heard from again.
The Mets made another trade with the Royals yesterday, and a catcher was in this deal, too, but this time the Mets got him.
Brent Mayne does not figure to become as good a catcher as Cone is a pitcher, but he was the Royals' No. 1 catcher last season, and the Mets got him for Al Shirley, who has a .197 career  average for five minor league seasons.


Five More Years for Foster and the Hokies
The contract of Virginia Tech's basketball coach, BILL FOSTER, was his contract extended yesterday for five years.
Last season, Foster's fourth at Virginia Tech, the Hokies had a school-record 25 victories and won the National Invitation Tournament.
This season, Virginia Tech is 4-1 and is ranked 22d.


Argentine Women Break Social Barriers to Pump Iron
IN Latin America, Argentine women have a reputation for spending hours and fortunes getting their hair, makeup, clothes and bodies just right.
The typical  Argentine woman, no matter what her socioeconomic status, is purposely thin, stylishly dressed, strikingly attractive and given to flaunting it.
Maria Eugenia Calo, like most Argentine women, spends a lot of time in the gym these days preparing her body for the summer that is quickly approaching the Southern Hemisphere.
But while most are slimming, toning and shaping, Ms.
Calo is building thick, bulky muscles.


Foreign Affairs;Voices of Experience
The Bosnia debate is over.
The troops are on their way.
The only thing worth  arguing about now is how this U.S.-led peace effort can succeed.
So I came to Haiti to ask U.S. soldiers in the peacekeeping mission here: What have you learned that might be helpful for your comrades in Bosnia?
Here are the lessons they offered:
Define success as something you can achieve in a year.
U.S. peacekeepers in Haiti defined success as giving Haiti a decent chance to develop into the Dominican Republic -- its poor Caribbean neighbor, which at least has some democracy, a functioning economy and stability.
They're not building Sweden here.
I witnessed a meeting President Aristide held with some visiting U.S. dignitaries.
At the end, an American clergyman present asked all the guests to bow their heads and pray that they had begun to turn Haiti "from misery into poverty." By that yardstick, the U.S. mission in Haiti could be judged a success.


Rutgers to Name Shea Coach
TERRY SHEA, the quarterbacks coach of the British Columbia Lions of the Canadian Football League and a protege of the former San Francisco 49ers Coach BILL WALSH, is expected to be named the new head football coach at Rutgers, according to a person close to the situation.
An announcement of the decision could be made as early as today.


Holiday Season Is No Holiday in Caviar Wars
FRESH caviar supplies are tight this year, and prices in many places have increased by up to 25 percent.
Nonetheless, Macy's, Zabar's traditional foe, is  armed to the teeth with low prices.
And this year, Citarella is challenging Zabar's for the first time.
But Zabar's is not changing its prices.
"I'm out of the caviar wars this year," said Saul Zabar, an owner.
"We're doing the best we can with quality caviar."


Fabian Linden, Creator of Index Of Buyer Confidence, Dies at 79
Fabian Linden, the economist who developed the widely quoted consumer confidence index of the Conference Board, died at his home in Manhattan on Monday.
He was 79.
The cause was cancer of the colon, his wife, Anita, said.


Celebrating Santa's Birth as New Yorker;Exhibition Honors Clement Moore, Who Immortalized That Sleigh Ride
Clement Clarke Moore, a prominent Protestant theologian and well-heeled developer of the farmland that became the neighborhood of Chelsea, thought he might be remembered as the author of his age's leading Hebrew dictionary.
Instead, he became famous for a poem he wrote for his six children and was reluctant to sign until 15 years after it was written.
That little poem, "A Visit From St. Nicholas," written in 1822, defined what  Santa Claus would become, adding essentials like the sleigh and reindeer as well as the chimney as point of entry and exit.
Not least, the poem set Santa's visit on Dec. 24 -- not Dec. 5, the eve of St.
Nicholas's Day, as had been the tradition.


DOUBLETREE TO BUY RFS, A HOTEL MANAGEMENT CONCERN
The Doubletree Corporation agreed yesterday to acquire RFS Inc., a hotel management company, for three million Doubletree shares, worth $62.25 million.
Doubletree, the Phoenix-based manager or franchisor of 114 hotels, also agreed to buy 974,000 convertible preferred shares of RFS Hotel Investors Inc. for $19  each, or $18.5 million.
RFS Hotel Investors, a real estate investment trust, owns 48 Holiday Inns, Residence Inns and Hampton Inns that are managed by RFS Inc.
The hotels, with 6,700 rooms, generate more than $120 million in annual revenue.


Recipes, Tested by the Experts
TEDDY BERGMAN, a 12-year-old kitchen dynamo, makes orange roughy with curry sauce, red snapper with a carrot and garlic sauce and, when he is in the mood for red meat, a steak "sandwich" with sauteed portobello mushrooms standing in for the bread.
Teddy says he can't remember when this fascination with cooking began, but he knows his first effort was salad dressing.
Unlike many far more experienced cooks who cannot talk and cook at the same time, Teddy does both with skill.


Honda to Lift Capacity at Canadian Plant
The Honda Motor Company said today that it planned to double the capacity of  its vehicle assembly plant in Alliston, Ontario, to begin production of a new mini-van in the fall of 1998.
Honda said it would invest $210 million to add capacity to build as many as 120,000 mini-vans a year.
The Alliston plant is currently capable of building as many as 120,000 Honda Civic subcompacts a year.
The expansion will add 1,200 workers, bringing total employment to 3,000, Honda said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15


Transactions
Baseball


A Concerto That Really Isn't
A composer can have a striking compositional voice and still write a piece that is not entirely successful.
Friday night's concert at Alice Tully Hall by the New Juilliard Ensemble, conducted by Joel Sachs, presented four such works.
Yet taken together, they made for an engrossing evening of music, which is something you can count on when Mr.
Sachs is in charge.
"Into the Light," a kinetic piece for large ensemble by Amanda Harberg, a 22-year-old recent Juilliard graduate, received its world premiere.
A fidgety figure becomes a relentless ostinato, then a sort of theme for a passacaglia, until the idea is temporarily abandoned for a sultry excursion into lyricism.
The materials seem rather thin for the workout they are assigned.
But Ms.
Harberg's tonally grounded language is spiked with pungency.


Legg Mason to Buy Lehman's London Unit
Legg Mason Inc., a Baltimore-based securities brokerage firm, said yesterday  that it was acquiring Lehman Brothers Global Asset Management Ltd., the London-based money management subsidiary of Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc.
The acquisition would be Legg Mason's first purchase of an overseas money-management firm, although it hadgained management of some international fixed-income products and emerging-markets equity when it bought Batterymarch Financial Management Inc. last year.
Wall Street firms are clamoring to buy overseas asset-management companies as more American investors begin to choose foreign investments.


Black Identity, Racism and a Lifetime of Reflection
THE COLLECTED ESSAYS OF RALPH ELLISON By Ralph Ellison Edited by John F. Callahan. 856 pages.
Modern Library. $20.


Frank Olive, 66, A Designer of Hats
Frank Olive, a designer of hats for fashion houses, celebrities and the theater, died last Thursday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 66 and lived on the  Upper West Side of Manhattan.
The cause was complications from pneumonia, said Winfield Huppuch, his companion.


Gridlock: When an Irresistible Revolution Meets an UnmovableConstitution
The conservative Republican tidal wave that has swept through American politics in the last year has crashed against a formidable and perhaps insurmountable sea wall: the United States Constitution.
Based on their meeting today, President Clinton and the Republican leaders in Congress may indeed reach some accommodation on the budget.
But it is safe to bet that nothing nearly so extensive as the revolution the Republicans have fought for all year will result from the year-end talks.


Setback for Simpson in Civil Suit
O.
J.
Simpson suffered a setback today in the consolidated wrongful-death civil lawsuit filed by the families of the two people he was accused of killing.
Judge Alan B. Haber of Superior Court granted a motion by the lawyers representing the families to request information about Mr.
Simpson's finances and the profits he gained because of the nine-month criminal trial, which ended  with verdicts of not guilty.


Football Captain Is Stabbed in a Fight on the Way to School
The captain of the John F. Kennedy High School football team was stabbed yesterday in a fight that began when he was riding the subway to school.
Terrance Willis, 18, was in stable condition at North Central Hospital in the Bronx after he was stabbed four times in the abdomen as school was about to begin.
Police officers from the 50th precinct in the Bronx were trying to find out who stabbed the youth and determine why the fight began.


139 People Are Killed in Crash Of Zaire-Based Plane in Angola
A Zairian passenger plane on a charter flight crashed in northern Angola late Monday, killing 139 people, Zaire's Transport Minister said today.


Maybe He's the 007 of Hoops
Pat Riley's return to New York turned into a bizarre day, even by his secret  agent standards.
It began with a morning shoot-around, in which none of the Miami Heat players were told where they were going until they jumped onto the team bus outside the  Four Seasons Hotel.
It picked up steam when he confided in several of the Heat's reporters during unsolicited phone calls to their hotel rooms, and it ended when he closed the locker room to all reporters before last night's game at Madison Square Garden.


Business Travel;United States airlines, flush with business, are cracking down on passengers who bend the rules.
WITH airplanes filling up and profits improving, United States airlines are beginning to crack down on some rule-bending passengers to whom carriers often turned a blind eye when they were bleeding red ink.
An informal survey among carriers turned up these examples:
Passengers who come running up to the gate at the last minute, usually less than 10 minutes before scheduled departure time, are increasingly being left behind and put on the next flight -- provided there is another flight to that destination, and provided there are seats available.


The U.N. in Bosnia: A Lesson in Limits
After repeated humiliation and the death of 107 of its soldiers during the last four years, the United Nations peacekeeping mission to Bosnia is ending today, leaving a ravaged country tenuously at peace and the virtual certainty that another operation will not be attempted under such conditions.
The messy deployment in Bosnia was the confused response to the outbreak of a European war, but what the United Nations learned is that peacekeepers cannot do their job if there is no peace to keep.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL REPORT
Mount St. Mary's


For French, Solidarity Still Counts
When Nadine Tweig discovered she was pregnant four years ago, she filed a form and began to collect $150 a month starting in her fourth month of pregnancy.
It is a subsidy that is extended to every mother in France regardless of economic or marital status.
Two years ago, when Ms.
Tweig became pregnant again, the subsidy doubled, and it will continue until her two boys reach 18.
Throughout pregnancy all Ms.
Tweig's medical needs, check-ups and medication were free of charge and free of  burdensome paper work or delays at a government-financed clinic not far from her upper-middle-class neighborhood around Avenue Daumesnil in Paris.


Food Notes
Books Celebrate Kwanzaa


British Tory M.P. Loses Homosexual Libel Case
A British Member of Parliament lost a libel action today over allegations he  was homosexual, a liar and a hypocrite, bringing to a close one of the most bizarre legal cases heard in an English court for years.


Tarango Issues An Apology
Penalties against Jeff Tarango were reduced today after he apologized for an  outburst at Wimbledon last summer.
After walking off during a third-round match against Alexander Mronz on July  1, Tarango accused the French chair umpire, Bruno Rebeuh, of favoring certain players.


CHRONICLE
When JOE FRAZIER learned that other former boxing champions, including Sugar  Ray Leonard and Evander Holyfield, were at the opening Monday night of the All Star Cafe in Times Square, he said, "I could take them all on in one night."
He didn't.
There wasn't enough room.
About 2,000 people crowded into the cafe to mix it up with sports superstars like Joe Montana, Wayne Gretzky, Andre Agassi, Ken Griffey Jr., Dwight Gooden and Monica Seles.


Corrections
An article on Monday about bookings for Dec. 31, 1999, to celebrate the turn  of the millennium referred imprecisely to the hotel known for decades as the home of New Year's Eve celebrations with Guy Lombardo and his orchestra.
Mr.
Lombardo entertained revelers at the Roosevelt Grill in the Roosevelt Hotel from 1929 until it closed in the early 1960's, then played for New Year's Eve crowds  at the Waldorf-Astoria, among other places, until 1977, the year of his death.


Japan to Use Tax Revenue To Rescue Housing Lenders
The Japanese Government ended months of bitter wrangling today by deciding to use $6.85 billion in taxpayers' money to rescue the nation's troubled mortgage companies.
The decision may ease some foreign concerns about the Government's resolve to deal with Japan's banking problems, for in some ways the resolution is reminiscent of the American Government's rescue of savings and loan institutions.


White Autumn May Give Way to Mild Winter
The late-autumn snowstorm that slowly spread over southern New York and southern New England yesterday was really two storms back to back, meteorologists said, with each system drawing power from a confluence of Canadian cold, Gulf of Mexico warmth and enormous reserves of Atlantic Ocean moisture.
The storm is expected to continue into today's morning rush hour, according to the National Weather Service, with expected accumulations in Central Park of  8 to 12 inches.


St. Peter's Guard Writes Dramatic Finales
There was no basketball practice, just final exams, at St.
Peter's College on Monday, which explained why Mike Frensley was running around the tiny campus worrying more about Charles Dickens than Fairleigh Dickinson.
"I had a literature exam today," said Frensley, the Peacocks' 5-foot-10-inch, 160-pound senior point guard, who is majoring in English.
"Basketball and literature take up most of my time."


McKey Signs Extension With Pacers
With one more season left on his contract, DERRICK McKEY has decided not to become a free agent and signed a five-year, $24 million extension with the Indiana Pacers.
McKey will earn $2.8 million this season and $3 million next season.
By 2001-2002, the forward would earn $6 million.
In his third season with the Pacers, McKey is averaging 12.3 points, 4.1 rebounds and 3.7 assists.
(AP)


5 Are Killed by Gunman in Bronx Shoe Store
A would-be robber who relatives said had a history of mental illness walked into a shoe store on a busy commercial strip in the Bronx at midday yesterday and opened fire, leaving five people dead, the police said.
Among the victims was a mother and her two young sons, who were shopping for  sneakers, and the wife of the store owner, whose second wedding anniversary was  yesterday.
Three other people in the store were critically wounded.


Who Will Rule Haiti?
Sunday's presidential election in Haiti marked a milestone for democracy there and a success for United States policy.
Next February, for the first time  in nearly 200 years of Haitian independence, one democratically elected President can yield power to another.
That was one of President Clinton's main goals when he dispatched more than 20,000 American troops in September 1994.
The winner, by a large margin, was Rene Preval, who ran with the powerful endorsement of the incumbent, Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
While the polling was generally free of the disruptions that marred recent parliamentary elections, voter turnout was low and the campaign was disappointingly short on serious debate.


Harlem Protester Denies Racist Remarks
The protester who has been accused of making anti-Semitic statements and threatening to burn down Freddy's clothing store in Harlem denied yesterday that he made any racist or threatening remarks and insisted that the protest was about economic issues.
But even in defending himself, the protester, Tracy Ligon, pointed to the religion of the Jewish clothing store owner, whose plans to expand drew the protests because they would force out a longtime black-owned record store.


Xerox to Consolidate Units To Speed Decision-Making
The Xerox Corporation said yesterday that it would realign its eight business groups into three to speed decision-making amid increasing competition in the digital copier market.
As part of the reorganization, Peter van Cuylenburg, executive vice president of operations at Xerox's Palo Alto Research Center, will leave the company at the end of the month.
He will not be replaced.


Bulger Should Prove Boon to UMass;Business as Usual?
To the Editor:
"Boss Bulger's New Job" (editorial, Dec. 14) leaves out one salient fact: that in the mid-1980's, while William Bulger was president of the Massachusetts  Senate, $250,000 ended up in his account.
This was half of $500,000 paid to a lawyer partner of the Senate president.


British Investment Firm To Buy BTR Sports Unit
The British industrial conglomerate BTR P.L.C. agreed yesterday to sell its Dunlop Slazenger sporting goods unit to the investment firm of Cinven Ltd. for more than L300 million ($462 million).
BTR said it expected the transaction to be completed in early 1996.
Dunlop Slazenger's main business is making and distributing golf, tennis, squash and badminton equipment with the Dunlop, Slazenger, Maxfli and Carlton brand names.
In Britain, the company also acts as the sole distributor of Puma sports products.
BTR makes goods for the transportation and construction industries, control and electrical systems, adhesives and sportswear.
(AP)


In Performance: DANCE
Dancing on the Edge Of Despair and Exhilaration Neil Greenberg Performance Space 122


Daimler Agrees to Sell Power Unit of AEG
Daimler-Benz A.G.'s AEG unit said yesterday that it planned to sell its power distribution unit to GEC Alsthom N.V. and to transfer its automation and plant-technology units to a joint venture to be controlled by Cegelec S.A.
AEG,  based in Frankfurt, disclosed no sale price or other financial details about the agreements, which cover 3.5 billion marks ($2.4 billion) worth of AEG's annual sales of 10 billion marks.
The agreements are to take effect on Jan. 1.
GEC Alsthom N.V. of the Netherlands is a joint venture of Alcatel Alsthom of France and the General Electric Company of Britain, which is not connected with General Electric of the United States.
Alcatel controls Cegelec.
(Bloomberg Business News)


A Rate Cut, and a Fistful of Reasons
For the second time this year, the Federal Reserve's top policy makers met in the face of substantial market pressure for lower rates and decided to cut -- by the smallest amount possible.
The decision is another example of the way the Fed can use its powers over interest rates not only to change the cost of money, but also to send a reassuring signal to investors and politicians alike.


Largess Vital To Literacy In Computers In New York
It's not just chip designers, CD-ROM authors and other wizards of the supply  side who score entrepreneurial triumphs in the world of technology.
For educators in New York City schools, it takes entrepreneurial drive to get technology into the hands of eager students.
The New York City Board of Education has not made a systemwide purchase of educational computers since 1985, when the Municipal Assistance Corporation committed $32.5 million to in-school technology.
But that was the electronic equivalent of biblical generations ago.
Forget talking encyclopedias and other color-and-sound goodies that excite home computer enthusiasts.
Many teachers are still trying to acquire basic hard drives.


COMMUNISTS GAIN IN THE SECOND TIER OF RUSSIA'S VOTE
As if the Government of President Boris N. Yeltsin hasn't heard enough grim news this week, the figures from individual parliamentary races started to pour  in today and the results were more of the same, only much worse.
It now appears certain that Communists will control virtually a third of Russia's new Parliament, far more seats than even they had hoped for.
If their close ideological soul mates in the Agrarian Party are included in the calculations, the figure is even higher.


Alice Bregman, 54, Child-Book Editor
Alice Miller Bregman, who edited and wrote about children's books, died last  Wednesday at the Mount Sinai Medical Center.
She was 54 and had lived in Manhattan for most of her life.
The cause was cancer, according to family members.


Shooting Suspect Called A Paranoid Schizophrenic
Michael Vernon, the man accused of murdering five people in a Bronx shoe store, was described by relatives yesterday as a paranoid schizophrenic who spent the last two years in and out of mental hospitals.
News of his arrest in connection with the shooting left his friends reeling with shock.
But his common-law wife, Maria Velez, said he had seemed strange in  the last two days.


INTERNATIONAL BUSINESSStill Worlds Apart on Air Fares; eUROPEAN tRAVELERS sEE fEW bENEFITS OF dEREGULATION
Anyone who flies regularly within Europe knows that air fares are breathtakingly high.
Never is that clearer that when some upstart emerges to take on the entrenched carriers.
Consider this: for a midweek economy-class round-trip ticket between Brussels and Rome recently, Sabena and Alitalia both charged $1,600.
From Brussels to Vienna and back, Sabena and Austrian Airlines charged around $1,400.
On the Brussels-Madrid round trip, Sabena and Iberia charged $1,450.


Good Luck Beats All For Guerin
The Devils allowed two goals to the Philadelphia Flyers in the first 75 seconds of the game tonight.
They lost Steve Thomas for the night before the game was two minutes old.
But they regrouped, recovered and with the help of two accidental deflections eventually rewarded the 5,781 fans who braved the snowstorm with a 5-4 victory in overtime at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Billy Guerin's second goal of the night, 2 minutes 13 seconds into the five-minute overtime, was the game-winner.
His slap shot from the right side on  a Devils' power play was deflected past Ron Hextall off the leg of defenseman Chris Therien of the Flyers.


Tory Skepticism on Europe Brings Major Another Defeat
A specter is haunting Conservatives the specter of Europe.
Once again the Tory Party is showing its divisions over Britain's ties to the European Union, the issue that has vexed Prime Minister John Major for most of his five years in office.


A Communist Rout?
Despite the alarmist cries in the West over the outcome of Russia's election  on Sunday, the overall balance in Parliament between the Communists and nationalists, on one hand, and the broad reformist middle, on the other, will not change.
In fact, the election was a virtual replay of the voting in 1993.
The only shifts have taken place within -- not between -- the two broad camps of voters.
The electorate may be deeply polarized between the opponents and supporters of the current course of reform, but it has remained extremely stable in its sentiments.
And, in a victory for democracy, more than 60 percent of the electorate voted, more than all the polls predicted.


No Headline
We thought deterrence could be based on the moral authority of the United Nations, but we learned that moral authority is not enough." -- ANTONIO PEDAUYE, the U.N. chief in Bosnia. [A10:3]


U.N. Mission in Bosnia: A Painful Lesson in Limits
After repeated humiliation and the death of 107 of its soldiers, the United Nations peacekeeping mission to Bosnia ends on Wednesday, leaving a ravaged country tenuously at peace and the virtual certainty that such an operation will never again be attempted on such terms.


Frank L. Driver 3d, Wire Executive, 65
Frank Luther Driver 3d, the former president and chairman of the Driver Harris Company, a wire and cable manufacturer, died at his vacation house in Little Compton, R.I., on Friday.
He was 65 and lived in Essex Fells, N.J.
The cause was malignant melanoma, said his son, Frank L. Driver 4th.


Veto of Securities Bill
President Clinton vetoed legislation that would have made it harder for shareholders to bring fraud suits against corporate officers and accountants.
Page D1.


Islanders Lose to the Blues
Shayne Corson had two goals and an assist, and Grant Fuhr allowed just one goal for the 11th time this year as the St.
Louis Blues defeated the New York Islanders by 4-1 tonight.
Fuhr, who has started every game this season, tied his career high with his 33d consecutive start.
He had earlier reached that milestone during the 1987-88  season as a member of the Edmonton Oilers.


Wine Talk
IMMENSE effort is expended at this time of year in thinking up clever wine-related gifts for wine-loving friends.
Why not wine?


Stone's Embrace of a Despised President
In his lonely Xanadu on Pennsylvania Avenue, the Citizen Nixon of Oliver Stone's sprawling new biography is left to contemplate what history has in store.
And not in his wildest dreams can he be imagining anything like this.
Like a prisoner identifying with his captor in a rare form of Stockholm syndrome, Mr.
Stone aligns himself with the Presidential pariah who has captured his imagination.
Out of this comes one of Mr.
Stone's biggest gambles, a bold feat of revisionism that veers unpredictably between turgidness and inspiration.
What it finally adds up to is a huge mixed bag of waxworks and daring, a film that is furiously ambitious even when it goes flat, and startling even when it settles for eerie, movie-of-the-week mimicry.
Reckless, bullying and naggingly unreliable, this mercurial "Nixon" is also finally as gutsy and overpowering as it means to be.
And it achieves the effect Mr.
Stone is always after: Attention must be paid.


For interactive advertising, 1995 has proved to be a breakthrough year. Now comes the shakeout.
INTERACTIVE advertising, finishing an ebullient, even euphoric, year punctuated by gains and breakthroughs, faces a shakeout in 1996 that will confront the nascent field with its first significant challenge.
That prediction was offered yesterday at a daylong conference, "Spotlight on  Interactive Advertising '95," for which the Advertising Club of New York played  host and Newsweek magazine, a unit of the Washington Post Company, served as a sponsor.
The conference, which club officials anticipate will become an annual event, drew more than 500 attendees to the Plaza Hotel in snowy, blustery weather.


Rwandan Defends Ouster of Aid Agencies
Rwanda's military strongman, Maj.
Gen.
Paul Kagame, today defended a decision to expel 43 foreign aid agencies as his country struggles to recover from the genocide of last year.
General Kagame, Rwanda's vice president, Defense Minister and former guerrilla commander, said the groups should have cooperated with the Government  like 102 other agencies that were allowed to stay.


Companies Vow to Consider Environment in Buying Paper
Several leading customers of the nation's paper makers say they are going to  consider environmental performance in deciding which companies get their business.
The admonition, being issued today by a group that includes four major corporations, Duke University and the Environmental Defense Fund, is intended to use market forces, not regulation or litigation, to press paper companies to improve environmentally.


Mayor Signs Legislation Raising Pay of Officials
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani signed legislation yesterday that gave him and New  York City's 63 other elected officials pay raises of up to 28 percent, formally  ending a political struggle that has already undercut Mr.
Giuliani's labor strategy, created new tensions at the Board of Education and subjected the Mayor to a dose of populist outrage.
Brushing aside much of the criticism over the last month as "a shame," Mr.
Giuliani said he wanted the raises -- including his own $35,000 increase -- primarily because they cleared the way for increases for scores of deputies, commissioners and other managers who have toiled without raises for at least four years.
Salaries for those appointed officials are linked by law to the pay  of the Mayor.


Real Estate;What's happening in SoHo? A gallery is leaving and a chain store is replacing a  miniature mall.
THE scorecard in SoHo reads plus one chain store, minus one art gallery and minus one miniature mall.
Anthropologie, the unit of Urban Outfitters that caters to the 30-something crowd, has leased 11,200 square feet, the ground floor at 375 West Broadway, for its first New York City store.


Bronco To Verdict, In Case You Were Out
Time hanging heavy since the end of the O. J. Simpson trial?
To the rescue comes "Why O. J. Simpson Won," a two-hour regurgitation, with the objective or the pretext of explaining why the jury did what it did.
So tonight at 9 on A&amp;E,  you have a chance once again to see Detective Mark Fuhrman and Brian (Kato) Kaelin.
Bill Kurtis narrates the coherently organized, if excruciatingly familiar, program, which goes from the famous car chase to the preliminary hearings to the verdict, with explanations and criticisms by participants and observers.


Surreal Dream Life and All-Too-Real Army Life
In the surreal erotic dream sequence that opens Wolfgang Murnberger's film "For God and Country," Private Berger (Christoph Dostal), an 18-year-old Austrian Army recruit, imagines that he's a knight on horseback entering a fortress that has the trappings of a ruined cathedral.
Amid candlelight, statues of the Virgin Mary and mystical choral music, an alluring priestess instructs him in rites that conflate religious imagery and sexual foreplay.
Just as the dream reaches a peak of delirium, he is awakened in his barracks by a bugle and hustled off to a morning drill.
Contrasting the drab, seemingly pointless routines of military training with the baroque fantasies of an innocent young recruit, "For God and Country" burrows more deeply than most films into its archetypal story of youthful initiation and male bonding.
The semi-autobiographical movie, which opens today at Film Forum, also offers some prickly satirical commentary on the Austrian national character.


A Trial, a Tape and a Warning in the Rabin Murder Case
The trial of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's confessed assassin opened today only to be postponed for a month, while Israelis received an unexpected replay of the killing in an amateur video not made public before.
The Government-appointed commission looking into the security failure that enabled Yigal Amir, 25, a religious nationalist, to shoot Mr.
Rabin at point-blank range issued formal warnings to six senior officers of the Israeli secret service, including its chief, that they may be accused of negligence in their duties.


AIRPLANE PRODUCTION TO BE STEPPED UP AT BOEING
The Boeing Company will increase production of jetliners for the first time in about five years, in part to catch up with the backlog from the recent 10-week strike by machinists.
Boeing, the world's largest maker of commercial jets, said yesterday that it would increase its monthly production rate next year for the first time since 1991.
Production will grow from its pre-strike level of about 20 planes a month to 22.5 in the fourth quarter of 1996 and 24 in early 1997.


A Chicken Recipe Healthfully Updated
It is not as hard as it might seem to update old favorites to make them less  fattening.
This chicken-breast recipe, for instance, is at least 35 years old, but to make it more current, some of the oil, soy sauce and brown sugar have been removed.
The chicken is not baked but is browned first, then braised on top of the stove.
Chicken Breasts Piquant


COMPANY BRIEFS


In Performance: POP
Limiting the Synthesizer But Not the Dark Introspection Sister Machine Gun Die Krupps Limelight


Nigerian Policemen Fire Tear Gas Against a Democracy Rally
Nigeria's military Government, already under attack for executing minority rights campaigners, sent police officers firing tear gas today against hundreds  of demonstrators demanding an immediate return to democracy.
The police fired tear gas after someone distributed leaflets that read, "We demand democracy now," at the Yaba bus station in metropolitan Lagos.


Wuerffel Named Academic All-American
DANNY WUERFFEL of Florida was selected as the quarterback for the GTE Academic All-America team yesterday.
Wuerffel, who finished third in the Heisman Trophy balloting, has a 3.67 grade-point average as a journalism-public relations major.
He is a junior.
Wuerffel led major college football in passing efficiency this year, and threw 35 touchdown passes to lead Florida through an unbeaten season and into the Fiesta Bowl against Nebraska.
The Nebraska offensive lineman AARON GRAHAM made the All-Academic All-America team with a 3.30 grade-point average.
(AP)


Old and New in a Jewish Festival
Does anything hold together American Jewish culture?
Perhaps it's a tension between assimilation and outsiders' pride, though that's hardly unique in a nation of immigrants; perhaps it's a shared memory of Old World modes and melodies colliding with an urge to explore the new.
John Zorn's latest festival  of Radical Jewish Culture, which started Monday night at Merkin Concert Hall, provides no definitive answers but plenty of data.
Monday's concert was by turns quiet and raucous, minimalist and expressionistic.
Meredith Monk, who can make simplicity profound, performed excerpts from her "Book of Days," about a medieval Polish girl who sees the future.
Alone and unaccompanied, she sang folklike songs, written using medieval Jewish modes; at the piano, she played "Madwoman's Vision," in which a handful of chords support a reverie of melodic fragments and keening, growling, cackling vocals.
Finally, Ms.
Monk and Robert Een sang duets from "Facing North," with overlapping patterns that were austere or playfully syncopated.


Owners and Players Agree to Extension
With some team owners saying that the escalating cost of free agents is forcing them to look for more revenue options -- mainly new or renovated stadiums -- the National Football League Management Council and the N.F.L.
Players Association announced an agreement yesterday that would be a force for stability.
It would extend the current collective bargaining agreement for one year, with an option for two additional years.
The agreement, which concluded about six months of intense negotiations, must be approved by 23 of the 30 team owners at their Jan. 17 meeting in Atlanta before it can take effect.
It must also be approved by a majority of the union members.


Deal for a Fastener Maker
Acklands Ltd. said today that it expected to acquire Reynolds Fasteners, a subsidiary of the Allegheny Ludlum Corporation, for about $30 million.
Reynolds  is an importer and distributor of industrial metal fasteners.
Acklands, based here, distributes industrial and safety-related products, as well as automotive  after-market parts.
Allegheny Ludlum is a Pittsburgh steelmaker.


House Overturns Veto by President Of Securities Bill
The House voted today for the first time to override a veto by President Clinton, reacting swiftly to his 11th-hour rejection of legislation to make it more difficult for stockholders to bring fraud suits.
The Senate, which is more closely divided, made plans to vote later this week.


A Close Call for an All-City Player
Terrance Willis, a Kennedy High School football player, rested comfortably in a Bronx hospital bed yesterday as he replayed the recent events that had almost  cost him his life.
"All I've been thinking about was how I should have turned around when I was  on top of one of them fighting," said Willis, who is at North Central Bronx Hospital.
"When I did turn around, I saw the short kid charging me and I punched him right in the face. But I should have turned around to fight him."


A Farewell Offering in Bethlehem


A Weaker Forecast on '96 German Growth
An economics institute predicted today that the German economy would expand by a sluggish 1.75 percent next year, a slowdown from this year's rate of 2.1 percent.
The projection, by the Ifo Institute, was more pessimistic than the Government's forecast of 2 percent growth in the gross domestic product and considerably lower than an August forecast by six other German economic institutes of 2.5 percent.


Kmart in Deal With Creditors To Ease Debt
The Kmart Corporation, in a move that staved off any immediate threat of bankruptcy, reached agreement with its creditors yesterday to reorganize its debt and eliminate its common-stock dividend.
Creditors agreed to delay demands for payment on $548 million in so-called "put" bonds due next year that Kmart, the embattled discount retailing chain, could not meet.
And by bowing to Wall Street pressure to cancel the dividend, Kmart said it would hold onto as much as $220 million a year of its dwindling cash reserves.


Johnson &amp; Johnson Agrees on Cordis Unit
To get Federal approval for its $1.8 billion merger with the Cordis Corporation, Johnson &amp; Johnson agreed today to sell the Cordis unit that makes cranial shunts.
The shunts are used primarily to treat infants and children with hydrocephalus, an excessive amount of fluid in the brain referred to as "water on the brain." The shunts, small tubes inserted through the skull, drain fluid from the brain to another part of the body where it can be absorbed.


Orange County Sues Marwick For $3 Billion
Orange County sued its former outside auditor today for $3 billion, accusing  KPMG Peat Marwick of failing to detect and warn of the risks to investments that resulted in the nation's biggest municipal bankruptcy.
Peat Marwick, the nation's second-largest accounting firm, denied wrongdoing  and said the county was blaming others for its own mistakes.


The Joys of the Flat Tax, Excluding the Equations
About halfway through tomorrow night's "Firing Line" debate on a flat tax, Jerry Brown says, "What we have here is a real muddy discussion."
That's not exactly the problem, since the two-hour give-and-get does clarify  the motives of both proponents and opponents, but the encounter is disjointed and at times perplexing.


Scooter-Maker Stakes
The Chrysler Corporation and Kawasaki Heavy Industries Ltd. are considering buying stakes in Bajaj Auto Ltd., the world's second-largest maker of scooters,  the Indian company's chairman, Rahul Bajaj, said yesterday.
Chrysler may buy a stake of as much as 7 percent if Bajaj names it as its partner for a car venture, he said.
Kawasaki is considering a 2 percent stake, he said.
A spokesman for Kawasaki said the company "is now considering the matter." Chrysler could not be reached immediately.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Promises Turning Into Snowmen
Let it snow! Let it snow! Let it snow!
The week began with promises: 8 to 12 inches in the city; as much as two feet in the northern and western suburbs.
The television weather prophets, with their giddy maps and incomprehensible satellite pictures and their meteorological lingo and their Winter Storm and Coastal Flood Warnings, led off the local news, coming even before the live pictures of the day's killings and long before the end-of-program spots to which they are usually relegated.
Powerful moisture-packed systems were slouching toward us from Oklahoma -- see what a mess -- the way New York sends its garbage to distant places.


Hungary Stake Grows For Ameritech Venture
A venture of the Ameritech Corporation and Deutsche Telekom has agreed to take a majority stake in the Hungarian phone company Matav.
The venture, Magyarcom, raised its stake in Matav from 30.2 percent to 67 percent.
Magyarcom  paid about $852 million for the extra shares.
Matav plans to use the money to replace manual switching with digital and optical fiber technology.
The extra shares bought by Magyarcom came from the 66.8 percent stake held by the Hungarian Privatization Agency, which will cut its stake to 25 percent plus one vote.
(AP)


Mother Slashes Child's Throat, Then Her Own
After "a quiet, normal family evening at home," a mother slashed her 10-year-old daughter's throat early Tuesday morning and then cut her own throat, a Nassau County police detective said.
The mother, identified by the police as Debbie Dwyer, 45, of Syosset, was in  critical condition today at the Nassau County Medical Center in East Meadow.
Her daughter, Noel, was in stable condition there.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Submit Those Song Requests
As every school child in New Jersey knows, the state has an official animal,  bird, bug, dinosaur, fish and flower, but lacks a song.
Since 1939, the Legislature has wrestled periodically with how best to represent the state musically.
Now the long wait may be nearing an end.


Scientists Speedily Locate a Gene That Causes Breast Cancer; BetterScreening Is Seen
With record speed, scientists have found a new gene that, when mutated, causes breast cancer.
Together with a different breast cancer gene, isolated 14  months ago, the two genes account for at least 80 percent of the breast cancer that occurs in women with strong family histories of the disease.


Wall Street Sidesteps a Clinton Tax Proposal on Dividends
Despite the hue and cry about the dampening effect that some Clinton Administration deficit-cutting proposals could have on innovative ways to raise  capital, Wall Street and corporate America might have found a way to dull the expected pain.
On Tuesday, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company managed Citicorp's sale of $125 million of "cumulative fixed/ adjustable-rate preferred stock," or Fraps, which enticed corporate and institutional investors with the promise of a sweeter dividend that kicks in if Congress approves the Administration proposal to reduce tax deductions for dividends.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;A mail-order beer club aims its big holiday campaign at women.
HOW do you sell Beer Across America?
By buying advertising across America, of course.
Lots of it.
Especially in the Christmas holiday season.
This is exactly what Beer Across America is doing, and rather successfully: the mail-order beer-of-the-month club says it currently has more than 100,000 subscribers.
Surprisingly, though, the target of most of the company's holiday advertising is not the male beer guzzler: it's the female gift-giver.


Pataki Proposes Housing Violent Felons 2 to a Cell
In a major shift in state corrections policy, Gov.
George E. Pataki has proposed that the state's most violent and disruptive inmates be housed two to a cell as part of a plan to build three new maximum-security prisons by the year 2000.
State prison officials have in the past avoided double cells for maximum-security inmates because they thought it would lead to heightened tensions and increased transmission of diseases like tuberculosis and AIDS.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Drivers Are Cautious in Storm
Drivers were on their best behavior during yesterday's snowstorm, the authorities said.
No fatalities or major accidents were reported by the time the evening rush hour ended, said Trooper Al Della Fave, a state police spokesman.
"Most people want to drive safely," said Tom Suszka of the Turnpike Authority, which reduced the speed limit on the toll road during the storm.
"They leave a little early and they do drive slower, so that helps keep our incidents down."


Heart Experts Urge Even Easier, Softer Exercise to Counter SedentaryHabits
There is good news for the millions of Americans who have put off exercising  because they were reluctant to first get an O.K. from their doctors or could not imagine themselves taking up a vigorous activity like jogging to push their pulse into a heart-protective target zone.
Faced with the discouraging fact that more than half of American adults get little or no physical exercise, an expert panel yesterday revised such long-standing advice in hopes of encouraging sedentary Americans to protect their hearts by becoming more active and physically fit.
Almost any kind of activity, including yard work and brisk walking, will do, the experts said, as long as it is done regularly.


America's Still a Nation of Joiners
To the Editor:
Before Anthony Lewis proposes solutions to the presumed problem of our nation's becoming nonjoiners (column, Dec. 18), he might consider that Americans today join different groups for different reasons.
While it is true that people  join P.T.A.'s, the Elks and the Red Cross less, they join support groups more.


Sanders and Others Not Offered Contracts
Four pitchers who have pitched in World Series games, a member of the Dallas  Cowboys' defense and offense, a former rookie of the year and the pitcher with the major league record for consecutive losses fell into the non-tender trap yesterday.
With clubs looking to cut payrolls any way they can, some players learned yesterday, the deadline, that they were not being tendered contracts for the 1996 season.
Not all clubs immediately disclosed their non-tenders, but with 12  teams not offering contracts to 30 players, last off season's record of 45 non-tenders could be exceeded.


Canada to End Some Tariffs
Canada announced today that it would eliminate all tariffs on automotive parts used for vehicle assembly in the country on Jan. 1.
The tariffs had been waived for the Canadian units of both the Toyota Motor Corporation and the Honda Motor Company Ltd., which assemble cars in Canada.
They had asked Canada to continue waiving the tariffs so they could remain competitive with North American car makers protected by the U.S.-Canada auto pact.


ITT COMPLETES ITS SPLIT INTO THREE BUSINESSES
The ITT Corporation completed its split into three publicly traded companies  yesterday, marking the end of one of America's largest and oldest conglomerates.
New York-based ITT gave shareholders one share each of the new businesses: ITT Industries, which makes auto parts, military electronics and fluid handling systems; ITT Hartford Group Inc., which owns property, casualty and life insurance units, and ITT Destinations Inc., which owns the Sheraton and Ciga hotel chains, Caesars World, Madison Square Garden, the New York Knicks and the  New York Rangers.
ITT was founded as the International Telephone and Telegraph Corporation in 1920.


Market Place;In Bank Merger, It's a Matter of Accounting
In the most contested merger battle now being waged, the struggle between Wells Fargo &amp; Company and First Bank System for the right to acquire First Interstate Bancorp, the arbiter of victory may be an accountant in Washington.
Before shareholders get a chance to vote yes or no on First Interstate's planned merger with First Bank System, the Securities and Exchange Commission will have to review and clear the information being sent to shareholders.
And that means it will have to decide whether or not the accounting treatment being  proposed by First Bank System is correct.


Bosnia Peace Requires Political Will Too;No-Exit Strategy?
To the Editor:
All sides of the national leadership and the news media seem to use the mantra "exit strategy" regarding President Clinton's use of our troops in Bosnia.
We only hear about getting out if casualties are too bad or guesses about how long the time will be.


Rutgers Hires a Walsh Man to Field a Winner
On a day when snow piled up like years of defeat and a frigid wind blew across an empty stadium, a protege of Bill Walsh was hired to bring a long-awaited thaw to Rutgers football.
Terry Shea, the 49-year-old former head coach at San Jose State and the offensive coordinator under Walsh at Stanford from 1992-94, signed a five-year contract that will pay him $150,000 a year in base salary and another $150,000 in perks the first year.
In return, he is expected to field a Rutgers team that  can compete in the Big East, attract a bowl bid and bring financial solvency to  a football program that has never operated in the black.


G.O.P. REBELLION SCUTTLES ACCORD ON BUDGET TALKS
Republicans in the House of Representatives today scuttled an agreement to begin serious budget talks that their leader, Speaker Newt Gingrich, made with President Clinton on Tuesday, and negotiations became snagged once again.
As a result, parts of the Government will remain closed for at least another  day.
The prospects of an eventual budget settlement, which have been flashing on and off like a strobe light for months, dimmed once more.


A BellSouth Account Goes to Riney
The BellSouth Corporation said yesterday that it had named Hal Riney &amp; Partners/Heartland in Chicago to handle the creative portion of a campaign to promote the company's role in sponsoring the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta.
The billings were estimated at $20 million.
Tim Klein, a spokesman for BellSouth in Atlanta, said Riney was awarded the  account after a five-month review that began with six agencies and was narrowed  to Riney and another finalist, Tucker Wayne/ Luckie &amp; Company in Atlanta.
Adweek identified the other four participants as Carmichael/Lynch and Martin/Williams Advertising, both in Minneapolis; Mullen Advertising in Wenham, Mass., and Team  One Advertising in El Segundo, Calif., a unit of Cordiant P.L.C.
Tucker Wayne, which handles corporate advertising and other assignments for BellSouth, will handle the media portion of the Olympics campaign.


Lobo Vies for Sullivan Award
The former Connecticut basketball star Rebecca Lobo, the world-champion sprinter Michael Johnson and Nebraska quarterback Tommie Frazier were among 10 finalists named today for the 1995 James E. Sullivan Memorial Award.
The award is given annually by the Amateur Athletic Union to the nation's top amateur athlete.
The other finalists were the Stanford golfer Tiger Woods, the wrestler Bruce  Baumgartner, the gymnasts Shannon Miller and Dominique Moceanu, the cyclist Rebecca Twigg, the sprinter Gwen Torrence and the basketball standout Lorenzen Wright.


World News Briefs;U.S. May Return Some Okinawa Bases
The United States has agreed in principle to return some of its military bases in Okinawa to Japanese landowners within three years, Japan's Defense Agency said today.
The 10 sites make up only 4.2 percent of the 58,000 acres occupied by United  States bases on Okinawa in southern Japan.
A formal agreement is expected by the end of the year, an agency spokesman said.


On Abortion, Dole Disserves Choice
To the Editor:
Re "In New Stand, Dole Opposes Abortion Ban" (front page, Dec. 18):


Carter Trying to Bring North Korea to Atlanta
Once branded a pariah in the Olympic community for leading a United States boycott of the 1980 Moscow Games, the former President JIMMY CARTER now is working to bring a holdout country to the 1996 Atlanta Olympics.
Practicing the kind of unofficial diplomacy he has used to mediate disputes in various global hot spots, Carter has urged North Korea to send a team to the  Olympics this summer.
North Korea is the only one of 197 nations that has not accepted an invitation to the Games.


Metro Digest
NEW YORK CITY


Carrying On a Family Tradition of Giving to the Needy
As children in the 1950's, Peggy Russell Rosenblum and her four siblings learned about charitable giving from their parents, who pledged to quintuple any contribution they made to the New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The warm memories of that tradition have stayed with Ms.
Rosenblum, and this winter, she  gave to the fund again.
"When pondering what to get my healthy, comfortably employed, grown and educated nephews for Christmas, I thought of your fund," she wrote.
"It truly was a soul-satisfying annual effort that was and is still very much in the Christmas spirit!"


A Quip by Dole Hits Close to Home
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas hails from a state where the Federal Government pays wheat farmers millions of dollars each year just to keep their fields fallow.
Politicians do not normally poke fun at such deals for constituents.
But today Mr.
Dole, a man with a wit drier than the grain belt in August, proved unable to resist.


Doctors Say H.M.O.'s Limit What They Can Tell Patients
Doctors across the country say that health maintenance organizations routinely limit their ability to talk freely with patients about treatment options and H.M.O. payment policies, including financial bonuses for doctors who save money by withholding care.
In interviews over the last three weeks, many doctors said such restrictions  interfered with their ethical and legal duty to provide patients with information about the benefits, risks and costs of various treatments.


INSIDE
American Jet Missing


Nets Are Haunted By Overtime Sound Of 1 Shot Falling
During the pre-game introductions, the roughly 5,000 fans who braved the snowy roads and frigid temperatures tonight took up the cause of their rivals across the Hudson River and gave Miami Coach Pat Riley a not-so-polite round of  booing.
Four minutes into the game, the crowd was booing the Nets.
New Jersey started the game by falling behind by 12 points and ended it by being outscored, 10-2, in overtime en route to a 112-104 loss to the injury-riddled Heat at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The Nets made just 1 of 10 shots in the overtime period.


Sale Planned For Goldwyn Film Library
The Samuel Goldwyn Company, which has been seeking a buyer since it disclosed six months ago that it could no longer meet its financial obligations, plans to  sell its film and television library to Polygram Filmed Entertainment for $62 million, the companies said yesterday.
The sale, which is subject to approval by Goldwyn's stockholders, would pull  the beleaguered entertainment company back from the brink and enable it to pay off most of its $72.9 million in bank debt, said Hans W. Turner, the company's chief financial officer.


U.S. Archives Warns I.R.S. Over Secrecy
The Government's chief keeper of historic records said yesterday that the Internal Revenue Service has, for at least two decades, violated Federal laws that require it to identify significant documents and turn them over to the National Archives.
The I.R.S. maintains that Federal law required that most of its records be kept secret to protect the confidentiality of taxpayers, but an evaluation by the National Archives and Records Administration found that the service had also failed to turn over such mundane documents as its annual report and copies of tax forms.


CABLE DESIGN TO ACQUIRE A UNIT FROM NORTHERN TELECOM
Northern Telecom Ltd. said yesterday that it would sell its communications cable and IBDN structured network wiring business to the Cable Design Technologies Corporation for about $90 million.
Pittsburgh-based Cable Design makes electronic data transmission cables.
Cable Design will retain Northern Telecom's 800 employees at plants in suburban Montreal, Quebec and Kingston, Ontario.
It will acquire the Kingston plant and will lease 30 percent of the Montreal plant from Northern Telecom.
Cable Design's shares rose $4.25 yesterday, to $45, in Nasdaq trading.
Shares of Northern Telecom, based in Mississauga, Ontario, were up 25 cents, to $41.875, on the New York Stock Exchange.


AT HOME WITH: Dr. Ruth Westheimer;The Bible as Sex Manual?
MENORAHS always make Ruth Westheimer a little sad.
Hanukkah of 1938 was the last Jewish holiday she spent with her Orthodox family in Frankfurt before she was sent off at age 10 to the safety of a Swiss orphanage.
Her parents and all her relatives died in concentration camps.


I.M.F. Admits Bosnia
Bosnia was granted membership in the International Monetary Fund today, Prime Minister Haris Silajdzic announced.
The move makes Bosnia eligible for hundreds  of millions of dollars to rebuild the country after three and a half years of war.
Membership had been a virtual certainty after the I.M.F. last week supported Bosnia's joining.
That was after a team of experts spent several weeks examining ways of breathing new life into the country's devastated financial and banking system.


Metro Matters;125th Street: What Jackson Didn't Say
THE REV.
JESSE JACKSON spoke the other night about the murderous incident on  125th Street.
He said: "Stop the hate. Stop the hate talk. Stop the violence." He reminded the 2,000 people celebrating a new biblical translation in the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine that "Scriptures are to be lived, not merely read."
Mr.
Jackson, one of several notables to do a reading from the new Schocken Bible that night, was the only one who chose to embellish his presentation with  a speech too.
But what he failed to say -- from the pulpit and when pressed to elaborate in a subsequent interview -- was more notable than what he did say.
He did not say who expressed the hate he cited or what they said.


Smith Barney Case Is Stayed by Judge
A multimillion-dollar arbitration between Smith Barney Inc. and a former municipal-bond banker at the firm has been stayed by a New York State judge, pending a hearing on Jan. 16.
At the hearing, Justice Herman Cahn of State Supreme Court will consider a motion by lawyers for the banker, Michael Lissack, to order a permanent halt to  the arbitration and to move the dispute to state court.


M. A. HANNA AGREES TO BUY CIMCO INC. FOR $33 MILLION
The M. A. Hanna Company agreed yesterday to buy Cimco Inc., a maker of plastic components for use in the commercial, industrial and medical industries, for about $33 million.
M.
A.
Hanna, a specialty chemicals business based in Cleveland, said the offer valued Cimco, based in Costa Mesa, Calif., at $10.50 a share.
M.
A.
Hanna said it planned to keep Cimco's plastics compounding operations while selling its plastics components business to Cimco's chief executive, Russell T. Gilbert, for an undisclosed sum.
Cimco shares were up 62.5 cents, to $10.25, in Nasdaq trading.
Shares of M. A. Hanna were unchanged, at $26.375, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Murdoch Sees Profit Drop
The News Corporation expects its profits to drop for its fiscal second quarter and first half because of weakness in the American television markets, Rupert Murdoch, the media company's chairman and controlling shareholder, said today.
But he predicted that the company's results would rise for its full year  ending June 30.
"We'd expect to be a bit off for the quarter, a bit off for the half really, but not much," Mr.
Murdoch said in an interview.
"It's nothing  we can't get back pretty quickly."


Nissan Plant in Tennessee
The Nissan Motor Company said today that it would invest 5 billion yen ($49 million) to build a transmission plant in Decherd, Tenn., next to an engine plant that Nissan plans to build by early 1997.
The transmission plant is expected to start operating in the spring of 1998 and is to make 300,000 transmissions annually.
Nissan said the two plants were scheduled to create 200  jobs each.
The transmissions will be used in Altima cars made at Nissan's plant  in Smyrna, Tenn., as well as in Nissan and Ford mini-vans.


Dole Ponders a Visit To G.I.'s in Bosnia; Pentagon Asks Delay
Senator Bob Dole may visit American troops in Bosnia over the Christmas holidays, his aides said today.
But Defense Secretary William J. Perry said that NATO and American military commanders in Europe had requested that dignitaries delay their visits to the troops in Bosnia until after the first of the year to avoid distractions just as the peacekeeping forces are starting to flow in.


Devils Acquire Jocelyn Lemieux From Whalers
The Devils had been trying to trade for a scorer to solve their lack of goal  production, but instead they traded a player with 4 goals in 28 games for a player with 1 goal in 29 games.
The Devils acquired wing Jocelyn Lemieux and a second-round pick in the 1998  draft from Hartford for center/wing Jimmy Dowd and a second-round draft choice in 1997.
The deal came within days of the deadline for freezing rosters for seven days, which starts at midnight next Tuesday.


FRUIT OF THE LOOM POSTS CHARGES AND ANTICIPATES LOSSES
Fruit of the Loom Inc. said yesterday that it would post fourth-quarter expenses of between $240 million and $260 million, resulting in a loss for the quarter and the year.
The underwear maker said the after-tax charges, which would equal about $3.15 to $3.40 a share, were the result of a write-down and previously announced job cuts.
The writedown of good will, which is related to the newly acquired Salem and Gitano businesses, will reduce earnings by about $135 million.
The job cuts will reduce earnings by about $115 million.
In October, the Chicago-based company said it would close six plants and cut 3,200  jobs.
Fruit of the Loom's shares rose $2.50, to $22.625, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Evidence of Parental Care Among Dinosaurs


Bosnia Peace Requires Political Will Too;Specter's Double Talk
To the Editor:
The argument by Senator Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania that Congress should support United States troops as NATO peace enforcers in Bosnia but not endorse the President's policy that sent them there (news article, Dec. 14) is an echo of the debate five years ago over sending American soldiers to the Persian Gulf.
Such a position may gratify a politician's need to have it both ways but offers  a dubious moral foundation for the conduct of foreign policy.


Editorial Notebook;Homesick for Communisim
Many Russians, to rephrase Winston Churchill, apparently believe that Communism is the worst form of government except for all the other forms.
That seems astonishing, especially to an American who lived in Moscow in the  last years of the Soviet Union.
After enduring all those endless lines in the Arctic winter to buy a stunted head of cabbage, after quietly suffering all the grandiloquent nonsense about Lenin's ideals and studying Marxism-Leninism until the mind went numb, after watching your country sink into an economic and  political stupor, how could someone vote for the Communist Party?


America's Still a Nation of Joiners
To the Editor:
Re "An Atomized America" (column, Dec. 18): Anthony Lewis is less than fair in criticizing only "right-wing ideologues" for relying almost exclusively on individual decision-making in the marketplace and rejecting a role for government.


Clinton Has a Right to Privacy
Bill Clinton may be the only C.E.O. in America who can't talk with his lawyers in private.
His effort to claim lawyer-client privilege for a 1993 meeting between his personal lawyers and White House counsel about the Whitewater investigation has provoked speculation that he is hiding something.
Worse, this effort is being compared to President Richard Nixon's attempt to conceal the Watergate tapes.
Yesterday, the Senate voted to take Mr.
Clinton to court.
Unlike executive privilege, which President Nixon invented in his failed effort to hide Watergate crimes, the lawyer-client privilege dates back to Elizabeth I and was part of American law at independence.
The privilege, which makes it safe to confide in lawyers, is no technicality.


Jetliner Mishap And Snow Foil Holiday Travel
Thousands of travelers hoping to spend the holidays in the tropics or amid the warmth of home and family were thwarted yesterday as snow and wind lashed the New York area again and an accident involving a 747 jetliner shut down Kennedy International Airport for several hours.
The mishap, which injured several dozen passengers, added to an already deteriorating air-traffic situation.
Airlines at La Guardia and Newark International Airports had already had serious delays when the accident at Kennedy closed that airport for more than four hours.


Neither Snow Nor Sleet Nor Computer Glitch?


4 Refrigerator Makers Agree to Clarify Ozone-Damage Labels
Shopping for a refrigerator is about to get more informative: if not about the refrigerator itself, then about its impact on the environment.
To settle a lawsuit brought by environmentalists, four big refrigerator manufacturers have agreed to re-label their appliances to clarify that their appliances will damage the earth's protective ozone layer to some extent, even though they have no chlorofluorocarbons, or CFC's, the most common ozone-eating  chemicals.
Meanwhile, the environmental groups that brought the suit say they will file another, against two manufacturers that still use CFC's, but without,  the environmentalists say, the required labels.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Authority Bond Rating Drops
The day after the New Jersey Turnpike Authority announced a three-year cost-cutting plan to avert a toll increase through 1998, Moody's Investors Service yesterday downgraded the authority's bond rating a notch from A -- the third best -- to Baa1.
Moody's said the authority's plan lacked "immediate measures" to insure a balanced budget in the absence of a toll increase.
It also chastised the authority for using nonrecurring revenue sources like surplus construction funds to pay operating costs.
The downgrade could mean higher interest rates for the authority.
Edward Gross, acting executive director of the authority, called the  move "unjustified."


Biggest December Storm Since '60 Blankets Region
A storm that went from woolly snowflakes to freezing rain and back again covered the New York metropolitan area with an uneven blanket yesterday -- 14 inches of snow at La Guardia Airport but only 7.5 inches in Central Park, 6 inches at Islip, L.I., and 5.5 inches in Norwich, Conn.
The storm -- actually a pair of storms that collided miles above streets that quickly became Currier &amp; Ives scenes without huffing horses or phaetons -- was the largest December storm since 1960, when 15.2 inches fell on Dec. 11 and 12.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CRESCENT REAL ESTATE EQUITIES INC., Dallas, a real estate investment trust, bought three office properties and a hotel in New Mexico, Colorado and Phoenix for $96 million.
The sellers were not identified.


Hanson Plans Sale of Its Lumber and Propane Assets in U.S.
Hanson P.L.C. said yesterday that it planned to put its Oregon lumber company up for sale and sell shares in its New Jersey propane company, in an effort to raise $2.3 billion to reduce the heavy debt it took on earlier this year.
The British conglomerate said it planned to sell Cavenham Forest Industries in Portland, Ore., and convert Suburban Propane in Whippany, N.J., into a limited partnership so it could sell 62 percent of its equity in an initial public offering.


Inmates to Double-Up Under Pataki Plan
In a significant shift in prison policy, Gov.
George E. Pataki has proposed that the state's most violent and disruptive inmates be housed two to a cell as  part of a plan to build three new maximum-security prisons by the year 2000.
Now, all but 700 of the state's 21,123 maximum-security prisoners live in single cells, because prison officials thought double cells would lead to tensions and threaten the health of prisoners.
But Mr.
Pataki contends that putting two inmates in a cell will save money while allowing the state to add beds to an overcrowded prison system.


Michael Jackson's Sound of Silence
Both times there was widespread speculation on the truth about Mr.
Jackson's medical problems.
Their seriousness aside, these ailments have resulted in Mr.
Jackson's retreat from singing into silence.
On Dec. 4, two days before he collapsed, Mr.
Jackson tried to promote the HBO special with a news conference at the Beacon.
The many members of the news media in attendance begged him for a comment.
Their attempts ranged from the cold-hearted ("Are you still married?" one person yelled out) to the harmless ("Say hello!" shouted another).
All questions received the same response: silence.


RTZ Deal Approved
Shareholders in the London-based mining giant the RTZ Corporation yesterday approved a $20 billion merger with CRA, its former Australian subsidiary, which  will create the world's biggest mining company.
RTZ-CRA will become a dual-listed company with common boards and unified management.
Australian shareholders endorsed the plan earlier yesterday in Melbourne.
RTZ, which is most active in North and South America, Europe and southern Africa, is mainly interested in copper and gold; CRA, which is involved in the Asia-Pacific region, is a leading producer of iron ore, aluminum and coal.
(Reuters)


Israel and Syria Agree to Renew Peace Talks, Secluded in MarylandUnder U.S. Auspices
Meeting under United States auspices, Israel and Syria will renew their efforts to negotiate a peace agreement in the seclusion of a rural resort in eastern Maryland next week, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said today.
The intensive new phase of negotiations, which the two countries agreed to undertake when Mr.
Christopher visited the Middle East last weekend, will start  next Wednesday at the Wye Plantation on Maryland's Eastern shore, a conference center an hour's drive from Washington.


Who Lives and Who Dies on TV
The end of the calendar year marks the midpoint in the television season, the time when network programmers assess what has gone well, what has gone less than well and what went south.
Among other things, those assessments tell them what holes they need to fill  for shows that have been canceled.
This year the holes are plentiful, and few of the reinforcements are producing high expectations.
NBC will add a comedy about an alien family.
ABC has a comedy about a former high school basketball team, the first effort from the Dreamworks Studio.
CBS has a high school drama that could be Montel Williams's vehicle out of daytime talk shows.
And Fox has a comedy about a woman trying to make it as an executive among lumberjack-types in Alaska.


Airline Ticket Tax May Be Temporarily Dropped in Budget Fight
The Federal Aviation Administration said today that the 10 percent airline ticket tax, which it needs to pay for the air traffic control system, would probably be temporarily dropped because of the budget impasse between the White  House and Congress.
The loss of the tax, which will expire on Dec. 31 unless it is renewed, would cost the Treasury about $15 million a day but would provide a windfall for air travelers or the airlines.


That Name Keeps Cropping Up in German History
BLOOD AND IRON From Bismarck to Hitler the von Moltke Family's Impact on German History By Otto Friedrich Illustrated. 434 pages.
HarperCollins. $30.


Equity Sale in Ducati
The chairman of Cagiva S.p.A. said yesterday that the company, an Italian maker of motorbikes, would sell a 50 percent stake in its Ducati motorcycle division to Sam Zell, the Chicago financier.
Mr.
Zell will pay about 300 billion lire, or $190 million, for the stake in Ducati, with the eventual aim of a New York Stock Exchange listing within two years.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Searching for Perfect Powder and a Free Ticket
The price of a resort lift ticket continues to cut a high-priced trail through skiers' wallets this season.
But with the added cost comes new ways to find a free ticket, at least now and then.
At Loon Mountain in Lincoln, N.H., management is wooing skiers by admonishing them to "eat your way to free skiing." A frequent-eater card keeps tally of the amount of food bought at the resort's five restaurants -- four cafeterias and a deli -- by stamping it in $5 increments.


Stuffing the P.B.A.'s Stocking
The New York State Legislature is attempting to send the New York City police union a $5-million-a-year Christmas present, and put the bill on the city taxpayers' tab.
Gov.
George Pataki, who has thwarted the lawmakers' pandering to the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association before, will have to come to the rescue once again.
The issue this time is a bill requiring the city's Police Department to promote sergeants and lieutenants assigned to investigative work at certain bureaus.
More than 400 sergeants who have been on the job for 18 months would get an automatic promotion to sergeant supervisor, and a $9,000-a-year raise.
An additional 176 lieutenants would become lieutenant commanders, and get an extra  $7,000.


Muller Says No to Islanders
Kirk Muller woke up yesterday morning and could not stomach the thought of rejoining the Islanders.
Not after they asked him to leave in the first place.
So he flew home to Ontario instead of rejoining the team in Dallas, as he was requested to do after five-plus weeks of paid exile in Southern California.
The result: Muller won't be paid and the Islanders have formally suspended him, even though they did not want to.
They have already paid Muller about $300,000 not to play this season.
But Muller apparently decided he didn't want to just show up when his heart was not in it.


Despite Protests, O'Rourke to Proceed With Privatizing Plans
Brushing aside the objections of legislators, the Westchester County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, said today that he would proceed with plans to have private contractors take over jobs like auditing the government's books and preparing meals for prisoners.
On Tuesday, the 17-member Legislature revised Mr.
O'Rourke's proposed $954.4  million operating budget to eliminate four of Mr.
O'Rourke's privatization initiatives -- and restore dozens of civil service jobs -- for a welter of reasons having less to do with ideology than with the interests of individual legislators.


2 California Police Departments Often Violate Rights, Suit Says
Lawyers for the American Civil Liberties Union and other civil rights groups  filed a lawsuit today in Federal District Court accusing the Los Angeles and Santa Monica Police Departments of routinely and intentionally violating Miranda rights by subjecting criminal suspects to coercive questioning even after they had requested a lawyer.
The Supreme Court's landmark ruling in Miranda v.
Arizona in 1966 requires all law-enforcement officers to tell suspects of their rights to remain silent and to have legal counsel present during questioning.
If a suspect invokes the rights, officers must end the interrogation.
The ruling was intended to protect  the rights of criminal suspects by mitigating the coercive environment inherent  in police interrogations.


Sports of The Times;Coach Nelson Does A Bit of Unwinding
AT the Garden, the noise had been all about the other coach.
Don Nelson had heard the hoots and the howls Tuesday night for Pat Riley and after the Knicks'  89-70 victory over the Miami Heat he had been asked his assessment of the crude  reaction to his predecessor's return.
"Personally, I feel Pat deserved better," he said.
"He was a great winner here. He deserved better."


A G.E. Unit's Hungary Move
GE Capital Services, the holding company for the financial services arm of the General Electric Company, and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development said this week that they had bought a combined 60 percent stake in the Budapest Bank from the Hungarian Government for about $87 million.
GE Capital acquired 27.5 percent and the European Bank 32.5 percent of the bank, they said in a joint statement.
The Budapest Bank, with assets of more than 215 billion forint ($1.5 billion) and 74 branches, is one of Hungary's largest commercial banks.


On the West Bank, 'Martyrs' Lose Their Mystique
In the alleys of the casbah, a maze of centuries-old dwellings in the heart of Nablus, portraits on peeling posters are all that remain of local heroes whose time has suddenly passed.
The men on the posters were killed in armed clashes with Israeli soldiers and were revered as martyrs by a generation of young Palestinians bred on the culture of violent rebellion that flourished here during the seven-year uprising against Israel that erupted in 1987.


McKesson Acquisition
The McKesson Corporation said today that it had bought the Ogden Corporation's Ogden Bioservices unit, which provides support services to commercial, nonprofit and governmental groups engaged in drug development and biomedical research.
Terms of the acquisition were not disclosed.
McKesson is the largest distributor of pharmaceuticals and health care products in North America, according to the company.


SOROS ACQUIRES A 7% STAKE IN TIMES MIRROR
George Soros, the billionaire investor, said yesterday that his investment funds had bought a 7.28 percent stake in the Times Mirror Company, sparking a spurt of buying in the media company's stock.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.
Soros said he had bought the stake for investment purposes.
The announcement pushed Times Mirror's shares to a high of $35 before  closing at $34.125, up 25 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Mr.
Soros's Quantum Partners bought 2.2 million series A common stock from Oct. 25 to Dec. 19 at prices ranging from $28.90 to $33.81 a share.
Mr.
Soros holds an aggregate 5.87 million series A shares.


Japanese Stocks Gain
Japanese stocks traded higher here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 204.66 points, or 1.05 percent, at 19,653.25.
On Wednesday, the Nikkei jumped 308.10 points.


AHI HEALTHCARE SEES A LARGER LOSS; ITS SHARES FALL 54%
Shares of AHI Healthcare Systems Inc. dropped more than 54 percent yesterday  after the company said late on Tuesday that its loss in 1995 would exceed 13 cents a share, the estimate of Wall Street analysts.
A company spokeswoman said  AHI, which is based in Downey, Calif., did not have a firm estimate of how deep  the loss would be.
AHI organizes physicians into local managed health care networks.
The company attributed its losses to the cost of developing new networks in markets outside Southern California.
AHI's shares were down $7.375,  to $6.125, in Nasdaq trading of 2.2 million shares.


The Debate on Holiday Diversity
FORGET about peace and joy.
This is a season of chaos and conflict as public  school systems, parents and children thrash out an intensifying annual debate: what holidays to celebrate, and how?
Christmas, it seems, is clashing with diversity.
"The public school system is a battleground this time of year," said Rabbi A. James Rudin, director of interreligious affairs for the American Jewish Committee.
"I am very fearful that this December dilemma will become even tougher as America becomes more multi-racial, multi-ethnic and multi-religious."


After Protests, Library of Congress Closes Exhibition on Slavery
Bowing to staff members who took offense at its contents and leaving some scholars dismayed, the Library of Congress has closed an exhibition about slavery and plantation life.
The exhibition, "Back of the Big House: The Cultural Landscape of the Plantation," was knocked down on Tuesday, only hours after its installation the  day before.
Many African-American staff members and officers of the library "took umbrage" with the exhibition, said Jill Brett, a library spokeswoman.


U.S. Officer Takes Charge in Bosnia, 'Not Looking for a Fight'
An American officer took command of international military operations in Bosnia today and declared that the NATO forces under him had come not "as a bunch of cowboys looking for a fight" but "on a peaceful mission."
In a somber ceremony at Sarajevo airport, the scene of some of the worst early battles of the war and still a no man's land between rival parts of the city, the commander of United Nations forces in the region, Gen.
Bernard Janvier of France, announced that military authority had been transferred to North Atlantic Treaty Organization forces.
The new force is led by Adm.
Leighton W. Smith Jr., the American who commands all NATO forces in Southern Europe.


Lawyer Is Sought In Man's Slaying
An Old Saybrook lawyer is wanted by the state police in connection with a 1994 slaying.
On Monday, Judge Richard Stanley of Middletown Superior Court suspended Haiman Long Clein, accused of ordering the shooting death of an East Lyme man, from practicing law.
Judge Stanley ordered the suspension to remove his control  over a fund for clients, to prevent Mr.
Clein from misusing the fund.
The judge  also appointed a trustee for the lawyer's cases.


Excerpts From Clinton's News Conference
Following are excerpts from President Clinton's news conference today, as recorded by the Federal News Service, a transcription company:
BY PRESIDENT CLINTON


Discreetly, Goldman, Sachs Prepares for a Possible Sale
Jon S. Corzine, the chairman and senior partner of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company,  buoyed by his investment banking firm's sharply rebounding profit, is preparing  Wall Street's most famous partnership for the possibility of a sale in 1996.
In a joint interview, Mr.
Corzine and Henry M. Paulson Jr., the firm's vice chairman and chief operating officer, stepped delicately around the question of  whether Goldman would put itself up for sale.


Board Prohibits Condom Lessons in Class
The seemingly interminable debate about AIDS prevention and condoms in New York City schools ended yesterday when the Board of Education adopted a high schools AIDS curriculum that will emphasize abstinence and prohibit condom demonstrations in classrooms.
After the 4-to-3 vote, students and others opposed to the curriculum stood up and shouted, "Shame!" and "Murderers!" until board members left the hearing room and school safety officers cleared the room of protesters.


USAir Expects Better Earnings
USAir Group Inc. expects its year-end earnings to exceed Wall Street expectations, the airline said on Tuesday.
USAir had its best November ever, its chairman, Seth Schofield, told airline  analysts.
He said that the average fares paid were higher than USAir expected and that costs were lower than the airline's forecasts.


SENATE WILL SEEK U.S. COURT ACTION ON CLINTON NOTES
After a day of spirited and deeply partisan debate, the Senate tonight approved a resolution to ask a Federal judge to order President Clinton to comply with subpoenas and turn over material related to the Whitewater matter that the White House says is protected by the lawyer-client and executive privileges.
The resolution was approved by a vote of 51 to 45, breaking entirely on party lines.
Three Senators did not vote: Daniel K. Inouye, Democrat of Hawaii, and Phil Gramm of Texas and William V. Roth Jr. of Delaware, both Republicans.


Lights in the Dark
To the Editor:
To those generous people who light up their windows in upper Manhattan every  holiday season -- thank you.
Every night I chug past your homes on a Metro North train and my spirits are lifted.
The twinkling that begins in December and ends  in January adds light to the dark night and brings happiness to the thousands who pass by.


World News Briefs;Hospitalized Greek Chief Is Back on Respirator
Doctors put Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou back on a respirator today as his health worsened, and they said they feared that an infection threatened his  weakened body.
The 76-year-old Prime Minister has been in intensive care for a month after being hospitalized with pneumonia.
Most of the time, he has been on a respirator and kidney machine, but in the last few days he had been breathing on his own.


73 Freshmen At the Fore
The 73 Republican freshmen who made Newt Gingrich a powerful Speaker of the House in January played a central role in making him look feeble today.
All year long, chroniclers of the Republican revolution have asked who is doing the leading, Mr.
Gingrich or the self-assured first-termers whom one of their spokesmen, Representative Zach Wamp of Tennessee, recently called "the purest, most worthy group of leaders elected to this body in my lifetime"?


In California, a Move to Give Consumers a Choice on Utilities
California consumers would be the first in the nation to be able to choose which electric utility to patronize as a result of a decision yesterday by the California Public Utilities Commission.
But the commission's decision, which was adopted in a 3-to-2 vote, calls for  setting up an elaborate system to give the state's own utilities time to adjust  to outside competition and to recover the huge costs they would incur in the process.


Leap Resigns Miller Account
The Leap Partnership in Chicago unexpectedly resigned its Miller Brewing Company account yesterday after 18 months.
The billings, on Lite Ice beer and various projects, were estimated at more than $30 million.
"I know it's unheard of for an agency to resign a piece of business like this," said George Gier, a creative partner at Leap, "but Miller doesn't fit in with our goals for next year." Though Mr.
Gier declined to elaborate, he said the resignation had not been prompted by problems working with Miller or by forecasts that Miller might spend less to advertise Lite Ice in 1996.
And Leap was "absolutely not" interested in another brewer's account, he added.


Gun Lobby Would Stop Injury Research
To the Editor:
Everybody talks about accidents but few do something about them.
The National Center for Injury Prevention and Control is an exception.


World News Briefs;Walesa Supporters Hint Premier Was a Spy
Supporters of President Lech Walesa threw Poland into a political uproar today, demanding an investigation into whether Prime Minister Jozef Oleksy, a former regional Communist boss, ever spied for Russia.
Although Mr.
Walesa's backers refused to say it directly, they indicated that Mr.
Oleksy had been spying for Russia.


Tandycraft to Take Revamping Charge
Tandycrafts Inc. said today that it would take a fiscal second-quarter charge of as much as $14.3 million, or $1.20 a share, to eliminate low-growth product lines and close stores and noncore businesses.
The Fort Worth-based retailer of leather goods, furniture and office supplies said the charge would range from $12.4 million to $14.3 million, or from $1.04 to $1.20 a share.
The revamping is expected to raise more than $15 million, which will be used to pay down debt of about $60 million.


People


Gunman Turned Holiday Hope to Tragedy
On the day she died, Maria Carrasquillo was planning a tropical Christmas for her family, with pork roasting in the oven, rice bubbling on the stove and presents to be opened at midnight.
It might be cold and snowy outside, but by Christmas Eve, she vowed, it would be just like Puerto Rico inside her tiny Bronx apartment.
But first, there were a few presents left to buy.
And so, on Tuesday morning as the snow fell, Ms.
Carrasquillo decided to take her two boys shopping at Little Chester Shoes on White Plains Road, near the Bronx Zoo.


Gasoline Prices Drop Sharply On Report of Higher Inventories
Gasoline futures prices fell sharply yesterday on the New York Mercantile Exchange after the American Petroleum Institute reported higher inventories late Tuesday.
It was the second consecutive daily decline in January delivery prices for wholesale unleaded gasoline, suggesting the market has reversed course after reaching a six-month high earlier this week.


CONSOLIDATION BY AUGAT INC. TO AFFECT 800 WORKERS
Augat Inc. said yesterday that it planned to consolidate operations in two divisions in a reorganization that would result in layoffs or relocation for about 800 workers.
Augat, a maker of electrical connectors that is based in Mansfield, Mass., said it would close its plant in Mashpee, Mass., transferring  its production of interconnect products to Maine and Switzerland.
The company will also close its plant in Montgomery, Ala., moving its production of automotive battery cable and wiring to other locations.
Most of the 800 workers  in Mashpee and Montgomery will face layoffs in 1996.
About 50 to 100 of them will be offered the chance to relocate.
Augat's shares were up $1.125 yesterday, to $16.375, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Oppressed by Privilege
Shanghai Triad" was shown as part of this year's New York Film Festival. Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 29. The film opens today at Angelika Film Center (Mercer and Houston Streets, Greenwich Village) and at Lincoln Plaza (Broadway at 63d Street).
"Shanghai Triad," may be as close as the great director Zhang Yimou can come  to making a conventional film.
Set in 1930, it tells of a powerful gangster and his bored, capricious mistress, a fallen woman who ultimately comes to know  and regret her mistakes.
However endlessly film makers around the world have told that story, Mr.
Zhang reimagines it with immense grace and turns it into a  deeply felt tragedy.


Honduras Confronts Military Atrocities of the 80's
During its decade-long "dirty war" against suspected guerrilla sympathizers,  the Honduran military kidnapped, tortured and killed dozens of people, confident that the armed forces' enduring grip on power meant that they would never be held responsible.
Now, for the first time, a civilian court has charged 14 military officers with those and other human rights violations in the 1980's.
But the commander of the armed forces is openly defying the elected civilian President.


20% Increase In Cab Fares Is Proposed
The chairman of New York City's taxi commission is proposing what would be the most substantial changes in the industry in almost a generation: a 20 percent fare increase, new rules to funnel more money into drivers' pockets and  for the first time, a mandatory retirement age for taxis.
The chairman, Christopher R. Lynn, plans to present his proposals today at a  Taxi and Limousine Commission meeting, and commission members said the panel is almost certain to adopt them.
After holding hearings, the commission will vote on the fare increase and other proposals next month, and they would go into effect in late February.


FIRST NATIONWIDE AGREES TO BUY HOME FEDERAL FINANCIAL
First Nationwide Bank has agreed to buy the Home Federal Financial Corporation for $70.6 million in cash.
Shareholders in Home Federal, the parent  of the Home Federal Savings and Loan Association of San Francisco, will receive  $18.50 a share.
Home Federal shares were up 37.5 cents yesterday, to $17.375, in Nasdaq trading.
Home Federal operates 15 offices in Northern California and has  total assets of about $735 million.
First Nationwide, a unit of MacAndrews &amp; Forbes Group Inc., a New York-based holding company, has 160 branches in seven states with total assets of about $14.4 billion.


Study Finds AIDS Drug Shows Promise in Cases of Hepatitis B
A medicine approved last month to treat AIDS also shows promise against hepatitis B, researchers report.
The drug, 3TC, suppresses the hepatitis B virus in people with chronic infections, stopping its damage to the liver, the researchers said in a report published in Thursday's issue of The New England Journal of Medicine.


Essay;'Rick Will Say . . .'
When you're a lawyer who needs a cover story to conceal close connections to  a crooked client, you find some kid in your office willing to say he brought in  the business and handled the client all by himself.
That's the significance of three little words in the notes taken down by Susan Thomases, Hillary Clinton's closest confidant and protector, of a telephone call to Webster Hubbell, Mrs.
Clinton's law partner, early in the 1992 Presidential campaign.


Patience and Flexibility Are Best Route
The key words for airline passengers to remember to get where they are going  this holiday season, especially passengers headed to and from the snowbound Northeast, are patience and flexibility.
With more than a million passengers booked on flights today as well as tomorrow and Saturday, airports will be more crowded and skies less friendly than usual.
Add to the usual holiday crush those passengers who had been booked  on flights that were canceled yesterday and Tuesday, and there are all the ingredients for mass frustration.


CHRONICLE
Not even his wedding could keep GORDON STEWART from attending a Christmas luncheon yesterday for his former boss, JOHN V. LINDSAY.


American Air Jetliner Missing Over Colombia
An American Airlines plane from Miami carrying more than 150 people crashed Wednesday night as it was making its final descent toward Cali, in southwestern  Colombia, local radio reports said.
Witnesses were quoted as saying they had seen a large explosion in the mountains outside Cali.


NEWS SUMMARY
International
A3-13


For Some, Extra Day Of Shopping
Some of the most urgent snow plowing today took place in the parking lots of  malls, but a slow shopping day only five days before Christmas was almost a pleasant lull after a burst of buying by shoppers rushing to beat the storm, retailers said.
Shoppers who made it to stores through the snow found meticulously plowed lots outside the region's malls and an unusually jolly holiday mood inside, as many families took advantage of a weekday off from school and work to finish their shopping with lots of elbow room.


Whitman Advises Dole to Seek Powell in '96
Just over a week after ending her neutrality and endorsing Senator Bob Dole for President, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey has come out with her first public advice for the Republican front-runner: pick Colin L. Powell to run for Vice President.
The Governor, who expects to take a leadership position in the Dole campaign, made her proposal public in an interview published today in The Star-Ledger of Newark, in which she cast the Dole-Powell ticket as a natural outgrowth of Mr.
Dole's understanding of American politics.


Dollar Weakens After Clinton Cancels Meeting on the Budget
The dollar weakened against most leading currencies yesterday after budget negotiations between President Clinton and Congressional Republicans crumbled late in the day.
Efforts to rejuvenate the budget talks fell through when the White House dropped plans for the second meeting in two days of President Clinton and top House and Senate G.O.P. leaders.
Optimism had risen following Tuesday's meeting  that the two sides would resolve the impasse.


Economic Scene;Who counts budget beans best, Congress or the White House?
WHEN the bean counters at the Congressional Budget Office disagree with their counterparts on the President's Council of Economic Advisers, whom do you trust?
The question has emerged as the issue of the hour in the political duel over  deficit reduction.


After Riley, It's Magic Time
The Knicks could break down the last few days into three parts.
There was the buildup for the return of their former coach, the actual game against his new team and, finally, the aftermath.
They now must contemplate their lives without  having Pat Riley to kick around.
"I'm glad it's over," Derek Harper said Tuesday night after the Knicks had beaten Riley's Miami Heat, 89-70.
"There was a lot of hype for just one basketball game."


Corrections
An article in Weekend on Friday about Rockefeller Center misstated the location of the studio for NBC's "Today" program.
It is at 10 Rockefeller Plaza, on the southwest corner of 49th Street, not the northeast corner.


Sports of The Times;Ex-Coaches Are Welcome In New Jersey
IF Pat Riley intended to be welcomed back by the city he left, if he wanted to blow forever kisses to adoring fans, he should have come here five years ago  instead of New York.
He should have coached the New Jersey Nets.
Nets fans are not Knicks fans, as Riley realized last night when about 5,000  indifferent souls sent some feeble derision at him to start, then left him alone to coach his Miami Heat to a 112-104 overtime victory.
Eight miles from 33d Street, it might as well have been Indianapolis.


Support-Case Father To Visit New Family
A man imprisoned for not paying child support to his wife can spend the holidays with two children from a second marriage, a judge decided yesterday.
The man, Jeffrey Nichols, 47, of Charlotte, Vt., has pleaded not guilty to Federal charges that he owes more than a half-million dollars in child support.


2 Contractors Win A-12 Suit; Justice Dept. Considers Appeal
The Justice Department said today that it was considering whether to appeal a ruling that the Federal Government be held responsible for canceling contracts with General Dynamics and McDonnell Douglas for the Navy's A-12 Stealth aircraft.
Government lawyers were reviewing the ruling, issued late Tuesday by Judge Robert H. Hodges Jr. of the Court of Federal Claims, which could cost the Defense Department $2 billion or more.


Nieuwendyk to Stars
JOE NIEUWENDYK, the high-scoring center whose contract dispute with the Calgary Flames played a major role in the dismissal of General Manager DOUG RISEBROUGH last month, was traded to the Dallas Stars late Tuesday night and agreed to a five-year contract.


China to Expel German Reporter Who Criticized Beijing Leaders
China has informed a leading German journalist that it is effectively expelling him for what German politicians and newspaper editors say is retaliation for his critical reports about Chinese leaders.
The journalist, Henrik Bork, who has been based in Beijing for four years, writes for several German-language newpapers, including the Frankfurter Rundschau and Tageszeitung, in Berlin.
Mr.
Bork, 34, was told last week that his work permit, which expires on Dec. 27, would not be renewed.


Racism That Led to Harlem Tragedy Must Not Be Ignored
To the Editor:
Contrary to "In Harlem Tragedy, Issue Isn't White and Black" (letter, Dec. 12), the issue involved in the fatal arson attack that destroyed a white-owned clothing store is very much black and white.


U.S. Bonds Fall on Snag Over Budget
Treasury prices gave up their early gains yesterday, as the bond market was weakened by a poorly received Treasury auction and yet another setback in Washington budget talks.
By the end of the day, the price of the Treasury's 30-year bond dropped 9/32  of a percentage point; its yield, which moves in the opposite direction, edged up to 6.12 percent, from 6.11 percent on Tuesday.


Weicker Is Dropping Out of Centrist Group
Former Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. is quitting a centrist political group because he says that other members are open to endorsing a major-party candidate for President in 1996.
"I am encouraging competition against both major parties," Mr.
Weicker said today in an interview.
"I am not in the endorsement business."


William J. Curtin, 64, Lawyer Who Specialized in Labor Issues
William J. Curtin, a Washington lawyer, labor-management expert and senior partner in the international law firm Morgan, Lewis &amp; Bockius, died on Tuesday at his home in Potomac, Md.
He was 64.
The cause was cancer, his firm said.


Dow Tumbles After Break in Budget Talks
Stock prices of some of America's biggest and best-known companies plunged in the last 15 minutes of trading yesterday, a slide that some analysts attributed  to the latest snag in Washington's budget impasse.
At the close, the Dow Jones industrial average was off 50.57 points at 5,059.32.
Traders and analysts said that a wave of computer-driven sell programs in the final quarter-hour of trading pushed the Dow down by more than 30 points.


Advice for Holiday Travelers
The words to remember are patience and flexibility amid the crowds and bad weather.
Page B12.


Bosnia Peace Requires Political Will Too
To the Editor:
Re "Mr. Bildt's Responsibility in Bosnia" (editorial, Dec. 17): You rightly point at the critical importance of civilian and political implementation of the Bosnian peace agreement in order to secure long-term peace, stability and justice in this war-torn country.


Playoff Hunt: The Streaking Chargers In Thick of It
The San Diego Chargers handed out ski masks today.
At stake on Saturday at the Meadowlands, in no particular order, is their body heat, their free meals, the playoffs and Coach Bobby Ross's headset.
Their Super Bowl hangover lasted more than one day -- try 10 months -- and only now are Chargers' eyes clear.
They have won four consecutive games without  their freight train (Natrone Means) and are thriving instead with a running back who does not even dress with the team.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Higher Cigarette Tax Is Urged
Current state financing for hospital care for the poor ends on Dec. 31, and yesterday, a coalition of consumer, medical and health groups accused Democrats  of playing politics by refusing to back a 25 percent increase in the cigarette tax that would provide a new source of money, The Associated Press reported.
Without the tax, some urban hospitals will close, said Louis Keeler, the New Jersey Medical Society president.
Democrats are worried about the campaign liability of a tax increase, and the tobacco industry has been running radio spots comparing Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, who supports the tax, with her predecessor, Jim Florio, a Democrat who was defeated largely because of a 1990 tax increase.


Make a Budget Deal Now
As budget talks floundered in Washington yesterday, President Clinton angrily blamed the band of fire-breathing conservative Republican freshmen in the House  for preventing Speaker Newt Gingrich from negotiating seriously.
The President was not wrong in his assessment, but he was not wholly right either.
The negotiations are at an impasse at least as much because Mr.
Clinton has not shown his own hand on where he wants the budget to go.
With a substantial part of the Government still shut down in the week before Christmas, both sides need  to take the process more seriously and make concessions to get things going.
The budget talks come at an extremely fluid time on both sides of the aisle.
On the Republican side, the first signs of disagreement are emerging between Speaker Gingrich and Bob Dole, the Senate majority leader.
After the first budget shutdown of a few weeks ago, Mr.
Dole was not the only one to recognize that it was the Republicans, not Mr.
Clinton, who got the public's blame for intransigence.
He has made it clear that he did not agree with keeping the Government shuttered in this second round.
The President slyly went out of his way yesterday to drive a wedge into the G.O.P. camp by praising Mr.
Dole for making a good-faith effort to negotiate, as opposed to Mr.
Gingrich.


Increases Proposed For Taxicab Fares
Under a sweeping proposal to restructure the industry, the head of the taxi commission is proposing raising fares by 20 percent, and is recommending that most of the increase go toward compensating drivers instead of fleet owners.
The proposal would also limit how long cabs could stay on the road before having to  be retired.
In the past, fare increases have mainly gone into the pockets of fleet owners, but the head of the Taxi and Limousine Commission, Christopher R. Lynn,  said he wants to attract better drivers by having them collect more of the latest increase.
The proposal, expected to be presented today, is considered likely to be approved by the full taxi commission.


Blaming Airline on Liquor
A group of drunken British and Irish tourists, some of whom had to be handcuffed to their seats after running amok on a trans-Atlantic flight, have blamed Northwest Airlines because it gave them free alcoholic drinks.
"They gave us drink on the plane; they shouldn't have," Eileen Cash told reporters today after returning to Britain.


Island in a Sea of White Resistance;Englewood's Neighbors Oppose All Regional School Plans
Throughout the fall, residents of primarily white suburbs like Tenafly and Leonia have crowded public meetings to tell the state that regardless of the racial imbalance in Englewood's schools, they do not want the state to integrate their schools with children from the heavily minority Englewood district.
Over and over again, their speeches hit on the same theme: that Englewood has mainly itself to blame for letting its schools become 92 percent black and Hispanic.
"Englewood's diverse community has rejected its own school system," said Elena Van Poznak, a white teacher who lives in Tenafly.
"That wrong has to be righted, but don't steal from other children."


Officials Considering Teacher Layoffs
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani says that his no-layoff pledge to New York City's public school teachers is no longer in force now that teachers have rejected a tentative contract agreement.
And Schools Chancellor Rudy Crew, who has been meeting with City Hall officials to discuss labor strategy, says he is considering recommending layoffs because of further Federal, state and city budget cuts.


Mario A. Procaccino, 83, Who Lost to Lindsay in 1969, Dies
Mario A. Procaccino, an immigrant's son from the Bronx who tapped the resentments of disaffected New Yorkers from outside Manhattan in a colorful but  unsuccessful bid to wrest the mayoralty from John V. Lindsay in 1969, died yesterday at Our Lady of Mercy Hospital in the Bronx.
Mr.
Procaccino, who moved  to Harrison, N.Y., a few years ago and spent his winters in San Juan, P.R., was 83.
Mr.
Procaccino's death was caused by complications of diabetes that led to heart failure, said his daughter, Marierose, of Harrison.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Driving Records Topic of Vote
In New York and Connecticut, rental car companies are allowed to check whether customers have valid drivers' licenses before handing over the keys.
A bill scheduled to be voted on in the State Assembly today would give rental-car companies in the state the same information.
The Senate has already approved the bill.


In Statements to Police, Mother of Slain Girl Said She Tried to RidChild of Demons
Under questioning by the police in the beating death of Elisa Izquierdo, her  6-year-old daughter, Awilda Lopez told how she was convinced that snakes and satanic potions were in her daughter's body and that it was her duty to expel them physically from her child, according to court papers released yesterday.
Her statements, made public at her arraignment on second-degree murder charges yesterday, provided a detailed glimpse into her possible motivations in  dealing with Elisa, who was found with a severe wound to the head and several broken bones.


Movement With a Bit of Sociology
The Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater has had a somewhat new look this season.
There is no lack of the vibrancy and passion that have made the company  so popular.
But there seems to have been a coming-to-terms, conscious or not, with the kinds of changes that have come upon American modern dance in general.
A perfect example is the revival of Donald McKayle's "Rainbow 'Round My Shoulder" presented on Tuesday night at City Center, where the company is to perform through Dec. 31.
The modern-dance classic, choreographed in 1959, depicts seven men on a chain gang, toiling in a simmering landscape by day and dreaming at night of the lives they left behind.
There was always a stylized look to the piece, as there is to  "Games," another McKayle classic.
Ailey wore his heart on his sleeve in his dances.
The strong, archetypal emotions Mr.
McKayle deals with in "Rainbow 'Round My Shoulder" -- exhaustion, longing and fear -- are filtered through his  more distanced sensibility.


Corrections
A subheading in a chart in Business Day yesterday, with an article about the  Warner-Lambert Company's purchase of five drugs from Glaxo Wellcome, misstated the availability of three other drugs made by Glaxo Wellcome.
The three -- Zantac 75, Zovirax and Beconase -- are available by prescription only; they are  not now sold over the counter.
Zantac 75 received Federal regulatory approval on Tuesday to be sold over the counter and will be introduced early next year.
The  other drugs are still waiting for similar approval.


Anecdotal Robeson: Nobility Turned Quaint
Of all the imposing figures who have strutted across the stage of American culture in this century, none has been more invested with a superman mystique than Paul Robeson.
The black singer, actor, athlete, humanitarian and crusader for social justice embodied a concept of nobility that in today's cynical age of tell-all television seems almost touchingly quaint.
And Avery Brooks's resoundingly oratorical portrayal of the singer in Phillip Hayes Dean's play "Paul Robeson" should do nothing to diminish his stature.
With his penetrating bass voice, Mr.
Brooks lends Robeson-associated songs like "Jacob's Ladder" and "Joe Hill" a rich, rumbling fervor.
And his version of "Ol' Man River," with revised lyrics purging the word "nigger," echoes the deep, rolling resonance of Robeson's vintage recordings.


Merrill Group Picked To Manage Brazil Sale
Brazil chose a group of underwriters led by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company yesterday to manage the sale of a part of the Government's 51 percent stake in Companhia Vale do Rio Doce, the world's largest iron ore exporter.
Brazilian officials estimate as much as $3 billion worth of shares could be sold, which would make it the largest Latin American equity offering.
The record is held by the Argentine oil company YPF S.A., which sold for $2.7 billion in 1993.
Merrill's group will charge a commission of 1.91 percent to manage the sale.
The group beat eight rival bids by companies including Goldman, Sachs, J.  P. Morgan, Morgan Stanley and Bear, Stearns &amp; Company.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Ousted G.M. Head Takes New Post
Robert C. Stempel, who was ousted as chairman of the General Motors Corporation three years ago, was named chairman today of Energy Conversion Devices Inc.
Energy Conversion, a battery and high-technology materials company, also said Mr.
Stempel would join its senior management as executive director.
In that position, he will become involved in all aspects of the company's business, including electric vehicle batteries.


Man Gets 10-to-20-Year Term for Raping Wife
Declaring that "there are too many places on this earth where wives are considered chattel," a judge sentenced a Washington Heights man to 10 to 20 years in prison yesterday for beating and raping his estranged wife.
Marital rape convictions are rare, often because women are too afraid to pursue charges or because of societal ambivalence toward their plight -- factors that Justice Franklin R. Weissberg of State Supreme Court in Manhattan alluded to before sentencing 37-year old Jose Santos.


OVERHAUL BACKED IN COMMUNICATION
House and Senate negotiators agreed tonight on a sweeping bill to rewrite the nation's communications laws from top to bottom, clearing the way for Congress to pass a final bill before the weekend.
The agreement came after Republicans capitulated to Democrats on a wide variety of issues, and it means that the bill is virtually assured of passing Congress and being signed into law by President Clinton.


Geico's Sale Approved
The shareholders of the Geico Corporation today approved Berkshire Hathaway Inc.'s offer to buy the 49 percent of the insurer that it does not already own.
Geico said holders of 86.5 percent of its shares outstanding voted to approve the deal at a special shareholders meeting.
The merger is expected to be completed on Jan. 2.
Berkshire Hathaway, Warren E. Buffett's investment company, offered in August to pay $2.3 billion, or $70 a share, for the remaining stake in Geico.


Key Rates
In percent


JAZZ IN REVIEW
Unchecked Improvisation With a Taste of Brazil Joe Henderson, saxophonist Blue Note


Corrections
A dance review on Tuesday about a performance of "The Christmas Revels" on Sunday at Symphony Space misidentified the musician who played the uilleann pipes.
He was Jerry O'Sullivan; Seamus Egan played the flute.


INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: The Risks of Cutting Too Far;Toyota Learns Customers' Limits With the Corolla
The Toyota Corolla has been Japan's best-selling car for 26 years.
So when Toyota introduced a fully remodeled and lower-priced version of the car in May,  it expected a big lift in sales.
But sales have been disappointing and Tsutomu Kusaka, a Toyota dealer in Yokohama, thinks he knows why.
The new Corolla not only is cheaper than the old  one, it also "looks cheaper," he said.
Instead of painting the bumpers, Toyota left them black.
And "the interior has become much poorer," he said.
Toyota heard the complaints and five months after introducing the car, the Corolla was  reborn with power windows and locks and nicer seats.


Accounts
*
Discovery Zone, Fort Lauderdale, Fla., to Fahlgren Benito, Tampa, Fla., to handle all regional marketing in the United States for the indoor playground franchise, which is controlled by Viacom Inc.
The account had been divided among various agencies including Fahlgren Benito, which has handled the Southeast region.
The combined billings were estimated at $8 million. *
Ralston Purina Co., St.
Louis, to Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg, New York, to handle the print part of the account of its Purina Nutrient Management brand of dog food, previously handled by Checkmark Communications, St.
Louis.
The billings were estimated at $5 million.
Avrett, Free already handles the broadcast part of the account in addition to other Purina brands like Cat Chow and Meow Mix cat foods. *
Legion Paper Corp., New York, to Porte Advertising, New York, to handle advertising for the importer and distributor of printing papers, previously handled in-house and assigned out on a project basis.
The billings were not disclosed. *
Dell Publishing unit of Bantam Doubleday Dell, New York, owned by Bertelsmann  A.G., to Ziccardi &amp; Partners, New York, to handle its account, previously at Franklin Spier Inc., New York.
The billings were not disclosed.


Pennant Fever: Orioles Heat Up Chase for Cone
David Cone's baseball heart has been in New York, but his baseball head might be nudging him to Baltimore.
The Orioles have intensified their bid to sign the  free-agent pitcher and spoil the Yankees' most important off-season plan.
The division showdown for Cone could peak with his long-awaited decision as early as today.
Although Cone has still not made his choice, there have been subtle signals that he might leave, and those signals grew stronger yesterday after intense discussions and powerful courting among the Orioles, Cone and Steve Fehr, Cone's agent.
Fehr's conversations with the Yankees were briefer, and the Orioles seemingly pulled even or surged ahead in the skirmish for Cone.


Conerly Fights for Life
CHARLIE CONERLY, a quarterback for the New York Giants from 1948-61, was in frail condition yesterday in Methodist Hospital in Memphis, three months after he underwent triple-bypass surgery.
He is still breathing with the help of a ventilator, said Conerly's wife, PERIAN.
Conerly, 74, who lives in Clarksdale, Miss., was diagnosed with congestive heart failure about a year ago.
(AP)


Unfazed by Election, Yeltsin Vows Not to Change Course
With his aides still reeling from their defeat by the Communists, President Boris N. Yeltsin today spoke up for the first time since Sunday's parliamentary  elections to assure the country that the Government would not change its course.
"We have no reason for concern or to view the election as a tragedy," Mr.
Yeltsin said from the clinic where he is being treated for heart trouble.


Packwood Gets Extra Time in His Senate Office
Former Senator Bob Packwood, the Oregon Republican who resigned in disgrace in September amid accusations of sexual misconduct, has been granted an extension and is not leaving his Senate office until Jan. 2.
But Mr.
Packwood is not being paid, and the extra time will not affect his annual $89,000 pension.


Hostetler Undergoes Surgery
Oakland Raiders quarterback Jeff Hostetler had arthroscopic surgery on his ailing left shoulder today and will be out for the rest of the season.
Hostetler was placed on the injury list and replaced on the team by quarterback Jeff Graham, who will be the No. 3 quarterback Sunday against Denver in a must-win game for the Raiders.


ResultsPlus
N.B.A.


Algeria Gains Vote of Confidence: Oil Contracts
Algeria is on the verge of concluding several major energy deals for the development of some of its enormous oil and gas reserves.
The agreements will bring a huge injection of capital to the country and are being characterized as  a turning point in the West's confidence in Algeria's Government.
British Petroleum will make a formal commitment on Saturday to spend $3.5 billion in Algeria over the next 25 years, the largest investment by a foreign concern since Algerian independence 33 years ago.


Hearing to Weigh Fate of Roosevelt School Board
A hearing on whether the state should oust the embattled Roosevelt, L.I., Board of Education is scheduled for Jan. 2 in Manhattan, state education officials said yesterday.
If the State Board of Regents finds that the Roosevelt school board failed to remedy deep financial and academic troubles since the state first intervened six months ago, the district of 2,600 students would become the first in New York to come under state control.


AT&amp;T Venture To Lay Cable For Africa
The AT&amp;T Corporation and Alcatel Cable S.A. of France said today that they had reached an agreement to cooperate on the design, manufacture, supply and installation of Africa One, an undersea cable system.
An AT&amp;T spokeswoman declined to disclose the value of the agreement with the  Alcatel Alsthom unit but said the entire project was valued at $2.6 billion.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
World Juniors


Liberties;Nix 'Nixon' -- Tricky Pix
I thought Oliver Stone might go all the way, and have Anthony Hopkins play Nixon as Hannibal Lecter.
Imagine Nixon in the Oval Office, listening to the "Goldberg Variations" and  savoring the prospect of eating John Dean's liver with some fava beans and a nice Chianti.


Whitewater Nuance Yields to Politics
With chef-like concern, Senator Bob Dole peeked in several times today upon the chamber's Whitewater debate and looked gently, as if at a gifted sous-chef,  upon Alfonse M. D'Amato, the New York Senator leading the fight against the Clinton White House over subpoenaing notes of a Presidential lawyers' meeting.
Mr.
Dole, the majority leader and front-runner to challenge Mr.
Clinton next  year, was too discreet and preoccupied to lead the debate.
But Mr.
D'Amato, the  Whitewater committee chairman who is one Mr.
Dole's chief Presidential campaign  strategists, was moving it to the boil.


Drexler Bruises Shin
CLYDE DREXLER likely will sit out tonight's game against Portland and the Houston Rockets guard may be out for two weeks with a bruised shin, the team said yesterday.
Drexler was injured Tuesday night when he collided on a fast break with CHARLES BARKLEY of the Phoenix Suns.
He is listed as day to day.
(AP)


South Korea Ex-Leader, on a Fast, Is Hospitalized
A former President, Chun Doo Hwan, who is on a hunger strike against what he  calls political retaliation, was hospitalized late today after becoming too weak to take water, officials said.
A senior prosecutor, Choi Hwan, called the transfer from jail to a police hospital "a temporary action" until Mr.
Chun can recover enough to face charges.


Russians Bombard Chechen City


NONPROFIT GROUP TO BUY CALIFORNIA HOSPITAL FROM FHP
The FHP International Corporation agreed yesterday to sell FHP Hospital and the surrounding 11-acre campus in Fountain Valley, Calif., to Memorial Health Services for $87 million.
The FHP campus includes a 230-bed hospital and medical office buildings.
Memorial Health Services, of Long Beach, Calif., is a nonprofit organization.
FHP International, also of Long Beach, is a health care  services company.


Bronx Gunman Was Under Treatment for Schizophrenia
For several years, Michael Vernon, the 22-year-old gunman charged with shooting five people to death in a Bronx shoe store on Tuesday, had shuttled in  and out of hospitals and health clinics for treatment of paranoid schizophrenia, officials said yesterday.


CENTOCOR BRINGS TRIAL OF ANGINA DRUG TO EARLY END
Centocor Inc. said yesterday that it had ended early a trial of its flagship  heart drug, Reopro, in patients with angina, because results exceeded expectations.
Just last week, the company ended a separate study of Reopro in patients who had coronary angioplasty to clear blocked arteries, because the results were so strong.
That news caused shares in the company, which has yet to make a profit, to surge 68 percent on Friday.
Angina, a condition that causes chest pain because of a lack of oxygen to the heart, represents a much bigger market for Reopro than angioplasty and could be worth as much as $400 million a  year in sales to Centocor, analysts said.
Trading in shares of Centocor, based in Malvern, Pa., was halted before it disclosed the decision to cut short the trial.


Where Spiders Are Welcome
ONCE upon a time in an enchanted gingerbread house in the frosty north country near the Finger Lakes, there lived an unusual little girl named Violet,  the daughter of a jolly toy maker.
Or so this story could begin.
Violet Mae Kirk, 9, and her parents, Susan and  David Kirk, do seem to live in a fairy tale.


Ukraine Agrees to Close Chernobyl A-Plant
Ukraine and the Group of Seven industrial countries agreed today to close the Chernobyl nuclear power station, nearly a decade after the world's worst nuclear accident.
The memorandum of understanding involves $2.3 billion in aid to close Chernobyl by 2000 and to develop Ukraine's energy sector, including completion of two safer nuclear plants.


The Giants' Croel Plans to Play the Free-Agent Market
Linebacker Mike Croel was asked whether he is coming back to the Giants next  season, and his answer was noncommittal.
But that was not surprising.
Few unrestricted free agents know what the future holds at this time of the year, and Croel is not Nostradamus.
But there is a strong tie between Croel and this coaching staff.
When Dan Reeves was the Broncos' coach, he drafted Croel out of Nebraska.
In 1991, Croel  was named rookie of the year in the American Football Conference.
But after a somewhat disappointing 1994 season, he signed a one-year contract with the Giants.


Executive Changes
AVIALL INC., Dallas, named Robert G. Lambert, its chairman, to the additional positions of president and chief executive, succeeding Marshall B. Taylor, who resigned to pursue other interests.


Britain Awards Second Rail Contract
The British Government awarded the second of its rail privatization franchises yesterday to an employee-led consortium that bid to run its regional  passenger service.
Great Western Holdings is 51 percent owned by management and  employees; stakes of 24.5 percent each are held by the bus company Firstbus and  the venture capital group 3i.
Great Western will operate the passenger-train service between London and western England.
The first seven-year franchise, for South West Trains, was awarded to Britain's second-largest bus company, Stagecoach, on Tuesday.
(Reuters)


Man Kills Three Women and Then Himself
A man who had been arguing with his girlfriend fatally shot her and two other women today and then killed himself, the police said.
The victims were found in an apartment building in South St.
Louis.
A 3-year-old, believed to be the daughter of the man's girlfriend, was in the apartment but was not harmed.


Samuelsson: Strength and Style, Too
Last spring, when the Rangers exited from the Stanley Cup playoffs humbly and early, the many reasons for the second-round sweep included the size and aggressiveness of the Philadelphia Flyers.
This factor was evident in the play of Sergei Zubov, an attacking defenseman  who was occasionally overwhelmed by the forechecking of the bigger Flyer forwards.
They would knock him into the glass and boards, deep in Ranger territory, take the puck from him and foil the New York attack before it formed.


In South Africa, Just Any Tree Won't Do
IT'S Christmastime in South Africa, and that, of course, means surfing, sun and prawn barbecues on the beach.
The seasons are backward here in the Southern  Hemisphere, so even if singing "White Christmas" wasn't politically infelicitous, it would be silly.
The last time it snowed on Christmas atop Cape  Town's famous Table Mountain was in 1957.
But when it comes to Christmas-tree fads, South African purists can go fashion-conscious Americans one better.
It's not enough for the eco-conscientious here merely to have a live Christmas tree.
They must have a live, indigenous Christmas tree.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief report on the obituary page on Tuesday about a memorial service for the actor David Warrilow at the Church of St.
Mark-in-the-Bowery misstated the date of the service.
It was Tuesday, not yesterday.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Conferees Reach Accord On Telecommunications Bill House and Senate negotiators reached agreement on a sweeping bill to rewrite the nation's communications laws, clearing the way for Congress to pass a final bill before the weekend.
The new agreement came after Republicans capitulated to Democrats on a wide variety of issues, and it means that the bill is virtually assured of becoming law.


As Jones Gets Honor, Mitchell May Get Going
On a day when Marvin Jones earned the most-valuable-player award from his teammates, Johnny Mitchell removed the nameplate from his locker.
Each action said much about the Jets' season.
What does it say about the rest of the Jets that Jones was honored even though he played in only nine games?
And what does it suggest for Jones's future?
A glance at the list of team m.v.p.'s reflects the franchise's inability to attract and keep quality players.
Except for last year's winner, Mo Lewis, not one other honored Jet, going back to 1990, is still on the team.


Bridge
The oldest American player to compete regularly in tournaments at every level, from sectional to national, is probably Al Rand of Manhattan, who is 88 and full of enthusiasm for the game.
In October, he won the annual Expert Night  game at the Harmonie Club, 4 East 60th Street.
Playing with Margie Gwozdzinsky,  he scored 66 percent with some help from the diagramed deal.
North-South charged into four spades, with Rand as East showing his considerable strength with a take-out double of the two no-trump response.
Now the opening lead was crucial.


Revamping Planned For France Telecom
The head of France Telecom, Michel Bon, introduced a plan yesterday to reorganize the world's fourth-largest telephone company, preparing for competition and a planned partial sale.
Mr.
Bon, who took over as the state-owned company's chairman three months ago, plans to introduce decentralized management, use-linked pricing of services and an "organization that revolves around the client."
The reorganization will create five broad functional areas, each with its own head: residences and small businesses, corporations, networks, research and  development, and administration.
The divisions will seek to increase the use of  telecommunications services in France, Mr.
Bon said.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Sports and Entertainment Group Is Formed by Garden's Ex-Head
Fifteen months after leaving Madison Square Garden's presidency, Robert M. Gutkowski announced the formation yesterday of a sports and entertainment company.
It will represent talent, produce television programming and market events.
The Marquee Group, with backing from Robert F. X. Sillerman, the media investor, was created through the absorption of Athletes and Artists, a sports and entertainment talent agency, and Sports Marketing and Television International, a sports event marketer.
Marquee is taking over those two firms by providing their principals with equity stakes.


Federal Shutdown Begins to Affect Economic Forecasts
The partial Government shutdown has begun to take a toll on the Government's  statistical system, delaying publication of various reports that affect securities markets and denying Federal Reserve policy makers full economic information in setting the nation's monetary course for the next six weeks.
But officials at the Labor and Commerce Departments, which produce the bulk of nonagricultural data, say they see no immediate threat to the integrity of the figures themselves once the Government fully reopens and can process and publish what they have collected.


Hoechst to Close Half Its Drug-Making Plants
Hoechst A.G. of Germany said today that it would close more than half its 77  drug-production plants and eliminate 8,000 jobs.
The actions followed the company's acquisition in July of Marion Merrell Dow  for $7.1 billion, creating Hoechst Marion Roussel, a pharmaceutical unit with 43,000 jobs.


Gay Couples Confront Holiday Stress
WHEN Christmas Day breaks over the hills of Staten Island, it will find Nan Buzard and Susan Allee nestled snugly in their 100-year-old shingle-sided Colonial house in St.
George, watching "Holiday Inn."
Then they will gather up the other lesbian women who are their downstairs tenants and head off with a cardamom coffee cake and sugar cookies -- plus an 11-week-old puppy -- to dine with their neighbors.


Corrections
Because of a production error, a picture on Friday with an article about Russian politics was published in error in some copies.
It showed a woman in a marketplace selling chickens.
The intended picture showed Russians looking at campaign posters.


For Most G.I.'s, Only Few Hints of Hate Groups
For Bob, a burly white Army sergeant, the underground presence of white supremacists at this prairie post is as clear as the Ku Klux Klan and Aryan Brotherhood graffiti he says he sees scrawled on portable toilets on firing ranges.
"It's a natural for them to recruit among soldiers -- that's where the guns are," the 12-year Army veteran said as music boomed and dancers gyrated at an off-post strip joint.
Motioning to his chest, he said, "They might slip a few extra rounds in their pockets."


In U.S. Policy Change, Fordham Radio Station to Get Grant
In a settlement that could affect Federal support of public radio and television stations nationwide, the United States Commerce Department said yesterday that it would not deny a grant to Fordham University's radio station because it broadcasts Mass for an hour each week.
The university station, WFUV-FM, which broadcasts public radio programs from  Fordham's campus in the Bronx, had been turned down in 1994 for $262,858 from the National Telecommunications and Information Agency, a division of the Commerce Department.
The school, which was founded by the Jesuits, the Roman Catholic religious order that still plays a major role in its administration, sought the grant to help pay for a new radio tower.


Fossil of Nesting Dinosaur Strengthens Link to Modern Birds
Fossil hunters digging in the Gobi Desert of Mongolia have found the remains  of a dinosaur that died 80 million years ago while sitting on its nest of eggs.
This is the first definitive evidence of parental care among at least some dinosaurs, and also more strong support for an evolutionary link between dinosaurs and modern birds.
In the interpretation of the paleontologists who came upon the fossil scene,  an Oviraptor, a meat-eating dinosaur resembling a small ostrich with a tail, was brooding a clutch of at least 15 eggs.
Its legs were tucked tightly behind its body in a manner identical to that of such modern birds as chickens and pigeons.
The arms were held back and somewhat to the side, encircling the nest in a protective posture.
Directly under the squatting reptile were the eggs, measuring seven inches by two and a half inches and arranged in a circular pattern corresponding to the nests of many modern birds.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;State Is Fourth in Development
At current rates of development, New Jersey will be "covered with buildings within 52 years," an environmental advocacy group said in a report released yesterday.
The report by Defenders of Wildlife said that 31.9 percent of the state's land is currently developed, and New Jersey experienced a 23.2 percent growth in development from 1982 to 1992, the fourth highest in the nation.
The state is still the most densely populated -- 20 percent higher than the  next state, Rhode Island -- with 1,004 people a square mile, the group said.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;A Vote on Laboratory Space
Small high-tech companies are having a tough time finding laboratory and office space in New Jersey, said State Sen.
Robert W. Singer, Republican of Lakewood.
He is sponsoring a bill, to be voted on in the Assembly today, that would allocate nearly $2 million to the State Economic Development Authority to  purchase a 40,000-square-foot building and 40 acres from Johnson &amp; Johnson.


Take This Job. Please.
The voluntary retirement of 12 senators at the end of this term, including the exceptionally able Sam Nunn of Georgia, Bill Bradley of New Jersey, Nancy Kassebaum of Kansas, Alan Simpson of Wyoming and David Pryor of Arkansas, has caused speculation and distress.
These are people at the top of their game -- people who were likely to be re-elected.
How could they walk away from the power and prestige of a Senate seat?
Consider a typical day for a typical senator, based on my experience and that of colleagues.


No Headline
Folks are going to need to be patient.
The reservations systems are doing the best they can."
RICHARD WEINTRAUB of USAir. [A1:1.]


Shazikou Journal;An Englishman in China: The Win Is His Epitaph
The craggy hills that surround this tiny town are called the Nine Dragons for their forbidding, rocky terrain.
Coaxing grain from the golden fields that hang  on the mountain slopes has been a struggle over the centuries.
Peasants still trundle down steep mountain paths with hefty bundles of underbrush strapped to their backs.
A single ribbon of smoke, rising from a red-roofed factory in the distance, is the only visible reminder of the outside  world.


386 Million Takeover Set By Informix
The Informix Corporation said today that it had agreed to acquire Illustra Information Technologies Inc. for stock currently valued at up to $386 million.
The deal would give Informix, the third-largest independent producer of data  base management software, a leadership position in the emerging category of so-called object-relational data base programs.
Illustra, a privately held company based in Oakland, Calif., is the leading supplier of object-relational data base software and programming tools for managing complex data in the Internet, multimedia, financial services and other markets.


Israel Bars Seven U.S. Jews, Calling Them Security Risks
Israel barred entry today to seven American Jews, including a New York rabbi  whom the Government considers to be a security risk in light of the assassination last month of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin.


CHRONICLE
Ms.
Gotbaum's predecessor and successor as Parks Commissioner, HENRY J. STERN, was having an encounter of a different sort yesterday; it happened at a news conference with four birds.
Mr.
Stern and ELLIOTT JAY ARKIN appeared at the Arsenal in Central Park to announce that bird sculptures by Mr.
Arkin that are now on display in Tiffany's  windows will be sold next month to help educate the public about birds in the city.


Racism That Led to Harlem Tragedy Must Not Be Ignored;Economics Isn't Excuse
To the Editor:
Attempts to downplay the evils of racism by citing economic factors and motives can be heard regarding the tragedy on 125th Street in Harlem, but also about every other horrific and genocidal course of racist conduct from the institution of slavery to the Holocaust.


New Mexico's Indian Tribes Vow to Defy Move to Close Casinos
Since July, when the New Mexico Supreme Court ruled that the state's Indian-run casinos were operating in defiance of the law, United States Attorney John J. Kelly has been under pressure from legislators and gambling opponents to close the lucrative operations.
The Indian tribes, insisting that they have the  power of sovereign nations, have refused to stop voluntarily, since gambling has become their economic lifeblood.
So on Thursday, Mr.
Kelly announced an ultimatum: By Jan. 15, the 10 tribes operating casinos must shut down or face legal action.


Queen Urges Prince Charles And Diana to Divorce Soon
Queen Elizabeth II has written to Prince Charles, the heir to the British throne, and to his estranged wife, the Princess of Wales, urging them to agree to an early divorce, Buckingham Palace said today.
A statement released by a spokesman for the palace said the Prince favored a  divorce and had discussed the matter with his wife.
Her reaction is not yet known.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball


Unbeaten Illinois Shoots Down Missouri in Overtime
Illinois 96, Missouri 85


Snowpeople of the Hour
The sanitation workers of New York City labor under a dual identity.
By summer they are unloved garbage removers, who periodically get photographed spilling trash from litter baskets onto the street, or looking unproductive during work hours.
Then the snow comes, and they become the heroic sanitation crews who labor all night so that their fellow New Yorkers may commute in safety.
"To our guys, the snow is like a robbery in progress for a cop -- the adrenaline starts pumping," said Sanitation Commissioner John Doherty, one of the few top city officials who worked his way up through the ranks of his department.


Taxi Fare Increases Aimed at Short Rides
A proposal to raise taxi fares in New York City would fall more heavily on riders taking short rides, a formula city officials hope would eventually free up more cabs as people forsake limited trips.
Under the plan, which could be in  place in late February, the cost of the first fifth of a mile would rise from $1.50 to $2, and the next fifth of a mile would cost 30 cents, up from 25 cents.
Article, page B6.


State Ordered to Use Medicaid for Elderly Poor
New York State's highest court decided yesterday that the state must make millions of dollars in retroactive payments to doctors, hospitals and ambulance  companies for service to elderly and poor patients under its Medicaid program.
The unanimous Court of Appeals decision was an outgrowth of a 1992 Federal Court ruling that the state Medicaid program must pay the 20 percent co-insurance on behalf of the elderly poor that is not paid by Medicare.


Stocks Higher in Japan
Stocks were trading at 19,759.37 at midday -- exceeding 1995's highest close  of 19,684.04.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues closed up 91.17 points today, or 0.46 percent, at 19,744.42.
On Thursday, the Nikkei rose 204.66 points, or 1.05  percent.


On My Mind;The Missing Report
From Bosnia and Washington now come almost daily official reports on how the  Western powers will learn and profit from the military history of the years when the U.N. tried to keep a nonexistent peace.
But one essential report never comes from Western officials: how we can learn and profit from the political history that brought about the war in the first place.


New York and Beyond, by 3 Veterans
It is simply a quirk of scheduling, a coincidence with no critical point intended.
But the fact remains that three of the more interesting photography shows at the moment are by artists over 80.
Two of the three -- Andreas Feininger, 89, whose photographs of New York and  close-ups of seashells are at the Bonni Benrubi Gallery, and Eve Arnold, 82, whose images of celebrities and of scenes around the world are at the midtown branch of the International Center of Photography -- had distinguished careers as photojournalists.
The third photographer, Kay Simmon Blumberg, 86, who operated a small portrait studio, recorded aspects of New York City from the 1940's to the 70's; her works are at the Janet Borden Gallery.


HERCULES SELLS DIVISION TO FIBERITE HOLDINGS
Hercules Inc. said yesterday that it planned to sell its composite products division to Fiberite Holdings , a Tempe, Ariz., supplier of composite materials, for $135 million.
Hercules, a chemical specialty products manufacturer in Wilmington, Del., said the composite products business had annual sales of about $100 million.


Senate Report Faults F.B.I. and Other Agencies on Idaho Incident
A Senate subcommittee issued a report today harshly criticizing the conduct of several Federal law-enforcement agencies, accusing them of a "chain of mistakes" that led to the deaths of three people in a 1992 confrontation between Government agents and a white separatist in Idaho.
The report by the Senate Judiciary Committee's Subcommittee on Terrorism, Technology and Government Information said that the law-enforcement blunders had weakened the trust between ordinary citizens and Federal police agencies.
Specifically, the panel found fault with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the United States Marshals Service and the office of the United States Attorney in Idaho.


Palestinian Authority and Islamic Group Fail to Reach Accord
After four days of negotiations, the militant group Hamas today refused P.L.O. pleas to participate in next month's Palestinian elections and end attacks on Israelis.
Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, had been under heavy pressure from Israel to restrain Hamas from violence that could jeopardize the peace effort.


Northwestern University stands to cash in on the rags-to-riches success of its football team.
WILL sports fans warm to a wildcat named Willie the way they have to a menagerie of other college and university mascots?
Willie is the symbol of Northwestern University, which is basking in the rags-to-riches success of its long-hapless football team that carries the Wildcats nickname.
After decades of being the doormat of the Big Ten, earning the team only modest revenue from companies that sell licensed collegiate sports merchandise, the Wildcats ended the 1995 season at 10-1.
That won them the conference championship and their first trip to the Rose Bowl since -- well, the last time that Pasadena, Calif., was decorated in Northwestern purple, Harry S.  Truman had upset Thomas E. Dewey less than two months earlier.


Halfway Point Reached in Map of Human Genes
Scientists have reached the halfway point in identifying markers to guide them in finding the location of the approximately 100,000 human genes.
The genetic map was created by researchers at the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research in Cambridge, Mass., and at Genethon in France.


Beryl H. Levy, 87, Lawyer and Teacher
Beryl Harold Levy, a retired lawyer, author and teacher of law and philosophy, died on Nov. 17 at Good Samaritan Hospital in West Islip, L.I.
He was 87 and lived in Babylon, L.I., said his family, who reported his death this  week.
Professor Levy was a scholar in the works of the Supreme Court Justice Benjamin Nathan Cardozo and made the philosophy of law his special field.
He retired as professor emeritus of philosophy from Hofstra University in 1976 but  continued to lecture in the department of philosophy at the New School for Social Research until 1984.


Complex Personality on Philharmonic Podium
PRIEST OF MUSIC The Life of Dimitri Mitropoulos By William R. Trotter Illustrated. 495 pages.
Amadeus Press. $29.95.


AUSTRALIA TO BUY NEW LOCKHEED MARTIN AIRCRAFT
The Australian Government said yesterday it would purchase 12 of the Lockheed Martin Corporation's C-130J transport aircraft, the newest version of the Hercules transport, for $900 million (Australia), or $666 million (United States).
The order includes options to buy 24 more aircraft for the Royal Australian Air Force and eight more for the Royal New Zealand Air Force.
Lockheed Martin has received a total of 39 orders for the plane, which was introduced in October.


Subway Fire Attacker Identified, Official Says
Investigators believe they know who ignited the flammable liquid that set fire to a Brooklyn subway token booth and killed the clerk, but lack the evidence to charge him with that crime, the Brooklyn District Attorney said yesterday.
The District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, declined to identify the person suspected of dropping a lighted match onto the liquid that an accomplice had reportedly squirted into and around the booth.
Nor would he say whether the person was one of three teen-agers already charged with murder in the case, or one of several more suspects still at large.
The booth was set ablaze during the police say was an attempted robbery at the Kingston-Throop station in Bedford-Stuyvesant on Nov. 26.


How Secrecy Corrupts
To the Editor:
Philip Taubman's Dec. 17 Editorial Notebook article on the Central Intelligence Agency is well put.
I would only add: Secrecy corrupts; absolute secrecy corrupts absolutely.


For Friends and Family, an Agonizing Wait for News
This week's snowstorms, which disrupted flights out of New York-area airports during the pre-Christmas crunch, may have saved the lives of some passengers who had planned to board the jet that crashed in Colombia.
The Colombian Consulate said yesterday that 43 people from the New York area  had been scheduled to be on American Airlines Flight 965, which took off from Miami and crashed in the Andean mountains near Cali.
More than 150 people died.


China Isn't Likely to Invade Taiwan;U.S. Hands Off
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal, in "What Beijing Fears" (column, Dec. 12), makes the point that democracy and economic development are not incompatible, and chides Beijing for using the economic development as an excuse for not promoting democracy.
He  cites the examples of Japan, Korea and Taiwan to bolster his case.


Giving New Fangs to an Old Vampire
The title "Dracula: Dead and Loving It" is so perfect that it's almost a good-will ambassador for Mel Brooks's slight but amusing new parody.
Mr.
Brooks  may no longer be at the forefront of silly comedy, but he's still laying on the  genre gags, horrible puns and enema references with dependable good cheer.
So even if this "Dracula" is thin-blooded, its better moments redeem a lot of dead  air.
It's hard to resist a vampire film in which someone says: "Yes, we have Nosferatu. We have Nosferatu today."
Mr.
Brooks has recruited the ever-sporting Leslie Nielsen to play a charmingly dim Dracula and give this film the feeling of an undead "Naked Gun."  Mr.
Nielsen proves equally good at capturing the Count's hauteur and at falling  down a flight of stairs after slipping on bat droppings.
The film, which follows the broad outlines of the familiar Dracula story, also gives its main character  an alter ego in the form of his own shadow.
While the real Dracula tangos debonairly on the dance floor, his shadow has raunchier things in mind.


Barnett Banks Picks McKinney &amp; Silver
Barnett Banks Inc. said yesterday that it had named McKinney &amp; Silver in Raleigh, N.C., as agency of record for all operating divisions including banks,  mortgage banking and consumer finance.
The account, with billings estimated at $15 million to $20 million, had been handled since 1983 by the Martin Agency in  Richmond, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies.
Jerri Franz, a spokeswoman for Barnett in Jacksonville, Fla., said that McKinney &amp; Silver was selected after a four-month review that began with six shops and was narrowed to that agency and one other finalist, Grey Advertising in New York.


While Shepherds Watched


Restaurants
I loved the food at Symphony Cafe, but the room kept me away.
Every time I walked through the door, I felt as if I were entering the headquarters of a starchy corporation.
I'd tug at my skirt and straighten my spine; hardly the right beginning for a relaxing meal.
So it is a pleasure to enter the new Tapika and discover that more than the name has changed.
The room has been completely redecorated.
The effect is riveting, even though it seems to have been done more by camouflage than construction.
The corporate boardroom has disappeared, leaving in its place a casual, comfortable restaurant with warmly painted walls, wooden accents and tongue-in-cheek references to the West.
Weathered wood, cowboy cutouts and picket fences lurk in every corner.
Even the light is filtered through two huge  metal disks that look like something unearthed in an ancient Indian mesa.


Cautiously Pessimistic,' but Investing in Russia
The Communists may be on the march again.
Economic reforms have faltered.
But George Soros has not given up on Russia.
The billionaire financier and self-appointed promoter of capitalism and democracy in former Communist countries is selectively investing in Russia despite all the risks and the ominous headlines.


Bright Lights, Big Holiday
Decorating for the holidays no longer simply means tossing a couple of strings of lights around the nearest rhododendron.
Approaches now include, clockwise from top, outlining the architectural features of a home in lights; erecting a giant snowman at a Christmas tree lot;  shaping garlands of lights into a huge poinsettia; floating a snowman in the middle of a river, and creating a Santa's Village that rivals Caesar's Palace for dazzle.


Turning Back the Clock at Shea: Mets Made Last-Minute Pitch
As a rule, Joe McIlvaine prefers to avoid "the city." But yesterday he could  not avoid it.
He had some appointments in Manhattan and figured he would get everything done in one visit.
Unknown to all but a handful of Mets' officials, the general manager had added a stop to his itinerary: David Cone's East Side apartment.
It wasn't to be a social visit, not at 8 o'clock in the morning.
McIlvaine was visiting Cone in a last-minute effort to snatch him away from the Yankees and the Baltimore Orioles and lure him back to the Mets.


Correction
A letter on Medicare published Wednesday from Eugene H. Chung gave an incorrect figure for the proposed amount of savings in the program that has been part of the Congressional debate.
The figure is $270 billion, not $270 million.


High-Flying Minutemen Seek a Sense of Purpose
An undefeated record and a No. 2 national ranking would seem to make winning  more simple.
At the University of Massachusetts, that much success at the start  of the season complicates the process.
There must be a specific purpose.
"What are we doing?" John Calipari said.
"What are we trying to prove? Why are we hungry?"
Several days ago, the Minutemen were trying to define the hunger their coach  demands as a means to push through the inevitable lulls of a long season.
That is when Tyrone Weeks contributed his idea: Why don't they go undefeated?


Let C.E.O.'s Heal Budget and Themselves
To the Editor:


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Hartford Remembers Better Days;G. Fox Display Recalls a Once-Proud Store and City
On a recent afternoon, Jerry Orfitelli introduced his two granddaughters to an old friend he thought they would never get to meet: the G. Fox &amp; Company department store, a Hartford institution that closed three years ago.
Together they walked into "Winter Wonderland" -- a six-floor smorgasbord of Christmas displays, children's attractions and December kitsch set up in the otherwise vacant building to benefit charities -- and the memories rushed over him.


In Center Field, On Center Stage
Lance Johnson has won the Mets' battle for center field without so much as one swing of the bat.
"Lance is going to be our center fielder, in all probability," Joe McIlvaine, the Mets' general manager, said yesterday at a news conference in Manhattan, where the former Chicago White Sox center fielder signed the two-year, $5.7 million contract he agreed to last week.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Three Children Killed in Fire
Three children who were home by themselves were killed yesterday when a fire  swept through their second-floor apartment shortly after midnight, fire officials said.
Firefighters found the bodies of Onera Willocks, 5; her sister, Desiree Willocks, 4, and their 14-month-old brother, Kamil Sloan, said John Panasec, acting Battalion Chief.
The mother, Shirley Willocks, 26, was burned trying to get into the apartment and was hospitalized.
The fire -- the third in the state  within a week that claimed the lives of children -- may have been caused by an overloaded extension cord running under a carpet, Mr.
Panasec said.


Bank of France Rate Cut
The Bank of France cut its 5- to 10-day securities repurchase rate, the ceiling for French short-term money market rates, by a quarter-point, to 5.85 percent.
The cut was decided at the twice-monthly meeting of the bank's Monetary Policy Council.
The move comes amid signs the economy is slowing and inflation remains tame at between 1.9 percent and 2 percent, in line with the Bank of France's target.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Market Place;Still Drained By Snapple, Quaker Sees A Big Charge
Still bleeding from its acquisition last year of Snapple, the Quaker Oats Company warned Wall Street today that earnings in the quarter ending Dec. 31 would fall short of expectations.
Quaker also announced plans for a $40 million  pretax charge against earnings in the quarter, mostly to cover the cost of getting rid of overcapacity in Snapple's bottling operations.


Problem to Savor: Space for Shaq
Shaquille O'Neal sat in the Orlando Magic locker room, telling a story about  the night he fractured his right thumb.
O'Neal said that while he was driving to the arena that October evening, two black cats crossed the road in front of his  truck.
O'Neal is such a prankster, it was difficult to determine if the story was on the level.
But it sounded good, and who was going to question the newly bulked-up, 332-pound O'Neal?
"Two of them, black cats, crossed right in front of me," said O'Neal, his head shaking in mock terror.
"I should have turned back."


Orange County Adopts Plan To Get Out of Bankruptcy
Orange County supervisors approved a bankruptcy escape plan today that would  pay bondholders and vendors in full while relying on lawsuits to repay schools,  cities and local agencies the $819 million still owed them.
The plan of adjustment was filed in Federal Bankruptcy Court here, one year and 15 days after a $1.64 billion investment loss plunged the affluent county into the nation's largest municipal bankruptcy.


Alexina Duchamp, Dada Artist's Wife And Colleague, 89
Alexina Duchamp, the widow of Marcel Duchamp, died on Wednesday at her home in Villiers-sous-Grez, near Paris.
She was 89.
As a former daughter-in-law of Henri Matisse, the widow of Duchamp and a close friend of John Cage and Jasper Johns, she was in her later years the unquestioned doyenne of the survivors of a great age in art, dance and music.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Arson Closes School Early
A Catholic school closed early for the holidays after several classrooms were severely damaged yesterday in what the authorities said was arson.
The police said someone broke into St.
Joseph's School -- which was unoccupied at the time -- and stole a computer and possibly other equipment before setting a fire  to a storage closet.
"We're not sure if it's someone with a problem against the school," said Detective Joel Frederico.
"We're looking at all avenues."


SmithKline Acquisition
SmithKline Beecham P.L.C. said yesterday that it had acquired Abtei Pharma-Vertriebs G.m.b.H., Germany's largest maker of over-the-counter medicines, for $142 million.
SmithKline, based in Britain, said the acquisition  would make it Germany's leading consumer health care company.
Abtei, a privately owned concern, had 1994 revenues of $77 million from the sale of vitamins, minerals and natural medicines.
(Reuters)


London Journal;Over the Palace, Questions as Heavy as Crowns
For the royal family, today was a typical day-after-the-bombshell.
Queen Elizabeth II was at Sandringham, the northern estate, where her husband, the Duke of Edinburgh, shot clay pigeons.
The Princess of Wales smiled for the cameras when she took her two sons to play tennis in London.
The Prince of Wales was lying low, visiting two hospices near his home at Highgrove in Gloucestershire.
They left it to the spokespeople, spin doctors, unnamed friends and "royal correspondents" of the newspapers, opining portentously in newsprint and on radio and television, to deal with the storm unleashed by the news that the Queen had urged Prince Charles and Diana to bring their failed 14-year marriage  to a quick divorce.


Treasury Prices End Day Mixed
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday, with the long bond modestly higher in lackluster trading.
With the future release of many economic reports on hold because of the partial Government shutdown, many dealers and investors remain focused on the budget talks, with few venturing to take strong positions before the outcome is known.


ResultsPlus
N.B.A.


Motion Explores Oklahoma Terror Link
Defense lawyers for the two men charged in the Oklahoma City bombing asked today for broad access to Government documents to explore the possibility that domestic or foreign "terrorists" were involved.
In a separate motion, Federal prosecutors opposed an earlier defense request  to move the trial against the two, Timothy J. McVeigh and Terry L. Nichols but said they would permit the two Army buddies to be tried in Tulsa, Okla.


Federal Inquiry on California Bank Merger
First Interstate Bancorp said today that it had been queried by the United States Justice Department about how a proposed $10.8 billion takeover by Wells Fargo &amp; Company would affect banking competition in California.
First Interstate, which is fighting Wells Fargo's bid, said the department's  antitrust division had sought information on the takeover's impact on the 37 of  48 California markets in which the two banks have overlapping operations.
Wells  Fargo has proposed selling some of the merged banks' businesses.


Japan Checks Coverup At Plutonium Plant
The Japanese Government, angered by a nuclear operator's cover-up of serious  damage caused by a recent accident, said today that it was stepping up its own investigation of the incident.
The accident occurred on Dec. 8 when tons of explosive sodium coolant leaked  from overheating machinery at the experimental plutonium-powered plant.
No one was injured.


Furor Over Death Penalty Ensnares Bronx Prosecutor
The political tempest that broke out when District Attorney Robert T. Johnson said he would not seek the death penalty in the Bronx shoe store shooting may have subsided, but the issue is likely to arise again -- every time a particularly horrific murder is committed in Mr.
Johnson's jurisdiction.
When Gov.
George E. Pataki signed legislation last March to reinstate the death penalty in New York State, Mr.
Johnson created a small stir by flatly ruling out ever seeking capital punishment in the Bronx.
This week, when he said he would not seek execution for Michael Vernon, the suspect in the shoe-store killings, the stir was louder.


Chief of Crisis-Prone Los Angeles Transit System Is Dismissed
The agency that was formed to create an efficient public transit system complete with subways and light rails is facing new difficulties with the dismissal of its first chief executive.
With Mayor Richard J. Riordan leading the effort, the board of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority voted 9 to 4 on Wednesday to remove Franklin E. White, who previously worked in New York as the state's Transportation Commissioner under Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.


500 Million in Aid Is Pledged for Bosnia
A conference organized by the European Commission and the World Bank pledged  $500 million today toward rebuilding Bosnia, the first installment toward a multibillion-dollar effort to put the wartorn region back on its feet.
The aid was pledged at a two-day meeting attended by representatives of 50 countries and 27 international organizations.
The money is to be used over the next three months to start restructuring projects in areas such as energy and transport.


Police Investigate Threats Against White and Korean Store Owners
At least 10 white or Korean store owners in Harlem have received racially charged threats since the arson attack on Freddy's clothing store that left eight people dead, police officials said yesterday.
Though officials say they do not know whether the threats are dangerous or merely harassing, police officers have been posted outside several stores on West 125th Street, the police said.


Real Estate;Lower interest rates are causing another surge in refinancings of home mortgages.
THE wave of home-mortgage refinancing of three years ago is back, though not  quite as strong.
"There's a real surge," said Ellen Bitton, president of the Manhattan Mortgage Company.
"Normally the week before Christmas is dead, but it hasn't abated at all. We're crazed."


Lawmakers Snub Giuliani Over Police Promotions
Racing an end-of-the-year deadline and ignoring the objections of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, the State Legislature has sent Gov.
George E. Pataki a bill that would require automatic promotions for hundreds of New York City police sergeants and lieutenants.
Mr.
Giuliani contends that, if Mr.
Pataki signs the bill into law, it will eventually increase the city's labor expenses by $5 million a year and will interfere with the police commissioner's ability to manage his department.


Car Bomb Kills 35 at Pakistan-Afghan Border
A car bomb exploded today outside a department store here in northwestern Pakistan, killing at least 32 people and wounding 117, doctors and witnesses said.
Hospital doctors said the death toll could rise because some of the wounded are in critical condition.
Officials said the dead included a daughter and two grandchildren of the provincial Governor, Khurshid Ali Khan, and a daughter and a nephew of a provincial minister.


Esiason Wants to Return And Still Wants to Start
Boomer Esiason, whose mood this season has alternated between bitterness and  sarcasm, said he wouldn't mind returning next year after all.
The reality of the 3-12 Jets, who end their season on Sunday at the Meadowlands against the Saints, is that he could give them their best shot at a  return to respectability next season.


So Very Bertolucci
It is sometimes the mark of a great film maker that when he is good, no one is better; when he is bad, he is extravagantly wrongheaded.
From the brilliant and lyrical epic "1900" to the inadvertently loony "Luna," Bernardo Bertolucci has established himself as one of the primary directors of the day.
With their sumptuous poetic images and ambitious historical backdrops, ranging from Fascist Italy in "The Conformist" to imperial China in "The Last Emperor," his films deserve to be seen together and in beautiful restored prints, as they will be in "Going for Baroque: The Bernardo Bertolucci Retrospective," beginning today at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center.
"Baroque" is not the best word to describe work that combines a roomy historical sweep with Marxist sympathies and tense, forbidden sexual pairings.
His second film, "Before the Revolution" (1964), which will be shown this weekend, is a naturalistic black-and-white work strongly influenced by Pier Paolo Pasolini, with whom Mr.
Bertolucci began as an assistant director.
Yet the story of a young man who is tortured by his status as a son of the bourgeoisie and who has an affair with his beautiful young aunt sounds Mr.
Bertolucci's constant themes.
And it was made when he was a film baby of 24.


U.S. Border Agent Accused in Sexual Assault on an Illegal Alien
A United States Border Patrol agent was arrested here on Wednesday after an undocumented El Salvadoran immigrant said the agent sexually assaulted her near  the border.
It was the latest in a series of accusations leveled against the patrol.


Doctor Wants Morning Marathon
Like the course itself, the world governing body for track and field appears  to be making twists and turns in retreating from its decision to schedule the Olympic men's marathon in Atlanta's evening heat and humidity next August.
Track and field's chief medical officer said in an interview yesterday that he has recommended the men's marathon be run at 7 or 7:30 in the morning on Aug. 4, as opposed to the scheduled time of 6:30 P.M., when the average temperature in Atlanta is 80 degrees and the average humidity is 65 percent.


Devils' Road Woes Continue, But It Wasn't a Total Loss
The Devils, lambs of late on the road, found a way for two periods tonight to bring some of their home tenacity with them.
Then they reverted to form, letting the Tampa Bay Lightning take over the aggressor's role and settling for a 2-2 stalemate before 18,878 at the Thunderdome.


Dame Ruth Nita Barrow, Ex-Barbados Governor General, 79
Dame Ruth Nita Barrow, the first woman to serve as Governor General of Barbados, died on Tuesday night after a stroke, officials said on Wednesday.
She was 79.
Dame Nita was the older sister of the late Prime Minister Errol Barrow, who led Barbados to independence from Britain in 1966.
In 1990 she was appointed Governor General, serving as the representative of Queen Elizabeth II.


Inside Art
Partners Half a World Apart


Alcoa Electronic Says That Cuts at Intel Led to Layoffs
Alcoa Electronic Packaging Inc. said today that it was permanently laying off half of its 1,200 workers and might lay off the remaining 600 because the Intel  Corporation, its main customer, had stopped placing orders for computer chip covers.
Analysts said Intel stopped its orders because Alcoa was not making the right products, analysts said.
Erik Jansen, an analyst at Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons, said Alcoa was not prepared to meet Intel's specifications for its Pentium and Pentium Pro chips.


Court Gives Female Officers Back Pay in Bias Suit
In a 19-year-old case originally brought by 124 female police officers in New York City, New York State's highest court ruled 4 to 3 yesterday that discrimination victims who work for public agencies have the same right to retroactive pay as workers for private companies.
In most discrimination cases involving government employees, the remedy -- called making the victims "whole" -- usually involves awarding seniority or promotions retroactively.
That was done in this case.
But the officers have yet  to collect the difference between what they were paid and what they should have  received in the higher-ranking jobs.


Fists Nearly Fly Between Line Coach And a Giant
There are times when a coach and a player get into an argument and normally it is no big deal.
But when center Brian Williams and offensive line coach Pete  Mangurian got into a heated argument that almost came to blows at the Giants' final practice this morning, it was more than the usual flare-up.


Corrections
An article yesterday about soldiers around the country and their views about  white supremacists in the ranks misstated the Army assignment of Pvt.
James N. Burmeister 2d, who is charged in the killing of a black couple in Fayetteville,  N.C.
He is a member of the 82d Airborne Division, not the Special Forces, at Fort Bragg, N.C.


Corrections
An editorial yesterday about a police union bill mistakenly attributed it to  the New York Patrolmen's Benevolent Association.
The bill was actually submitted by the Sergeants Benevolent Association and the Lieutenants Benevolent Association.


English Pastoral Style And Sugarplum Fairies
Anglophilia and seasonal cheer are the order of the week at the New York Philharmonic, where Andrew Davis is offering glimpses of the English pastoral symphonic style, by way of Delius and Vaughan Williams, as well as visions of sugarplum fairies and other apparitions from Tchaikovsky's "Nutcracker." The program, heard on Wednesday evening, is to be repeated this morning at 11 at Avery Fisher Hall.
English neo-Romanticism has always been an acquired taste for American listeners, and even though the increasingly plentiful recordings suggest that this repertory bears more serious investigation, many listeners still think of it as uncommonly bland.


Kmart Credit Rating Is Cut by Moody's
Moody's Investors Service cut the Kmart Corporation's credit rating yesterday to the lowest investment grade because of the weak fourth-quarter retail market.
About $4.3 billion of Kmart debt is affected.
Despite the downgrade, Kmart stock was up 27 percent yesterday, gaining $1.625 to close at $7.625 in trading of almost 15.5 million shares on the New York Stock Exchange.


Ohio Judge Pleads Guilty to Drug Dealing
A county judge who favored legalizing drugs yet said that only an idiot would use them has pleaded guilty to Federal charges of distributing cocaine.
The judge, Michael Gallagher, 39, faces as many as 20 years in prison, a maximum $1 million in fines and the possible loss of his law license.
He was released on bond after his plea on Tuesday and was ordered to report to a substance-abuse program.


Train Kills Driver at L.I.R.R. Crossing
A 31-year-old insurance agent was killed yesterday morning when his Jeep was  hit by a train after he drove around a closed Long Island Rail Road crossing gate in Blue Point, L.I., the Suffolk County police said.
His 6-month-old daughter, who was strapped in a safety seat, was unharmed.
"I would call it a miracle that the child was not injured," Detective Sgt.
George Horvath said.


2 Short Fuses Pressing Their Luck
There's something comforting about watching the Odd Couple turn into the Old  Couple.
Jack Lemmon and Walter Matthau may no longer be sharing living quarters, but in the 1993 movie "Grumpy Old Men" and its zanier sequel, which opens today, these cantankerous next-door neighbors in Wabasha, Minn., know exactly how to drive each other crazy.
And they have all the time and energy in the world to do it.
If John Gustafson (Mr. Lemmon) and Max Goldman (Mr. Matthau) are thin-skinned grouches in their sagging flesh, their success with women is nothing short of fantastic.
Have any two older men of modest means been luckier in love?


AMERICAN ENTERPRISES BIDS FOR SPRECKELS UNIT
American Enterprises L.L.C. has offered to buy Spreckels Industries for $11 a share plus the proceeds from a sale of Spreckels's sugar operations.
American Enterprises, a Richmond-based investment firm, made its offer in a letter to Spreckels on Tuesday.
Spreckels is a sugar processor that sells its products to  grocery store chains and food processors.
The company also designs and makes industrial equipment.
The company said in November that it would sell its Spreckels Sugar unit and focus on the more profitable industrial goods business.
A Spreckels spokeswoman said the company would not comment on American's proposal.


4 Divas Have Lots Of Fun Telling Off Mr. Wrong
Everyone has heard that Mr.
Right is dead.
The novelist Rona Jaffe announced  his demise 30 years ago in one of her catchier book titles, and since then the women's movement has driven several boxes of nails into his coffin.
But is he really done for?
Despite themselves, the four black women whose turbulent love lives are explored with a salty good humor in "Waiting to Exhale" all subscribe to the myth of a knight in shining armor.
By the end of the film, adapted by Terry McMillan (with Ronald Bass) from her best-selling novel, one of the four actually finds her Prince Charming, and another has established a long-distance correspondence with someone who shows distinct Mr.
Right potential.


AVID STOCK FALLS ON EARNINGS FORECAST
The stock of Avid Technology Inc., which makes digital video and audio editing systems, plunged 36 percent yesterday, a day after the company said it expected disappointing fourth-quarter results.
The stock fell $10.625, to $19, on Nasdaq, where it was the most active issue, with almost 10.8 million shares traded.
Avid, based in Tewksbury, Mass., said on Wednesday that it expected profits for the quarter ending Dec. 31 to be lower than in the prior quarter.
It forecast unchanged or lower revenues, but higher operating expenses.
In the third quarter, Avid had profits of $8.75 million on revenues of $114 million, with operating expenses of $445 million.


Settlements Lift Owens-Illinois
The shares of Owens-Illinois Inc. rose 8 percent today after the company said it would receive $400 million from its insurers to settle disputes over asbestos-related claims.
Shares rose $1.25 today to close at $14 on the New York Stock Exchange.


Preaching but Not Practicing?;Austerity at Dial Does Not Always Reach the Top
John W. Teets, chairman and chief executive of the Dial Corporation, has made a name as a cost-cutter so tough that labor-union workers hanged him in effigy during his decade-long overhaul of the conglomerate.
From 1983, when he won money-saving concessions from transit-union workers after a seven-week strike at the company's Greyhound line, through three months  ago, when he moved to close six consumer-products plants and eliminate 700 jobs, Mr.
Teets has built a reputation as a man with an iron grip on company costs.
He has even set up an "asset protection program" to make sure that expenses are not padded by improper employee use of company resources.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Republicans Carping At Communications Bill Disgruntled House Republicans were taking pot shots at deals negotiated by their own leadership to overhaul the nation's communications laws just a day after House and Senate negotiators said they had reached agreement on a bill.


Home Video
Always eager to ride coattails, home video established a connection this week with "Nixon," the Oliver Stone film that opened on Wednesday.
If "Nixon" is Mr.
Stone's take on the man, "The Real Nixon," a set of three videos to be released  on Tuesday by Central Park Media, is a carefully orchestrated but oddly affecting effort by the former President to come across as a regular fellow.
The tapes are drawn from 38 hours of conversation between Richard M. Nixon and Frank Gannon, an author and producer who spent four years with Nixon as a researcher and writer immediately after the President's resignation in 1974.
"I'm a loyalist, but not a blind one," Mr.
Gannon said recently.


Knicks Wondering Why All the Fuss About Magic
As are many of his players, Don Nelson is downplaying the importance of the game.
General Manager Ernie Grunfeld promises not to trade the frontline if the Knicks lose.
Shaquille O'Neal's team against Patrick Ewing's may make for good cable ratings, but the Knicks respectfully request that you not make too much of their matchup tonight with the Orlando Magic.


The Royal Endgame
Queen Elizabeth II, lacking some of the powers afforded earlier English monarchs, has settled for divorce to rid the House of Windsor of the bedeviling  marriage of the Prince and Princess of Wales.
There was a time when the English sovereign dealt more decisively with royals who made trouble or outlived their welcome.
The most common punishments since Henry VIII's day were execution (two of Henry's wives and Mary, Queen of Scots), incarceration (George I's wife, for adultery), and exile (Edward VIII, the Duke  of Windsor).


House Sends Senate an Overhaul of the Welfare System
Republicans overcame their own differences today and finally won House approval for a welfare bill that would shift much of the responsibility for poor people from the Federal Government to the states.
But President Clinton said explicitly for the first time that he would veto it.


Rains in Brazil and Argentina Send Soybean Prices Plunging
Soybean futures prices plunged yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade as rains aided parched crops in Brazil and Argentina, relieving drought conditions  that threatened to severely hamper world supply.
Analysts cautioned, however, that predicted rainfall of up to 1.5 inches would provide only temporary relief to the region, which has seen virtually no rain in two months and stifling hot temperatures.


Uncovered Short Sales At Highs on 2 Exchanges
Short interest rose to record levels in the most recent period on both the New York Stock Exchange and the American Stock Exchange, the exchanges reported  yesterday.
The New York exchange posted a rise of 2.9 percent for trades in the month ended Dec. 12 and settled Dec. 15.
On the American exchange, short interest advanced 4.5 percent in the same period.


Harlem Fire Survivor Faced Down Gunman
Face-to-face with an enraged gunman in those first terror-filled moments inside Freddy's clothing store, Patrick Glynn felt the gunshots draw near, dropped to the floor and played dead.
It would not be the last time on Dec. 8 that Mr.
Glynn, a construction worker, desperately struggled to survive the murderous rampage of Roland J. Smith Jr.


In America;A Sweatshop Victory
Sometimes there is good news.
The Gap, under strong pressure from consumers and worker rights activists, has agreed to allow independent observers, including human rights officials, to monitor working conditions in the factories in Central America in which Gap clothing is made.
If carried out in good faith, the agreement would curb many of the abuses of  the young and mostly female workers who put in long hours at very low pay in the so-called maquiladora factories.
These are independently owned sweatshop operations that have been set up in free-trade zones to produce goods for large  retailers in the United States and elsewhere.


18 Sought in 3 Nations; Linked to Doomsday Sect
At least 18 people linked to a doomsday sect at the center of a mysterious mass murder-suicide in Switzerland and Canada last year are missing, the police  in Geneva said today.
Police in Switzerland, France and Canada are looking for them, so far without success, the Geneva police spokesman, Alexandre Baeriswyl, said.
In October 1994, the bodies of 53 members of the Order of the Solar Temple were found inside burned dwellings in Switzerland and Quebec.
The sect followers variously  had been drugged, shot and stabbed.


Metro Digest
NEW YORK CITY


Appeals Court Says Rules For Primary Are Legal
In a ruling that benefits Senator Bob Dole's front-running candidacy for the  Presidential nomination, a Federal appeals court said today that the State Republican Party's complex and arduous rules for electing Presidential delegates were constitutional.
The decision by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit reversed two lower court rulings that would have made it substantially easier for Republican Presidential candidates to get their delegates on the ballot in 15 Congressional districts, most of them in New York City.


Bosnia Foes Are Beginning To Pull Back
The warring factions in Bosnia have begun withdrawing from confrontation lines as some roads have already been cleared of mines, the commander of American forces here said today.
The commander, Maj.
Gen.
William L. Nash, said that "they not only pledged their support" for the peace agreement, "but they reported a variety of measures they were taking such as mine clearing and starting to pull back forces well ahead of any deadlines." He spoke at his first news conference since arriving in Bosnia two day ago.


Embattled Guerrilla Group in Peru Shifts Tactics Against Government
The Marxist revolutionaries who were arrested last month as they planned what officials describe as an attack on the Peruvian Congress belong to a little-known guerrilla group that was believed to have been defeated two years ago, after the police captured its top commanders.
But the detention on Nov. 30 of 23 people, including a New York woman, who are accused of being members of the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement has shown that the group is still functioning and capable of considerable violence.


High-Speed Train Collision Near Cairo Leaves at Least 75 Dead
A commuter train traveling at high speed rammed a passenger train in early morning fog near Cairo today, killing at least 75 people in Egypt's worst rail accident in more than 15 years.
Witnesses in the town of El Badrashein, 17 miles south of Cairo, said an early-morning train taking about 120 workers south to the town of Beni Suef collided into the rear of another train traveling to Asyut city.


Turkey's Islamic Party Knocks on Door in Sunday Vote
For months now, Turkey has used the threat of rising Islamic fundamentalism at home to warn Western allies of the consequences of leaving this Muslim country out in the cold.
Now, with national elections scheduled for Sunday, that threat is knocking at the door of this bastion of secularism, as the staunchly Islamic Welfare Party stands poised to enter Parliament as a major player.


Stocks Rise, Broad Indexes Eclipsing Dow
Stocks closed sharply higher yesterday on hopes that new talks planned between the White House and Congressional leaders that are scheduled for today will end the dispute about balancing the Federal budget in seven years.
The Dow Jones industrial average climbed 37.21 points to close at 5,096.53, nearly recovering a 50-point loss in the previous session.
In the broader market, advancing issues led decliners, 1,417 to 951, on Big Board volume of 419.9 million shares.


U.N. Panel Says Iraq May Still Be Trying to Produce Missiles
The Government of President Saddam Hussein may be continuing to try to produce a long-range missile system with the help of prohibited imports, a United Nations commission on Iraqi disarmament told the Security Council today.
Rolf Ekeus, the commission's chairman, showed the Council and reporters a muddied gyroscope used to guide missiles that divers had recently retrieved from the Tigris Canal in Baghdad on the instructions of his inspectors.
The gyrscopes had apparently been disposed of in the canal to avoid detection.


Hershey Settles Suit Vs. 2 Pasta Importers
HERSHEY, Pa., Dec. 21
The Hershey Foods Corporation said today that it had agreed to settle a lawsuit it brought against two importers of Turkish pasta, accusing them of selling pasta that did not contain 100 percent durum wheat.


Tethered to Daughter, 15, a Mother Pays
Deborah Harter has been tethered to her 15-year-old daughter for two weeks, following the girl to school and around the house, everywhere she goes except the bathroom.
But while the tether, ordered by a court as an alternative to incarceration,  has kept the teen-ager out of trouble during the holiday season, some state and  school officials have asked the court to find Mrs.
Harter in contempt, charging  she violated the judge's order by smoking in the child's presence.
And now Mrs.
Harter, of the Charleston suburb of Summerville, faces the possibility of imprisonment.


Ghosts of Christmas Past At the City's Historic Houses
IF you want to get away from the glitter, the pressure and the noise of Christmas, you might visit New York City's historic mansions during the holidays.
They are seldom crowded; the Van Cortlandt House, set in the romantic, wintry landscape of Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx, has only about half a dozen visitors a weekend.
The Merchant's House Museum, a beautifully restored late Federal house, is tucked away nearly out of sight, next to a vacant lot on East  Fourth Street in Greenwich Village.
These and several other great houses are oases of calm in a city frenzied with Christmas revels.
Indeed, they are among the secret treasures of New York.
But they are simply decorated, and there will  be no lavish parties inside.
For -- not to be a Scrooge -- in old New York, there were few Christmas Day celebrations as we now know them.
The story of how Christmas came to New York is part of the social history of  the city itself, one that is reflected in a chronological tour of its historic houses.
From the Morris-Jumel Mansion in Washington Heights to the Abigail Adams Smith House on the Upper East Side to Historic Richmond Town on Staten Island, these houses represent the city's various eras, including Colonial New York and  the Victorian Age.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Murder Trial to Be in Trenton
Reversing his own ruling, the judge who will preside over the trial of a man  accused of killing 7-year-old Megan Kanka decided yesterday that the case could  be heard in Trenton, as long as the jurors live elsewhere.


Fokker Reaches Accord With Labor Unions
The troubled Dutch plane maker Fokker N.V. reached an agreement yesterday with labor unions to cut its wage costs by 10 percent by 1997.
The agreement is  part of a series of measures aimed at securing Fokker's future, in combination with a pending cash injection by its parent company, Daimler-Benz Aerospace, and its other large shareholder, the Dutch Government.
A Fokker spokesman said a wage deal would not lead to the full 10 percent savings next year because it had to pay off a previously agreed-on early retirement program.
The deal with its four main labor unions will cut wage costs by reducing overtime bonuses and introducing more flexible working hours.
The plane maker will also reduce the number of temporary employees.
(Reuters)


Joyner Traded for Roberts; Gordon Signs With Red Sox
Neither Wally Joyner, who averaged over .300 for the last three seasons with  the Royals, nor Tom Gordon, who averaged almost 12 victories for them in that span, will be returning to Kansas City for the 1996 season.
That scenario became a wrap yesterday when the Royals traded Joyner, a first baseman, to the San Diego Padres and Gordon, a 28-year-old right-hander, signed as a free agent with the Boston Red Sox.
In return for the 33-year-old Joyner, the Royals obtained infielder-outfielder Bip Roberts.
More important, they opened a spot at first base for two younger players.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Free Coffee or Tea for Drivers
At least 13 people died on New Jersey roads in 1993 because a driver fell asleep, the State Police said yesterday.
To battle driver fatigue and inebriation on Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve, the New Jersey Turnpike Authority will continue a tradition of serving free coffee, tea or milk to motorists at the 11 rest stops along the 148-mile highway, from 9 P.M. to 7 A.M.


Allianz Reports Gains
Allianz A. G. Holding said yesterday that its premium income for the first nine months of the year rose 5 percent, to 52.2 billion marks (about $36 million), from 49.7 billion marks a year earlier.
Allianz said the nine-month increase stemmed from the first-time consolidations of new acquisitions.
(Dow  Jones)


Bids for New Frequencies
Bids on licenses for space on the broadcast spectrum for mobile personal-communications services reached $1.2 billion as the fourth round of bidding ended, the Federal Communications Commission said today.
Further auctioning of frequencies will be held in January, the F.C.C. said.
The bidding  was largely limited to small businesses and entrepreneurs for the start-up of services like hand-held devices for the two-way transmission of voice and data.
Total bidding for telecommunications rights has netted the Federal Treasury more than $10 billion.


China Isn't Likely to Invade Taiwan
To the Editor:
"China Circles the Wagons" (news analysis, Dec. 15) states that Chinese military commanders have begun pressing for military action against Taiwan to reunite the island with the Chinese mainland.


Let C.E.O.'s Heal Budget and Themselves;Where Are Women?
To the Editor:
What is striking about the plea for a balanced budget from business leaders is that not one appears to be a woman.
Might this mean our power structure is still dominated by males?


Dollar Ebbs vs. Mark and Yen; Traders Await Budget Progress
As Washington continued to dither over the Federal budget yesterday, the dollar continued to waver in foreign-exchange markets before finishing lower against other leading currencies.
The dollar started the day stronger as hopes rose for a resumption of stalled negotiations between President Clinton and Congressional Republicans over a plan to balance the budget in seven years.


Sports of The Times;Pitino: Coach in Need of a Lesson
RICK PITINO'S voice cut through the speaker phone.
This was a conference call for the Chemical Bank Holiday Festival next week at Madison Square Garden, with  20 members of the news media listening.
Pitino's Kentucky team will play Rider in the first game of the Festival on Wednesday, with Iona playing St.
John's in the nightcap.


NEWS SUMMARY
International
A3-19


Quaker State In Settlement
The Quaker State Corporation said today that it had agreed to pay $4.4 million to settle a lawsuit that it was part of an oil industry price-fixing conspiracy.
Quaker State, a producer of motor oil and lubricants based in Irving, said it was one of three companies that were the targets of a 1994 class-action suit brought by producers of Penn Grade crude, an oil that yields products ranging from engine lubricants to food additives.


Trenton Senate Votes Support for Made-to-Order Schools
Parents and teachers who are unhappy with public education in New Jersey will soon be able to get tax dollars to set up and run their own schools.
A bill the State Senate approved 25-10 today would make New Jersey the 20th state to allow state-chartered schools that are publicly financed but privately operated.
In the last five years, 246 charter schools have opened around the country: in shopping centers in California, where 100 schools have been authorized; in a former grocery store in Castle Rock, Colo., and in a low-income housing project in Minneapolis.
The New Jersey legislation would greatly increase the number of charter arrangements, authorizing 135 schools of  up to 500 students each.


South Korea Indicts 2 Former Presidents in Staging of 1979 Coup
The South Korean Government indicted two former Presidents today in connection with the military coup in 1979 that helped carry them into power.
The indictments of the two Presidents, Roh Tae Woo, whose trial on bribery charges began separately on Monday, and Chun Doo Hwan, a former general who was hospitalized today after 18 days on a hunger strike, are likely to lead to lengthy prison sentences.
In theory, they could face the death penalty for leading the coup, although such punishment is unlikely.


Linda Sutter, 54; Wrote 'Brenda Starr'
Linda Sutter, a former journalist who developed the story line of the syndicated cartoon strip "Brenda Starr" in the early 1980's, died on Monday at her home in Cambridge, Mass.
She was 54.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


Maine Suspends Coach
SHAWN WALSH, who coached Maine's hockey team to a national championship in 1993, was suspended yesterday by the university for one year for violating National Collegiate Athletic Association rules.
Walsh's suspension without pay was one of several actions announced after the university completed its 18-month investigation of Maine's athletic programs.
(AP)


Partial List of Passengers and Crew
Following is a partial list of those aboard the jet that crashed in Colombia.
Reported survivors have an asterix with their names.
COCKPIT CREW TAFURI, Nicholas, 57, Marco Island, Fla., the captain WILLIAMS, Don, 39, New Smyrna Beach, Fla., the first officer


In Snowfall, Old Yardstick Still Works
HOW do we know they're right when they say that the storm dumped seven and a  half inches of snow on Central Park this week?
Because Ignatius Camporeale tramped out to the middle of the park with a 12-inch wooden ruler and measured it, that's how.
In a world that has handed over its fate to computers and assorted microchipped gizmos, Mr.
Camporeale is a reassuring low-tech presence.


In Crackdown on Health Care Fraud, U.S. Focuses on Training Hospitals and Clinics
As health care costs continue to grow, the Federal Government has begun investigating some of the nation's teaching hospitals and medical school clinics, looking closely at whether they have been inflating their incomes through false Medicare billing.
The focus on teaching hospitals and clinics, the cornerstones of American medical education, is the latest development in a crackdown on health care fraud and billing abuses in general that has been intensifying, Federal officials say.


Becker to Skip Games
The Olympic doubles tennis champion BORIS BECKER said yesterday that he won't defend his title in Atlanta next year.
"I will definitely not play at the Olympic Games in Atlanta, neither in singles nor doubles," Becker said.
"I have  personal reasons."
Becker, who turns 28 today, won the Olympic doubles championship at the 1992 Barcelona Games, paired with his fellow German MICHAEL STICH.
"With Wimbledon and the U.S. Open, I would be traveling eight weeks in a row," Becker said of the Olympics.
"I can't do that."
(AP)


Georgia Official Told to Defend Canceling Job Offer to Lesbian
A Federal appeals court panel has ordered the Attorney General of Georgia to  defend his withdrawal of a job offer to a lesbian who participated in a religious "commitment" ceremony with her female partner.
The ruling late Wednesday, by a three-judge panel of the United States Court  of Appeals for the 11th Circuit, ordered the Attorney General, Michael J. Bowers, to show why the withdrawal was not a violation of the woman's constitutional rights.


100 Civilians Said to Die In Chechen Battle
Rebel fighters pulled out of Gudermes, Chechnya's second biggest town, today  after a weeklong battle with Russian troops that the town's mayor said had killed more than 100 civilians.
Aslan Maskhadov, overall commander of the Chechen separatist rebels, said he  had ordered his fighters to withdraw "to avoid further victims among the two sides and among peaceful civilians."


Washington Is in No Rush To End Budget Standoff
Across the country, Government offices are closed, and 260,000 Federal employees are off work.
With just four days until Christmas, millions of veterans and welfare mothers may not get their January checks on time.
The Senate and House could be in session, at least officially, during the week between Christmas and New Year.
This last happened in 1979, when Americans  were being held hostage in Iran.
The time before that was in 1963, after the assassination of John F. Kennedy.


Abroad at Home;Are There No Workhouses?
The conflict between Congressional Republicans and President Clinton is billed as one over balancing the Federal budget.
But the issue that has shut much of the Government for a week is much larger.
What is at stake is the kind of society we want to be.
Will poor people, in America as in all of Western Europe, be assured of at least basic medical care?
Or will they be left to the whims of local officials,  and to begging?
That is one question the budget fight will decide, and in doing  so define the country we are.


No Obvious Cause Seen in J.F.K. Mishap
Their patience was tested, but air travelers were able to leave the New York  area yesterday as airlines returned to normal operations after two days of maddening delays caused by snow and wind.
Some lines at check-in counters were unusually long.
Continental Airlines reported two-hour delays yesterday at Newark International Airport, where it is  the major carrier, as it tried to accommodate passengers whose travel plans were upset Tuesday and Wednesday.


French Premier Pledges to Negotiate With Unions to End Unrest
Trying to end the worst labor unrest in France in a decade, Prime Minister Alain Juppe today promised "dialogue, consultation and negotiation" with labor unions after nearly a month of confrontations.
Meeting labor union and business leaders in his office for a "social summit"  that went on into the evening, Mr.
Juppe outlined plans to increase economic growth and asked union and business leaders to agree on ways of taking on 250,000 entry-level workers next year to reduce an unemployment rate of 11.5 percent.


Cards Sale May Be Imminent
Anheuser-Busch has apparently found a buyer for the St.
Louis Cardinals and is expected to announce the deal by Friday.
A person with knowledge of the sale said the brewery would sell the team to a group of investors led by William DeWitt, a Cincinnati businessman who has owned interests in the Baltimore Orioles, Texas Rangers and other teams.
Andrew Baur,  chairman of Southwest Bank in St.
Louis, and other St.
Louis investors are reportedly in the group as well.


Daimler-Benz Spinoff
Daimler-Benz Aerospace A. G. said yesterday that it had split off its service unit into a joint venture with Industrieverwaltungsgesellschaft A. G. as part of its efforts to concentrate on its main businesses.
IVG, a Bonn-based real estate and service company, will take a 45 percent stake in the new joint venture company.
No price was disclosed for the stake.
DASA, the aerospace unit of Daimler-Benz A. G., will maintain a 45 percent stake in the unit, and Bayerische Vereinsbank A. G. will hold the remaining 10 percent.
(Bloomberg Business News)


New Jersey Daily Briefing;School Bill Passes the Senate
The Senate approved a bill yesterday in a 25-10 vote that would make New Jersey the 20th state to allow state-chartered schools that are publicly financed but privately operated.


ABB Gets Oil Contract
Asea Brown Boveri said today that it had signed a contract worth about $100 million with Esso Norway, an Exxon unit, to develop the Balder oilfield in the North Sea.
ABB said the contract was for a subsea oil production system.
The oilfield, 118 miles off Norway's coast, is scheduled for production in early 1997.


Ex-Teacher Accused In Another Sex Case
A former New York City public school teacher, who was dismissed four years ago after being accused of sexually assaulting a young boy, was charged yesterday with a similar offense, investigators said.
When the Board of Education dismissed him in 1991, the former special education teacher, Willie McCain, 49, was also dismissed as a supervisor in an after-school program operated by the Police Athletic League.
It was the same program -- at the same Staten Island elementary school -- that rehired him last  month, according to the schools' Special Commissioner of Investigation, Edward F. Stancik, who announced the charges.


Anthony Vasconcellos, 36, Museum Chief
Anthony Vasconcellos, managing director of the Institute for Contemporary Art, P.S. 1 Museum, in Long Island City, Queens, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 36.
He died of AIDS, said his companion, Lucio Seixas.


Telefonica Sells Stake
Telefonica de Espana S. A. has sold its 5.84 percent stake in AT&amp;T Network Systems International back to AT&amp;T International for 6.541 billion pesetas ($53.57 million).
Telefonica said yesterday that it would book a profit of 3.6 billion pesetas on the sale, which was in keeping with European Union guidelines to national phone companies to sell stakes in equipment providers and concentrate on providing telecommunications services.
ATT-NSI is a Netherlands-based unit of the AT&amp;T Corporation.
(Bloomberg Business News)


WESTINGHOUSE TO SELL KNOLL GROUP TO PARE DEBT
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation took a step yesterday toward paring down the debt it incurred when it bought CBS Inc. by agreeing to sell the Knoll  Group, a maker of office furniture, for $565 million in cash.
Knoll is being sold to Warburg Pincus Ventures L.P., an affiliate of E. M. Warburg, Pincus &amp; Company, a New York-based financial services organization.
The sale is expected  to be completed in the first quarter of 1996.
Westinghouse expects the sale of the two businesses to raise more than $3.2 billion to help pay for the $5.4 billion acquisition of CBS, which it completed on Nov. 24.
Shares of Westinghouse rose 50 cents yesterday, to $16.375, on the New York Stock Exchange.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball


25 and Under
The lights are low, the synthesized pop is pounding and the bar crowd is good-looking.
A hostess, trying to keep up with the traffic, disappears under an avalanche of winter coats and totters off to the coat room.
Tables built for two hold four, while tables for four seat five or six.
Bar Anise, just about a month old, is clearly popular.
But this disparate crowd is not easy to please.
The sedate group that has just descended on the bar after shopping at Bloomingdale's knows the reputation  of the chef and owner, Matthew Kenney, from his more expensive restaurant, Matthew's, across East 61st Street.
But will these patrons be willing to endure  the packed bar and dining room, the throbbing music and the policy of not accepting reservations?
Conversely, will the weather-beaten men with pony tails, accompanied by women half their age, return to Bar Anise once the glare of the "see and be seen" spotlight disappears?


UAL SAYS EARNINGS ESTIMATES WERE TOO HIGH
The UAL Corporation confirmed yesterday what it had apparently told some analysts earlier: Wall Street's expectations for fourth-quarter earnings were too high.
Shares of the company, the parent of United Airlines, had been lower most of the day on word that analysts had turned sour on the stock.
The stock closed down $17.875 a share, or 9 percent, at $180.125, on the New York Stock Exchange.
A statement released by UAL indicated that it expected fourth-quarter earnings to be slightly below consensus analyst estimates of $3.17 a share.
The company cited inclement weather and a weaker yen.


Federal Deficit Widened 3.2% Last Month
The Federal deficit in November was 3.2 percent higher than the corresponding month a year ago, but through the first two months of the fiscal year it was 10.8 percent lower than a year earlier.
The Treasury Department said today that spending in November exceeded revenues by $38.5 billion, compared with $37.2 billion in November 1994.


TV Talk Shows Aren't Hurting Anybody
To the Editor:
Re "Falling Ratings Threaten All Except Top Talk Shows" (news article, Dec. 20): Sure, most daytime television talk shows are disgusting.
But unless you believe people are just waiting to copy the exploits of the feeble-minded, it is difficult to see how these shows hurt anyone.
They are little more than broadcast versions of carnival sideshows with some true crime thrown in.


New York's Child-Welfare Caseloads Threaten More Tragedies
To the Editor:
Amid the contrition, chest-thumping and anguish concerning the death of Elisa Izquierdo, some issues are being glossed over.
Without adequate staffing of child welfare agencies, more children will be in danger of the same fate.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Dec. 1 about the closing of the municipal finance business at Lazard Freres &amp; Company misstated an aspect of a Securities  and Exchange Commission investigation of a $1.8 billion New Jersey Turnpike bond offering.
Richard P. Poirier Jr., then a partner at Lazard Freres -- who was instrumental in getting the firm a role in the bond offering -- was not the subject of an enforcement action by the S.E.C.


Tom Sawyer as Gable
Aw, shucks!
Was there ever a cuter, more adorable Tom Sawyer than Jonathan Taylor Thomas's glossy portrayal in the latest Disney movie, "Tom and Huck"?
With his post-Beatles haircut and proto-grunge duds, Mr.
Thomas's Tom is the very model of an MTV-wise youngster transported back to Hannibal, Mo., in the 1840's.
Mr.
Thomas doesn't simply mug, roll his eyes and strike magazine-ready poses  with the bravado of a child star who has studied his best camera angles.
He flirts shamelessly with the camera and with everyone in sight, lowering his gaze, casting sidelong glances and flashing coy, enigmatic smiles.
When he gives his sweetheart, spunky Becky Thatcher (Rachael Leigh Cook), her first kiss, the  camera muscles in for a close-up.
A moment later, when he tells her she is "not  the first" girl he has had a crush on, she smacks him.
He responds with the sly, sheepish what-did-I-do expression of a baby Clark Gable.


Lewis A. Lapham, 86, Executive In Shipping and Banking Concerns
Lewis A. Lapham, who held senior management posts in both the shipping and the banking industries, died on Wednesday at his home in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 86.
Mr.
Lapham died after a brief illness, said a son, Lewis H. Lapham, the editor of Harper's magazine.


Art in Review


Corrections
A brief report by The Associated Press in some editions on Tuesday, about charges of negligence against a freighter captain who the Coast Guard said was intoxicated as he sailed into New York Harbor, misstated the connection of the ship to the General Steamship Corporation of Stamford, Conn.
According to the Coast Guard, General Steamship is the American agent for the vessel, not the owner; the ship is owned by Big Lift Shipping of Hamburg, Germany.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in Manhattan that are to close soon:
Closing This Weekend


No Break in Impasse Over Balanced Budget
Unable to reach agreement on reopening the Government or virtually anything else, the White House and Congressional Republicans nevertheless pushed on today and started examining a sheaf of proposals to balance the Federal budget by 2002.
After 32 days in which the bargainers had traded more accusations than offers, that in itself was progress.
Republican leaders and President Clinton are to meet at the White House on Friday to see whether today's review uncovered any common ground.


No Doom or Gloom for the Rangers
In an illuminating test between two top teams, the Rangers edged the Philadelphia Flyers by 2-1 tonight in a fierce battle at the Spectrum.
It was as interesting as it was intense, with both teams combative, and with something to  prove.
This was the first time they had met since the Flyers swept the Rangers in in the second round of the Stanley Cup playoffs last spring.
Much about the mood and the result, however, were different.


Extravagant Demolition, With Woman As Top Pirate
IT'S cutthroat time at the movies, all right, when the last two weeks of the  year bring a stampede of bloated entertainments no one necessarily wants to see.
Suicidal case in point: "Cutthroat Island," this winter's "Waterworld," which stars Thailand, Malta, two cannon-firing pirate ships, one monkey (maybe all the parrots were busy) and Geena Davis as a pirate queen.
It's not possible to believe that Ms.
Davis is the highly respected captain of a pirate ship, and it's not even fun to try.
More interesting is the question of who had enough doubloons loose to think "Cutthroat Island" belonged in America's Christmas stocking.
The director is Renny Harlin, who has said in supposed jest: "My motto is: If you build it, you either have to burn it down or blow it up. Otherwise, it's a waste of money." But in today's Hollywood those are often words to live by, and  Mr.
Harlin ("Cliffhanger," "Die Harder") does have real talent for demolition.
He may have found it a creative challenge to pile on explosions, vertiginous special effects and theme-park-worthy atmospheric touches (like a crab crawling  on a dead body covered with cobwebs).


CONFERENCE PACT ON COMMUNICATION FACES HOUSE SNAG
One day after House and Senate negotiators announced they had reached agreement on a bill to overhaul communications laws, disgruntled House Republicans started taking pot shots today at the deals negotiated by their own  leadership.
It remained unclear whether the sweeping bill was in real trouble or whether  some Republicans were merely angry about the perception that they had caved in to Congressional Democrats and the White House on many issues.


Nutcrackers, Messiahs and Carols (Musical or Dickensian)
Here is a sampling of holiday events in New York City this weekend.
Unless noted, events are free.
Churches accept donations.
Today


HFS TO BUY ERA REAL ESTATE FOR $46 MILLION
HFS Inc. said yesterday it had agreed to buy Electronic Realty Associates, the world's fourth-largest franchiser of residential real estate brokerages, for about $46 million.
Under the transaction, HFS will pay $36.8 million for ERA's brokerage business, and another $9.2 million for its home warranty business, minus some working capital adjustments.
In August, HFS acquired the Century 21  Real Estate Corporation, with 6,000 franchisee-owned offices.
ERA has 2,500 franchised offices in the United States and 14 other countries.
Century 21 and ERA together handle about 15 percent of annual sales of existing United States homes.
HFS has 4,700 franchised hotels in the Days Inn, Howard Johnson, Ramada  and Super 8 brands among others.
On Wednesday, it announced plans to buy the Travelodge franchise system with 450 hotels for $39 million.


Hugh H. Smith Is Dead at 93; Helped to Banish Yellow Fever
Dr.
Hugh Hollingsworth Smith, a virologist who was a principal member of the  scientific team that developed the yellow fever vaccine for the Rockefeller Foundation in the 1930's, died on Monday at his home in Tucson, Ariz.
He was 93.
Dr.
Smith, in collaboration with Dr.
Max Theiler, conducted the field trials  in Colombia and Brazil that proved the effectiveness of the 17D vaccine strain in 1937.
The work was carried out by the International Health Division of the Rockefeller Foundation.


For Mother, Rent Money Is Replaced
A year ago, Elaine Blanco almost became homeless.
She lived in a room with her two sons, now 5 and 2, and was planning to move to an apartment with her cousin in Queens.
She took the $500 she had for the rent deposit, wrapped it carefully in one of the baby's Pampers and started down Junction Boulevard to pay the landlord.
When she got to the discount store where the landlord worked, she could not find the money.
In a panic, she emptied her purse onto the floor and tore into the baby carriage looking for the missing bills.


Columbus Ave. Chaos
To the Editor:
Bouquets for the Columbus Avenue reconstruction in Manhattan are premature -- I have the earplugs to prove it.


For Big Broadcasters, Communications Bill's Big Issues Are Settled
For the big national broadcasters, the unsettled status of the telecommunications bill was not totally unsettling because none of the issues they care about remain in dispute.
The bill, whenever it is passed by Congress, will give the largest station owners, such as the broadcast networks, the right to increase their television station ownership up to a level equal to 35 percent of the television homes in the country.


Editors' Note
A book review on Tuesday about "The Girl Who Died Twice: Every Patient's Nightmare: The Libby Zion Case and the Hidden Hazards of Hospitals" (Delacorte Press), by Natalie Robins, cited Miss Zion's use of various drugs and concluded  that her death, at New York Hospital in 1984, "wasn't anyone's fault."
The review should have taken account of a ruling on May 1 by a State Supreme  Court justice in the suit against three New York Hospital doctors brought by Miss Zion's parents, Sidney and Elsa Zion.
The justice, Elliot Wilk, allowed a jury's finding that the doctors were guilty of negligence in her death, but ruled that the jury's hearing of evidence about her cocaine use was improper; he threw out the jury's finding that Miss Zion's conduct made her partly responsible herself.


Art in Review
Chris Ofili Gavin Brown's Enterprise 558 Broome Street, South Village Through Jan. 6


COMPANY BRIEFS


It Was Uninvited and Early. Now It's Official.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about daytime television talk shows misstated the first year of Procter &amp; Gamble's discussion with producers and distributors about the shows' standards.
It was this year, not 1955.


Welfare, Unreformed
The welfare bill that passed the House yesterday is seen by its sponsors as an overdue reform of a system that traps its victims into a life of dependency and deprivation.
They must have had some other bill in mind.
This measure skips  the hard task of putting welfare parents to work and descends, instead, to the easy task of stripping parents of money they need to make life tenable for millions of destitute children.
The House margin was not enough to overcome a veto that President Clinton said yesterday he would wield.
Yet the vote count in the Senate, which will address the bill today, matters.
Even a narrow victory will encourage the G.O.P. leadership in the belief that by making marginal concessions, they can eventually resist a veto.


Shares of Centocor Surge 28% After Two Positive Drug Trials
The shares of Centocor Inc. surged 28 percent yesterday after the biotechnology company reported -- for the second time in a week -- unexpectedly  strong results in clinical trials of its blood-clot-dissolving drug, Reopro.
Centocor, based in Malverne, Pa., said on Wednesday that because of positive  interim data it was halting trials of Reopro for use in patients with unstable angina, a type of extreme chest pain associated with heart disease.
Clinical trials are halted when positive results make it unethical to continue giving some patients a placebo rather than the drug.


CHRONICLE
What do you do when you want to give gifts with some originality to 80 people?
CATHLEEN P. BLACK, the new president of Hearst Magazines, was stymied about what to give Hearst editors and corporate executives at a luncheon at the "21" Club on Wednesday.


For Congress and Clinton Dead Ends at Every Turn
It was a day of gridlock in Washington, with vast legislative packages on the budget, welfare, telecommunications and securities law stalled at various points between the White House and Capitol Hill.
Budget negotiators spent another inconclusive day closeted in the Capitol, examining an array of competing proposals to balance the budget by 2002.
A meeting between President Clinton and Republican leaders was scheduled for this  morning at the White House, a sign of some life in the talks.


China Isn't Likely to Invade Taiwan;North Korea's Floods
To the Editor:
Buried in your Dec. 14 issue was a news article noting that North Korea is on the verge of widespread famine after the devastating floods of this past summer, which inundated 75 percent of the territory and left half a million people homeless.


Holiday on Monday
Christmas is on Monday.


Loree Collins, 68, Trenton Legislator
Loree (Rip) Collins, a former New Jersey Assemblyman and Union County Republican chairman, died on Dec. 14 at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 68 and lived in Summit, N.J.
The cause was cancer, said a family spokeswoman, Margo Feiden.


For Children
Patriotic Christmas Tree Forbes Magazines Galleries 62 Fifth Avenue, at 12th Street Greenwich Village (212) 206-5548 Recommended for all ages Through Jan. 2


COCA-COLA EXPECTS SLOWER INTERNATIONAL GROWTH
The Coca-Cola Company said yesterday that it expected international shipments to increase 5 percent in the fourth quarter, a smaller-than-expected gain.
The news overshadowed board approval of a 2-for-1 stock split, the first in three years, and a $1.5 billion capital spending plan for 1996, the largest investment program ever for the world's biggest soft-drink maker.
The forecast marks the fifth straight quarter of slower sales growth outside the United States, which accounts for about 80 percent of Coke's profit.
Analysts had been expecting a 7  percent increase overseas for the quarter, less than last year's gain of 13 percent.
Shares in Coke fell $1.50, to $72.75.


Court-Ordered Study Condemns Illinois's Psychiatric Hospitals
Patients in the 10 psychiatric hospitals run by the State of Illinois encounter conditions so filthy, harsh and unsafe that they sometimes lie in their own excrement, are tied down for hours at a time or become victims of physical assault, a court-ordered study of the system has found.
The study, by two mental health experts, is a scathing condemnation of the Illinois Department of Mental Health and Developmental Disabilities, which administers the state's psychiatric hospital system.
It was commissioned by a Federal judge overseeing proceedings in a lawsuit, filed by the American Civil Liberties Union, that seeks the system's overhaul.


A Fire-Breathing Marshal Who's Mean on Ice
Jean-Claude Van Damme is an actor best seen and not heard.
And in "Sudden Death," his chilly new action-adventure film, he is so busy dashing around that  he barely has time to talk.
The number of speeches he garbles in his heavily accented monotone can be counted on the fingers of one hand.
This verbal blankness is part of his appeal.
As Mr.
Van Damme (and his stunt  doubles) execute the movie's many acrobatic feats, he comes as close as any actor can to resembling a flesh-and-blood comic-book hero who is all action and  no feeling (hugs with his character's children notwithstanding).
In "Sudden Death," his derring-do prevents 17,000 hockey fans, among them the Vice President of the United States, from being blown to smithereens at the Stanley Cup finals in Pittsburgh's Civic Arena.
During a chase sequence, he even hides from his pursuers by donning a uniform and impersonating the Pittsburgh Penguins' ailing goalie, with surprising skill.


Philips and AT&amp;T In European Deal
Philips Electronics N. V. agreed yesterday to sell its wireless telephone equipment activities based in France and Germany to the AT&amp;T Corporation by early next year.
The activities involve a global work force of about 3,500 people, sales organizations in 25 countries and technology for mobile telephony  base stations and microwave transmitters.
AT&amp;T's network systems unit will become the new owner of Paris-based Telecommunications Radio electriques et Telephoniques, a Philips unit known as TRT.
AT&amp;T also will get wireless communications assets that were owned by Philips's German unit PKI A. G., which is based in Nuremberg.
The two companies  signed a preliminary agreement on the sale in July.
(Bloomberg Business News)


New Jersey Daily Briefing;D.W.I. Law Requires Prison
Putting some muscle behind the conventional holiday warnings about not mixing drinking and driving, Governor Whitman yesterday signed into law a bill requiring a prison sentence for any driver who causes a death while intoxicated or after losing his or her license for drunken driving.
Another new  law allows the police to confiscate the license plates of anyone found driving with a license that had been suspended for drunken driving.
The legislation, which takes effect immediately, was introduced after a 39-year-old Randolph woman, Teresa Wright, was killed last February by an accused drunken driver whose license had been suspended.
TERRY PRISTIN


Sports of The Times;Cone Faces Unfinished Business
IT could not end like this for David Cone, not with his right arm flopping helplessly to the Kingdome rug, bent out of shape from too many pitches.
Cone was furious with himself.
He often is.
He blamed himself for that bases-loaded walk to Doug Strange -- Doug Strange -- that tied the final playoff game in Seattle on Oct. 8.
He stared into space with those pale eyes that can seem thoughtful or distant, depending on the way the light is shining, or the moon is waxing or waning.
A season could end like this, but not a hitch with the Yankees.


Good Year for Christies
Christies International P.L.C. said yesterday that its worldwide auction sales rose by 14 percent in 1995, or 17 percent in dollar terms.
Sales were L931 million, or $1.47 billion.
Christies said the sales were its highest ever apart  from "the peak years of 1989 and 1990." It said in a statement that in total, sales had risen by 60 percent since 1991 or 43 percent in dollar terms, demonstrating the strong recovery of the market in the last five years.
(Reuters)


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Man Accused of Abduction
Federal charges were filed yesterday against a Duluth, Minn., truck driver accused of abducting a waitress on Dec. 4 as she left work at a hotel in Mahwah  and keeping her with him as he made deliveries through the Midwest, the Federal Bureau of Investigation announced yesterday.
The driver, David James Ward, 38, was arrested Dec. 7 after the waitress managed to free herself at an Indiana rest stop and describe her abductor, officials said.
Mr.
Ward may have been involved in other abductions, said Charles R. Buckley, Acting Prosecutor for Bergen County.


Man Is First Charged in Spouse Abuse Law
An Ohio man who prosecutors said harassed his ex-wife and sent her hundreds of threatening letters after she fled with their young son to New Jersey has become the first man in the country to be arrested under a Federal law included  in the year-old Violence Against Women Act.
The new law makes it a Federal crime to cross state lines to violate a protective order.
In the case of the Ohio man, Wayne Hayes, state authorities had done everything to uphold a protective order issued against him by a New Jersey family court judge.
Even so, his ex-wife's lawyer, Ronald J. Busch, said, "She was in such fear and desperation because he lives in Ohio and it was hard for the state to deal with him."


CHRONICLE
The "material girl" doesn't want to be a material witness.
Yesterday, a Los Angeles County Superior Court judge ordered MADONNA to testify against a man accused of stalking her or face arrest, Reuters reported.


Gunman Planned Arson, Police Say
The man accused of shooting five people to death in a Bronx shoe store Tuesday has told the police that he carried lighter fluid and matches with him and planned to burn the business down, a senior police investigator said yesterday.
Startled, the police searched the store and said later that they had found a  flammable fluid and a new book of matches.


Prisoners Have Rights, Too
A report in The Times this week by Matthew Purdy depicted an atmosphere of violence at New York's largest state prison, Clinton Correctional Facility.
Inmate beatings and other acts of official violence have led to an unusually large number of successful legal claims by inmates protesting the use of excessive force by prison guards.
These cases were brought by Prisoners Legal Services of New York, a nonprofit group underwritten by public funds that Gov.
George Pataki has unwisely targeted for elimination in his new state budget plan.
Created by the state bar association 20 years ago after the Attica prison riots, the legal services program provides a peaceful way to address inmate grievances.
With a budget of under $4 million, it continues to play a vital role in uncovering abuses at remote state facilities, and giving prisoners an outlet  for their frustrations.


In Bethlehem, a Season of Joy for Palestinians
Church bells pealed and fireworks burst over Manger Square tonight as the last Israeli soldiers left the town of Bethlehem, handing over the traditional birthplace of Jesus to Palestinian rule after 28 years of occupation.
Palestinian officers, their rifles thrust triumphantly toward the darkening sky, were mobbed by a rapturous crowd as they rode into a police station beside  the Church of the Nativity, where Christmas will be celebrated for the first time this year under Palestinian control.


Derivatives Are Center Of Protest
The chairmen of two Congressional committees urged the Commodity Futures Trading Commission today to clarify a recent ruling that might have cast doubt on the legal standing of some over-the-counter derivatives contracts.
Representative Pat Roberts of Kansas, the Republican chairman of the House Agriculture Committee, and Representative Thomas J. Bliley Jr. of Virginia, the  Republican chairman of the House Commerce Committee, wrote the C.F.T.C. to protest the reasoning behind its $2.25 million fine against the German conglomerate Metallgesellschaft A.G. in July.


U.S. Studies Wave of Violence in Nevada
Federal authorities are investigating whether a bomb found outside an Internal Revenue Service office here this week is linked to a yearlong wave of violence and harassment against people associated with the Federal Government in northern Nevada.
Officials today were reluctant to say that the planting of the bomb was part  of a larger conspiracy.
But the method used is similar to those advocated by far-right groups opposed to the Federal Government, according to law-enforcement officials and civil liberties experts who keep track of militant groups and anti-government activity.


The Waning Light of Autumn


Cox and Gardner Fined
The National Football League fined Miami Dolphins linebacker BRYAN COX $17,500 and Buffalo Bills fullback CARWELL GARDNER $15,000 yesterday after their fight in a game Sunday.
Both players were fined $10,000 each by the N.F.L. director of football development, GENE WASHINGTON, for the fight, which broke out with two minutes remaining in Buffalo's 23-20 victory Sunday.
Cox and Gardner were ejected from the game.


Drug Seems to Cut AIDS Infection For Workers Stuck With Needles
The drug AZT appears to reduce the risk of infection with the AIDS virus substantially for health workers who are accidentally stuck with needles or other sharp instruments, Federal health officials said today.
In its weekly report, the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  published the findings of the study it has conducted with British and French health officials.


Florida Names 10 Semifinalists
The Florida Department of Citrus said yesterday that it had selected 10 agencies as semifinalists in a mandated review for its orange juice and grapefruit juice advertising accounts, with billings estimated at $27 million.
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide in New York has handled the accounts for the last 25 years.
Eight agencies will compete for the orange juice and grapefruit juice accounts: Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, a unit of Cordiant P.L.C.; Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas  in New York, owned by the Interpublic Group of Companies; Beber Silverstein &amp; Partners in Miami; Grey Advertising in New York; the Martin Agency in Richmond,  also owned by Interpublic; the Richards Group in Dallas; the West Group in Tampa, and the New York and Miami offices of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc.


Times Mirror Sells Its Stake in McClatchy
The Times Mirror Company said today that it had sold its stake in McClatchy Newspapers Inc., the publisher of The Sacramento Bee and other dailies.
Times Mirror, the Los Angeles-based publisher of Newsday, The Baltimore Sun,  The Los Angeles Times and other newspapers, said in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission that it had sold 293,900 class A common shares of McClatchy between Oct. 12 and Dec. 1 at prices ranging from $20.01 to  $21.45 a share.
It said it sold all the shares because it determined that the sale price represented their fair value.


Major Goes to Ulster and Ireland For Support of the Peace Plan
Prime Minister John Major campaigned in both parts of the island today, seeking support for Britain's position on the Northern Ireland peace effort, which has been weakened by a resurgence of vigilante killings widely attributed  to the I.R.A.
Mr.
Major, visiting Belfast and other areas in Northern Ireland as well as Dublin, arrived during the busiest week in years in the official effort to produce full-fledged peace negotiations.


Clark Gets His Chances As Isles Tie
Wendel Clark has been giving the Islanders a shot in the arm since arriving in a trade earlier this season.


INSIDE
Made-to-Order Schools


New York Schools Grant to Revive Arts Teaching
The Annenberg Foundation is planning a $36 million, five-year program to revitalize arts education in New York City's public schools.
The plan would establish a new model for arts education in a school system that for a generation has increasingly neglected music, dance, art and drama.
The plan, according to its developers, would make arts education a systematic part of the curriculum from kindergarten through high school by creating a network of partnerships between individual schools and arts organizations.
Supervising the classroom lessons would be a new agency, the Center for Arts Education, administratively distinct from the Board of Education.


Fed Drops Rule For U.S. Banks
The Federal Reserve Board said today that it had eliminated the $25 million limit on the amount healthy United States banks could invest in a foreign company without Fed approval.
Such investments now will be limited to 5 percent of a bank's Tier 1 capital  (equity and retained earnings), which in virtually all cases is more than the $25 million cap, the Fed said.


No Headline
Should there be a divorce, the Prince of Wales has no intention of remarrying."
ALAN PERCIVAL, the Prince's spokesman. [A4:4.]


A Higher Taxi Fare for Shorter Trips
New York City's plan to raise taxi fares an average of 20 percent would fall  more heavily on riders taking short, fast trips than on those making long, slow  ones, a shift that officials said yesterday would increase the number of available taxis cruising the streets.
The Taxi and Limousine Commission made the proposed fare structure public yesterday at a raucous meeting attended by more than 100 drivers and owners, many protesting a plan to retire taxis after a certain period.
If the commission approves the new fares and the mandatory retirement of taxicabs at its meeting next month, the new regulations would go into effect in late February.


Metromedia Makes a Bid For Goldwyn
The Samuel Goldwyn Company, which has been for sale since the summer, now finds itself the object of a bidding war.
Goldwyn, an independent film company, confirmed today that it had received a  takeover offer by Metromedia International Group Inc. for $5 a share, just hours after Goldwyn had agreed to sell its film and television library to Polygram Filmed Entertainment for $62 million.


PRESIDENT AGREES TO RELEASE NOTES ON WHITEWATER
Averting a protracted court fight, the White House today reached an agreement with Congress for President Clinton to comply with Congressional subpoenas and turn over new material on the Whitewater affair to Senate and Federal investigators.


Cone Makes Up His Mind: 3 Years in Pinstripes
David Cone deliberated and procrastinated over his future for days.
He made the Yankees sweat, he made the Orioles salivate and he made himself stir crazy.
New York or Baltimore?
Baltimore or New York?
For Cone, the answer emerged yesterday afternoon when he accepted the Yankees' three-year, $19.5 million contract offer while sitting in his Manhattan apartment.


Experts Begin to Ponder a Crash Without an Obvious Cause
Investigators struggled today to begin explaining how two experienced pilots  flying an apparently airworthy jet in good weather went off track and slammed into a mountain in Colombia.
There is no evidence so far of any terrorism, experts said.
The plane, American Airlines Flight 965, carried 164 people, and reports tonight said several had survived.


CHRONICLE
KATIE COURIC is planning on taking a brief respite from her duties as an anchor of the "Today" show after her second child is born.
Her last live performance will be this morning, although she has already taped her portion of  the Christmas Day show.
The baby is due on Jan. 5, and she plans to return in March.
Several substitutes are scheduled to take her place, beginning Tuesday.
They  include one of her "Today" predecessors, JANE PAULEY, who is now an anchor on "Dateline NBC"; MARIA SHRIVER, a "Dateline" contributor, and ELIZABETH VARGAS, a "Dateline" correspondent who has substituted for Ms.
Couric in the past.


Mayor Decides Not to Rename 2 City Judges
Overturning a longstanding precedent, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has rejected  the recommendations of his own judicial screening panel and decided not to reappoint two Brooklyn Criminal Court judges to full terms.
One of the judges the Mayor has appointed in their place is Charles Posner, a Jewish community leader in Flatbush with ties to one of the Mayor's allies, Assemblyman Dov Hikind.
That decision, in combination with the unusual rejection of two sitting judges, has led to allegations that politics has entered Mr.
Giuliani's appointment process, an assertion the Mayor's aides deny.


Cousteau's Son Blocked From Using Name
A United States District Court judge granted a motion today by the French oceanographer Jacques Cousteau to prevent his son from using the family name within the United States to advertise a Fiji Island resort.
Judge Vaughn Walker, in San Francisco, granted a motion for a preliminary injunction against Jean-Michel Cousteau, the Cousteau Fiji Islands Resort, Post  Ranch at Big Sur and related business entities, according to court documents.


On Stage, and Off
Leave Slingshots at the Door


Popular Snuffs Found to Have High Nicotine
Of the five best-selling brands of snuff, the most popular have the highest content of nicotine and cancer-causing chemicals, researchers say.
A study published on Wednesday in The Journal of the National Cancer Institute said that the three top-selling brands, Copenhagen, Skoal fine cut and Kodiak, had "statistically significant higher levels of nicotine" than Hawken and Skoal Bandits, the fourth and fifth most popular.


ABC Auditing Baseball Venture
ABC Sports is conducting an audit into the finances of The Baseball Network,  the joint television and advertising partnership it was part of in 1994 and 1995 with NBC and Major League Baseball.
"When a business dissolves, it's prudent to  do an audit," said Mark Mandel, a spokesman for ABC Sports.
ABC and NBC angrily announced their secession from TBN last June, saying that baseball had reneged on a promise to extend the partnership for at least a year  to meet its advertising sales targets.
Yet both made offers on baseball's new TV contract, with NBC agreeing to pay $400 million over five years.


Corrections
Because of a computer entry error, a music review on Wednesday about the Skampa Quartet at the Walter Reade Theater omitted the last three words of the final sentence.
The sentence should have read, "It has the smoothness and virtuosity favored by modern string quartets, but it also inherits an older Central European tradition of string playing, one in which music is as warmly inflected as a conversation between loved ones."


Senate Puts Off A Vote on Veto Of Securities Bill
The Senate tonight put off until Friday a vote on whether to hand President Clinton the first veto override of his Presidency, as both sides in the legislative fight to rewrite the nation's security laws remained unsure of the depth of their support.
Senator Christopher J. Dodd, a Connecticut Democrat, assailed President Clinton for his Tuesday night veto of legislation that would limit fraud suits brought in the name of stockholders.
Mr.
Dodd, who spent much of Monday evening  trying without success to persuade Mr.
Clinton to sign the bill, called Mr.
Clinton's objections minor.
Far worse, he said, the President had not raised his objections during the many months of negotiations over the issue.


Art in Review
David C. Scher Jack Tilton Gallery 49 Greene Street, SoHo Through tomorrow


UNITECH EXPECTS LOSS AND POSSIBLE BANKRUPTCY
Unitech Industries plans to report a significant loss for the year that ended on Oct. 31 and said it might be forced to seek bankruptcy protection.
The company, a maker and distributor of cellular, computer and video accessories, also said its president, Kenneth F. Lind, had resigned and would be replaced by  Gerald Bellis, who was named chief executive last week.
The company disclosed its loss projection late on Wednesday, and its stock price plummeted yesterday.
The shares were down $8.50, or 79 percent, at $2.25, in Nasdaq trading.
Unitech said its financial results for the first three quarters of its  fiscal year might have been misstated.
The magnitude of the loss will not be known until an audit is completed.


The Scene in Freddy's
A worker shot during the attack on Freddy's clothing store in Harlem described coming face-to-face with the gunman and pleading "I have nothing to do with this store."
But the gunman, Roland J. Smith Jr., said, "Get out of here," and fired at the man as he fled, said the survivor, Patrick Glynn.


Joseph Vasquez, 33; Directed 'Homeboys'
Joseph B. Vasquez, an independent film maker whose "Hangin' With the Homeboys" won the 1991 Sundance Film Festival screenwriting award, died on Saturday at Scripps Memorial Hospital in Chula Vista, Calif.
He was 33 and lived in Hollywood.
The cause was AIDS, said Mark Groubert, his collaborator.


7 Bells With 7 Agendas Struggle to Keep Unified Front onCommunications Bill
For more than a decade, the seven regional Bell telephone companies have been the fulcrum in efforts to overhaul the nation's communications laws.
Yesterday,  as House and Senate negotiators struggled to complete a sweeping telecommunications bill, a fresh round of complaints from one of the seven underscored how difficult it has become to hold the Bell coalition together.
U S West, which serves 14 Western states, sent a letter yesterday to several  Congressmen on the conference committee to protest some provisions in the bill,  even though the legislation has been endorsed by the coalition.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about desegregating schools in Englewood, N.J., referred incorrectly in some editions to the date of a public hearing there.
It was Oct. 23, not Dec. 14.


A Dog-Eat-Dog World
The title character of "Balto," an engaging animated adventure story whose refreshing lack of pretension sets it apart from most feature-length cartoons, is an Alaskan canine who is rejected by his peers for being half dog and half wolf.
Canine life in Nome, where the movie is set, revolves around dog-sled races that have the fervor of high-school football games.
The local hero and top dog is an unscrupulous, predatory ladies' man named Steele (the voice of Jim Cummings), whose swaggering ways set female hearts aflutter.
Steele and his cronies take delight in humiliating poor Balto (Kevin Bacon), who has a serious  crush on a sleek rust-colored huskie named Jenna (Bridget Fonda).
"Balto," the newest cartoon from Amblin Entertainment, runs only 74 minutes,  but it succeeds in packing them with more than enough of wholesome wintertime adventure.
At the same time, the film, directed by Simon Wells, skillfully adapts a true story into an easy-to-swallow anthropomorphic fable about courage, honesty and peer pressure, in which the schoolyard bully gets his comeuppance.


Clinton Decision Sets New Hampshire Vote
President Clinton will skip the Delaware primary, his campaign announced on Wednesday.
The decision effectively cements the date of New Hampshire's primary  as Feb. 20.
The President joins Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican front-runner,  in deciding not to file in Delaware, which plans to hold its primary on Feb. 24, four days after New Hampshire's.
New Hampshire law and Democratic National Committee policy require that New Hampshire's primary be the first in the nation by at least seven days.


Art in Review
Stephen Shore Pace Wildenstein/MacGill 32 East 57th Street Through Jan. 6


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows:
ARLAN HUANG, L. J. Wender, 3 East 80th Street, Manhattan (through tomorrow).
In  Arlan Huang's paintings, traditional Chinese furniture provides the jumping-off  point for heavily impastoed abstractions.
His blown-glass "stones" -- seductive  ovoids of translucent color wrapped around a transparent core and marked with Chinese characters -- sound like kitsch, but aren't (Pepe Karmel).
RICHARD KALINA, Lennon, Weinberg Gallery, 560 Broadway, at Prince Street, SoHo (through today).
Late Matisse meets late Mondrian in Richard Kalina's relentlessly cheerful paintings, combining brightly colored biomorphic shapes with an open grid of colored strips layered atop old-fashioned botanical illustrations of flowers and leaves.
It's a relief to get to his drawings, where the grid opens up so that you can look at individual motifs (Karmel).


Why Knicks Fans Are Angry With Riley
To the Editor:
Re "Knicks' Fans Can't Forget Good Times" (sports column, Dec. 20), on the former Knicks coach Pat Riley: George Vecsey focuses on Riley's mode of resignation -- by fax rather than by addressing the news media and New York fans directly through a news conference.


Nets Hit The Road, Already Reeling
Tell the Nets "happy holidays" and the response likely will be "bah humbug."  Four straight losses, including a numbing 112-104 decision in overtime Wednesday night to the injury-riddled Miami Heat, have put the Nets in a sour mood.
Making the situation more perilous is a stretch of four consecutive road games that begins Friday night in Atlanta against the Hawks and will be followed by games at Philadelphia on Saturday night, at Miami next Tuesday and at Houston next Thursday.
The Nets (9-13) have won just 2 of 12 road games this season.


COLONIAL BANCGROUP TO BUY SOUTHERN BANKING
The Colonial Bancgroup said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the closely held Southern Banking Corporation of Orlando, Fla., for stock valued at  about $50 million.
Colonial said it would exchange more than 1.6 million of its  shares in the purchase.
Colonial's stock slipped 87.5 cents yesterday, to $32.
Southern Banking is the parent of Southern Bank of Central Florida, which has total assets of $225 million and eight branches.
Colonial Bancgroup, based in Montgomery, Ala., is a multibank holding company with assets of $3.6 billion and 103 branches in Alabama, Tennessee and Georgia.


A Photographer Upstages Herself
In the midst of her "Projects 52" exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art, Carrie Mae Weems has given herself a hard act to follow with three extraordinary carved wood African objects: a low chair and two branching ladders from Ghana.
By their very beauty, self-sufficiency and robust physicality, these pieces tend to upstage the earnest elegance of Ms.
Weems's politically oriented late Conceptualism, with its characteristic mixing of texts and photographs.
The three objects and other parts of the show also teach useful lessons about the limits of appropriation, the strategy of lifting objects, texts or images from myriad sources, which caught fire in the 1980's and remains one of the staples of contemporary art.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
A Record-Setting Night in Boston Dana Barros and Todd Day each got his name in the record books while helping the Boston Celtics improve their record to .500 last night with a 114-113 victory over the visiting Minnesota Timberwolves.


Where Moore Wrote Tribute to St. Nick
To the Editor:
Your paean to things New York in the legends of Christmas (news article, Dec. 20) paid well-deserved recognition to Clement Clarke Moore, author of the poem "A Visit From St. Nicholas." Sadly, I must raise a cry from the outer boroughs on a key omission.


Journal;Hold The Mistletoe
Call it the "Moose Murders" syndrome: Sometimes the targets of a critic's butchery are as entertaining as the objects of his affection.
This, at least, is my excuse for joining the millions who tuned in to Kathie Lee Gifford's Christmas special on Wednesday night.
That morning Tom Shales, the TV critic of The Washington Post and one of the  funniest writers alive, had described "Kathie Lee: Home for Christmas" as "the equivalent of what commies might have used to torture political prisoners." He wrote that Ms.
Gifford, the perky TV talk-show host and chanteuse, was "all over this show like a bad toupee" -- and that was the nice part.


Ex-Prosecutor to Investigate Accusations Against Gingrich
The House ethics committee today chose James M. Cole, a former prosecutor who sent two Federal judges and a Congressman to prison, as its special counsel to investigate Speaker Newt Gingrich.
Mr.
Cole, who declined to comment on his appointment, will investigate accusations that a course Mr.
Gingrich taught at two colleges in Georgia was a political effort intended to circumvent tax laws.
His inquiry may well go beyond the tax law issue and involve the finances of Gopac, a political action committee Mr.
Gingrich headed until this year.


Corrections
An obituary headline yesterday about Dame Ruth Nita Barrow misstated her position.
She was the current Governor General of Barbados, not a former one.


KEY PRODUCTION AND BROCK EXPLORATION TO MERGE
Two natural gas companies, the Key Production Company and the Brock Exploration Corporation, said yesterday that they would merge.
Each Brock stockholder will receive one share of Key stock for each 1.45 Brock shares held, according to a joint statement released by the companies late Thursday.
Key said it planned to open a regional office in New Orleans, where Brock is based, and would employ some former Brock employees.
Under terms of the definitive agreement, the deal will be structured as a tax-free exchange.
Key and Brock expect to complete the deal, which requires stockholder approval, in the spring  of 1996.


Burundi Gunmen Kill 30, Including a Governor
Gunmen killed more than 30 people this week and assassinated a provincial governor, the state-run radio said today.
The radio said "armed gangs" -- wording used to describe hardline Hutu guerrillas -- killed more than 30 people southeast of Burundi on Thursday.
It said the attackers, who came from neighboring communities, burned down 50 houses and stole more than 70 cows.


Tape of Meeting Questioned
Two City Council members said that a tape recording of a Dec. 6 roll-call vote might have been altered to include votes on a police contract that they deny casting, The A.P. reported.
Anne Phillips, an independent, and Phyllis Koch, a Democrat, have asked the Atlantic County Prosecutor to investigate.
The  other five Council members are Republicans.
City Manager Thomas Ciccarone said:  "To believe that we doctored or dubbed that tape, you'd have to believe that we  staged the whole thing and brought in actresses to play the voices of Anne Phillips and Phyllis Koch. It's absolutely ludicrous."
JOE SHARKEY


U.S. Magistrate Rejects Extradition of Mexico Ex-Official
A United States magistrate in New Jersey rejected today a fourth and final effort to extradite a former Mexican official accused of graft and a cover-up in the assassination of his own brother, a powerful politician in Mexico's governing party.
However, the former Deputy Attorney General of Mexico, Mario Ruiz Massieu, did not leave the Newark courthouse a free man.
At the request of Secretary of State Warren Christopher, he was detained by United States immigration officials who will seek to deport him on grounds that his presence in the United States would have "potentially serious adverse foreign policy consequences."


Don't Consign Freud to Scientific Trash Bin;The Religion Trap
To the Editor:
Richard A. Shweder's "It's Time to Reinvent Freud" (Op-Ed, Dec. 15) was a brilliant piece of satire and reader-misdirection in the tradition of Swift's "Modest Proposal."


TAINTED FORCE: A special report.;Newark Police Troubles: Out of Control at the Top
In the summer of 1993, 26 Newark police officers were accused of raping, robbing and beating prostitutes.
Although the victims identified the officers through photo line-ups, city records show that the department never followed through on the allegations and has done nothing to discipline the officers.
Last March, four officers were arrested by Internal Affairs agents for stealing cars from city residents and selling them to friends.
Nine months later, the accused officers, who have pleaded not guilty, are still on active duty, and the Internal Affairs commanders who uncovered the case have been transferred out of the unit.


U.S. Officials Explain Firefighting-Plane Delay
Bad communications and a balky chain of command were to blame for the frustrating wait for firefighting C-130 tanker planes that came too late to do much good in battling a major brush fire on Long Island last summer, a report from the Secretary of Agriculture to Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato said today.
The struggle to contain the fire, which scorched 12 square miles of Suffolk County pine barrens, was compounded by the expectation among firefighters and government officials that the big water-bombing C-130's were on their way.


Thorpe Town Now Included
The Olympic torch relay route has been changed to include Prague, the birthplace of the former Olympian Jim Thorpe.
Prague officials and Thorpe's relatives were upset when the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games erred in sending the torch run through Yale, where Thorpe lived for a time.


Corn Prices Hit 11-Year High On Weather in South America
Corn futures prices climbed to an 11-year high yesterday as beleaguered South American crops faced a return of hot, dry temperatures after a disappointing rainfall.
Soybean futures prices also rose strongly.
Although Argentina received soaking rains of up to two inches in some places  in the last few days, it would not be enough to help corn crops if they entered a coming critical growing period under heat stress, said Steve Bruce, an analyst at E.D.&amp; F. Man International Futures Inc.


but G.O.P. Falters on Pro-Business Laws
Republicans took control of Congress last January armed with a sweeping agenda to undo decades of regulation and in many cases tilt the laws toward industry and away from consumers, workers and even investors.
Why, then, has it been so hard to enact pro-business laws?
To the dismay of many giant media and telephone companies this week, quarreling among House Republicans has jeopardized a bill that would overhaul decades of outdated regulations.


Black-Market Caviar Is Rare in Most Stores
The caviar business everywhere is fueled by suspicion.
Every retailer will hint at how the competition's caviar is inferior or how the osetra is being passed off as beluga.
But most well-known dealers play it straight.
They are also unlikely to risk  selling bootleg or black-market caviar from some of the questionable sources that have popped up around the Caspian Sea in recent years.
Shady characters just off the plane from Russia with a suitcase of cheap caviar may find buyers in Russian immigrant communities in America, but in general are more welcome in  Prague than in New York.


Busch to Sell Cardinals
Anheuser-Busch announced today that it has agreed to sell the St.
Louis Cardinals for $150 million to a group of investors who say they will keep the team in the city.
The deal still must be approved by Major League Baseball, and  the new owners, led by the St.
Louis lawyer Fred Hanser, expect to close the deal Feb. 15.
The deal includes Busch Stadium and its parking garages.
The stadium will keep the name, officials said.


Christmas at the People's Palace
Outside, the streets that border Tiffany's were raucous with cars, the sidewalks were clotted with pedestrians and the sky over Fifth Avenue and 57th Street was threatening something dire.
Inside the store, however, were warmth and coziness, green swags and golden balls, red tulips, roses and amaryllis and  a horde of shoppers hunched over glass display cases.
Tiffany's is the People's Palace nowadays, and frankly, the customers did not live up to their surroundings.
Instead they were living testament to why clothing retailers, except those who purvey parkas, jeans and Orlon watch caps, are not a happy breed.
True, there was the occasional exception -- the woman in ankle-length mink, for one, and the man who was bespoke from head to toe -- but basically these shoppers signified that today only the Pope maintains a dress code.


Judge Says Budget Impasse Could Shut Nation's Courts
A senior judge who represents the policy-making board of the Federal judiciary today warned that the budget stalemate might force the nation's courts to shut down shortly after New Year's Day.
Gilbert S. Merritt, the chief judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, said in an interview that "a breakdown in constitutional order" could occur if money was not authorized soon.


In Harlem, A Statement Of Regret
The black record store owner whose monthslong dispute with his Jewish landlord precipitated a Harlem fire that killed eight people, has issued a five-page statement expressing grief for the dead and pleading for help in resurrecting his business.
The store owner, Sikhulu Shange, wrote: "Suddenly, my shop became the center  of a controversy that has raised the ugly specter of racism, and has so tragically involved the loss of innocent lives, a loss that I deeply regret and  grieve for.


Crew Proposing Budget Cuts Deemed Unpopular in Past
Faced with another round of budget cuts, as well as with unresolved collective-bargaining issues, Schools Chancellor Rudy Crew has revived some budget-cutting ideas, like changing full-day kindergarten to a half day, that only months ago were rejected as widely unpopular.
In a memo outlining a wide variety of cost-cutting and revenue-producing moves, Dr.
Crew has also asked the Board of Education to consider changing the birthday cutoff date for 5-year-olds to attend kindergarten from Sept. 1 to Dec. 31; increasing the minimum number of students in bilingual education classes from 15 to 20, and selling merchandise with the insignia of the Board of Education or a school.


NOTES RELEASED ON WHITEWATER
Bowing to Congressional demands, the White House today turned over cryptic notes describing how top lawyers for the President struggled two years ago to gather the facts and gain an understanding of two sensitive investigations involving Mr.
Clinton, his wife and their business partners in Arkansas over the last decade.
The notes, written by William H. Kennedy 3d, a former associate White House counsel, reflect a free-wheeling two-hour discussion in November 1993 about Whitewater and other issues just as some of the details of the investigations were becoming public.


The Neediest Cases;Struggling to Preserve His Family, a Father Looks for Help, and Finds It
She would say she was going out to buy milk for the baby, and then she would  not come back.
Meanwhile, Cleveland Johnson would brood and stew for days at a time, his anger sometimes flaring into violence upon his wife's eventual return.
Mr.
Johnson's wife was addicted to drugs, and his children were suffering the consequences.
He would often return home to find his son and daughter unfed, unwashed and increasingly unruly.


Edper to Acquire Stake of a Bronfman
The Edper Group will acquire Peter Bronfman's majority voting stake in the company.
Edper is an entity through which the Bronfman family controls one of Canada's biggest conglomerates.
The move, announced on Thursday, is part of Mr.
Bronfman's plan to streamline the organization's complex structure to make it more attractive to investors.


Swiss Grants NATO Transit Permits
Switzerland has decided to permit NATO to fly troops and equipment through Swiss air space to peace-enforcement operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The flights, to take place only when NATO is unable to fly more direct routes from Germany over Austria, are expected to start immediately, Transportation Ministry officials said today.


Claire Townsend; Film Maker Was 43
Claire Tracy Townsend, a documentary film maker and the author of an expose on nursing homes, died on Tuesday at her parents' home in Los Angeles.
She was 43 and lived in Ojai, Calif.
The cause was breast cancer, said her sister Joan.


Anderson Misfires as Skid Hits 5
As Kenny Anderson soared to the peak of his jump for a 3-point shot that could have tied tonight's game against Atlanta in the fading seconds, the ball was cleanly pilfered by Mookie Blaylock.
The theft ended a thoroughly forgettable game for Anderson as the Nets lost their season-high fifth straight game, 94-91, before 8,197 at the Omni.
The loss left New Jersey at 9-14, while the Hawks improved to 12-12.


TEXACO IN DEAL WITH SOUTH KOREAN PETROLEUM
Texaco Ltd., the British subsidiary of Texaco Inc., said yesterday that it had agreed to sell a 15 percent stake in its North Sea Captain oil and gas development to the South Korean Petroleum Development Corporation.
The stake in  the $1.4 billion project secures a supply of fuel oil to Korea.
It will also enable Korea to develop a strategic fuel reserve, given that it has no proven oil or gas reserves of its own.
Texaco is the operator of the field and until yesterday's announcement was the sole equity holder, a rare occurrence in major  oil and gas projects.
Companies usually take on equity partners to spread the risk and cost of development.


LAIDLAW AGREES TO SELL HALF ITS STAKE IN ADT
Laidlaw Inc. agreed yesterday to sell half its 23.9 percent stake in the security company ADT Ltd. to Western Resources Inc. for $14 a share, or a total  of $215.6 million.
Laidlaw, a Canadian waste disposal and transportation company, also agreed to grant Western Resources, an electric company in Topeka,  Kan., an option to buy its remaining ADT shares at $14 each or at market value,  whichever is greater, until May 15, 1997.
ADT's shares closed yesterday at $14, up 50 cents on the New York Stock Exchange.
Laidlaw's chief executive, James Bullock, said the sale was part of the company's strategy to focus on core assets.
Laidlaw said last year that it wanted to sell its stake in ADT, the Bermuda-based home security company and vehicle auctioneer.


Army Report Says Racist Groups Aren't Problem at Ft. Bragg
An Army investigation at Fort Bragg, N.C., has found that there are at least  22 soldiers in the 82d Airborne Division -- less than two-tenths of 1 percent of the 14,736-member force -- who are skinheads or hold extremist or supremacist views on race.


CBI Agrees To Takeover By Praxair For $2 Billion
Unable to attract a rival bidder, CBI Industries did an about-face yesterday  and accepted a sweetened $2.2 billion cash bid from Praxair Inc., ending a two-month takeover battle.
CBI's board agreed to the deal late yesterday afternoon, after Praxair had threatened to withdraw its $33-a-share bid and pursue a previously announced tender offer at $32 a share.


Loss Leaves the Knicks Looking Up at Orlando
You can compare the statistical lines of Shaquille O'Neal and Patrick Ewing or you can merely digest what happened in the first quarter, how the Orlando Magic could not miss and the Knicks could do nothing about it and how little is  changing in this rivalry.
Using the Atlantic Division standing to measure the distance between the two  teams is almost trite.
O'Neal, Anfernee Hardaway and Dennis Scott would be better served by a rearview mirror, in which the Knicks continued to fade from the Magic's view after tonight's 111-90 Orlando victory.


Pilot Recounts Mishap on J.F.K. Runway
The pilot tried everything, but the Boeing 747 jetliner failed to respond to  his attempts to steer it back on course, a safety official investigating Wednesday's accident at Kennedy International Airport said yesterday.
"We haven't ruled anything out," said the official, Chuck Leonard of the National Transportation Safety Board, at a news briefing after interviewing the  pilot about the accident, which injured several dozen people aboard the Tower Air jet.
"Anything with the crew, with the aircraft, with the airport conditions or the weather."


No Headline
All I know is they're killing each other, really.
You see kids and women getting shot, you know -- makes you feel you've got a reason when you go down there." -- PVT. RYAN SIMMONS, 19, on his way to Bosnia. [4:4.]


Frothy Romp Hides a Cynical Tale of Infidelity and Affectation
Die Fledermaus," by Johann Strauss, may be a frothy, tuneful romp, but it is also a deeply cynical story about the infidelities and affectations of the wealthy and the foibles of the working drudges who envy them. It would be interesting to see a production that looked at these characters with as much honesty and affection as Strauss did.
But the Metropolitan Opera's production, which returned on Wednesday night, treats "Die Fledermaus" like some hopelessly dated work that can serve only as a vehicle for inane, empty comedy.
Otto Schenk's handsome 1986 production, sung in German with spoken English dialogue, returns every year in time for the New Year's Eve gala, and every year the dumbing down of the production gets worse.


Mystery Unravels in Art Theft From Storage Vault
A year after the artist Arbit Blatas and his wife, Regina Resnik, the longtime Metropolitan Opera star, went to their Manhattan storage vault for some paintings only to find the space cleaned out, the police have a prime suspect and have retrieved a few of the stolen works.
But the bulk of the collection -- more than 200 pictures valued at about $2 million and a costume that Ms.
Resnik wore for a Met gala -- remains missing, with negligible insurance coverage.
Now the couple and detectives have taken the unusual step of going public in the middle of an active investigation to elicit  tips on who may be peddling the art and buying it.


Giants Know the Stakes Are Very Different for Chargers
One team, the Giants, is thinking about the future.
The future as in next season.
Players have made vacation plans.
Moving vans have been to their houses.
Some are catching a flight immediately after the game against San Diego on Saturday at Giants Stadium to warmer weather and strawberry daiquiris.
Another team, the Chargers, is thinking about the future as well.
The future  for the Chargers is immediate.
A victory over the Giants puts them in the playoffs, and they can begin the quest to get back to the Super Bowl after an erratic season.


A Case Against Capital Punishment
A Short Film About Killing" was shown as part of the 1989 New York Film Festival. Following are excerpts from Caryn James's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 23, 1989. The film opened this week at the Cinema Village, 22 East 12th Street, Greenwich Village.
In "A Short Film About Killing," Krzysztof Kieslowski, one of the most respected of the postwar generation of Polish directors, has the daring to build an argument against capital punishment around an utterly unsympathetic character.


An Entitlement Increase?
The struggle over balancing the budget is really a struggle over the future of huge and costly entitlement programs like Medicare and Social Security.
So what does the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, do just before Congress departs  for the holidays?
He tries to ram through a bill to raise entitlement spending -- specifically, Social Security benefits for the elderly who work past age 65.
His misguided measure was temporarily blocked by Senate Democrats.
But the Republicans vow to bring it back soon.


Elisabeth Leustig, Casting Agent, 50
Elisabeth Leustig, a casting agent whose credits included "A River Runs Through It," "Dances With Wolves" and "The Bodyguard," was killed on Tuesday in  a Moscow traffic accident.
She was 50.
The Moscow police said Ms.
Leustig, in town to work on the planned movie "The Saint," was killed in a hit-and-run accident Tuesday night on Tverskaya Street,  a downtown thoroughfare.
The driver was not found.


Executive Changes
HEALTH MANAGEMENT INC., Holbrook, N.J., named Paul Jurewicz chief financial officer, succeeding Drew Bergman, who will remain chief development officer, treasurer and corporate secretary.


Sports of The Times;Drop-Back Days Are Numbered
HERE we are, living in one of the world's great inventions -- the United States -- on the eve of a new century, and still quibbling about whether African-Americans can play quarterback in the National Football League.
Earlier this week on the radio, a former N.F.L. quarterback and two talk-show hosts reacted to a complaint by Kordell Stewart, the Pittsburgh Steelers' quarterback/wide receiver, that race might have been a factor in his being shifted to flanker.
The three felt that Stewart, who is black, was misguided.
His problem, they agreed, was that he was too talented to play only quarterback.


Golfer Dies After Hole-in-One
Using a driver, Peter Sedore scored a hole-in-one at the Panorama Village Golf Course.
Then he died.
Sedore, 83, got his 18th career hole-in-one on the 129-yard fourth hole at Panorama Village on Wednesday.
A hole later, he collapsed.
He was pronounced dead at Hemet Valley Medical Center, apparently from an aneurysm.


Dollar Rises as Trader Sentiment On a Budget Deal Turns Positive
The dollar rose against leading currencies in New York yesterday as the market's shifting sentiment on Federal budget negotiations turned positive.
President Clinton and his Republican opponents in Congress negotiated to balance the budget in seven years at the White House yesterday, prompting hope that the stalemate would soon end.


Mental Care Is Cited In Shootings
The lawyer for the man charged with murdering five people in a Bronx shoe store said yesterday that his client suffered from "severe psychological problems."
The lawyer, Ira Brown, said he would probably ask a judge next week to order  an independent psychiatric evaluation of his client, Michael Vernon, 22.
Mr.
Vernon's companion, Maria Velez, told Mr.
Brown yesterday that Mr.
Vernon had a "significant psychiatric history," the lawyer said.


S.&amp; P. Cuts Ratings On 4 Japanese Banks
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation downgraded the credit rating yesterday on four of Japan's biggest commercial banks, citing concern about "the length and severity" of the bad-loan problems plaguing the nation's banking industry.
"Their financial situation is weaker than any of the major U.S. banks," said Shinano Morita, bank analyst for S.&amp; P.
S.&amp; P. cut the short- and long-term debt ratings on Sanwa and Mitsubishi and  the long-term ratings of Sumitomo and Dai-Ichi Kangyo.
The revision is likely to raise the cost of borrowing for the banks at a time when foreign lenders are  already charging them more than their Western counterparts to borrow dollars in  the interbank money market.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Don't Consign Freud to Scientific Trash Bin;Exhibition Protest
To the Editor:


Damaged Mill Starts Work
Malden Mills, a textile factory, resumed partial production today, less than  two weeks after it was shut down by an explosion and fire.
About 300 of 2,500 employees went back to work finishing and dyeing the mill's fleecy Polartec fabric.


Bond Prices Turn Higher In Slow Day
Prices of Treasury securities turned higher yesterday in thin trading during  an abbreviated pre-Christmas session that exaggerated movements of prices.
In the shortened session, which ended at 2 P.M., the price of the 30-year bond rose 14/32 , to 1116/32 , and the yield, which moves in the opposite direction, fell to 6.06 percent from 6.09 percent on Thursday.
That was the lowest yield in nearly two weeks.


Government Ousted In Mauritius Election
The main opposition alliance has won a landslide victory in a general election, final results showed today.
The National Electoral Commission said the alliance, led by Navin Ramgoolam and Paul Berenger, took 65.2 percent of the 556,297 votes cast on Wednesday to take all 60 parliament seats on Mauritius.


Tampering of Milk Possible
The Department of Health is investigating the possible tampering of milk from Farmland Dairies sold in three northern New Jersey supermarkets, according to The A.P.
The department is examining one-gallon plastic containers at three Grand Union supermarkets -- one in Elmwood Park, Bergen County, and two in Clifton, Passaic County.
There is no evidence that tampering occurred at the dairy, the department said in a prepared statement.
No illnesses or injuries have been reported, nor any complaints filed about unusual appearance or taste.
All the Farmland milk on those shelves was replaced and the department is advising consumers to inspect recently purchased milk, to look for loose caps or broken seals, puncture marks, slashes or leaking containers.


Stocks Inch Up in Slow Day Ahead of Holiday Weekend
Stock prices edged up yesterday in slow trading, as Wall Street prepared for  the three-day Christmas weekend.
The Dow Jones industrial average gained 1.44 points, closing at 5,097.97 after gaining more than 30 points early in the session.
The Nasdaq composite index rose 6.25 points, to 1,046.89.


About New York;Elevating Matchmaking to a Fine Art
ROBERT caressed his goddess during a recent singles get-together, not whispering sweet nothings in her ear, but blowing hot air.
"Ain't she beautiful?" he said.
"I was inspired, first by the openness of her expression. Then by the prominence of her position. She was screaming for attention and she was lonely."


Rangers Dig Down Deep and Stretch Home Streak to 16
Physically weary and mentally exhausted after a big victory in Philadelphia on Thursday night, the Rangers didn't deserve to win at Madison Square Garden last night, even though they put 48 shots on goal.
They probably didn't even deserve a tie, but they salvaged one anyway, 3-3, against the Hartford Whalers, the kind of result a good team gets in a good season, when it steals a point in the standings before taking a well-deserved holiday break.


NEXSTAR ENTERS LICENSING AGREEMENT WITH BOEHRINGER
Nexstar Pharmaceuticals Inc. said yesterday that it had licensed Boehringer Mannheim Therapeutics to develop and market Nexstar techonology being used to develop treatments for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
Nexstar, a Boulder, Colo., biotechnology company, said Boehringer Mannheim Therapies would pay royalties and other payments on the development and commercialization of any of  the so-called anti-H.I.V. nucleoside-lipid conjugates.
In a separate transaction, Boehringer Manneheim G.m.b.H., of Germany, bought 297,619 common shares of Nexstar for $16.80 each, for an total investment of $5 million.


Millennial Capitalism? Not Yet.
This Christmas is going to be a major disappointment for me.
It hasn't been commercialized enough.
I was hoping to achieve a piercing cynicism by this time  about the mail-order catalogues that burden my life each holiday season, and it  just hasn't happened.
As one of the 98 million Americans who collectively spent $58 billion on mail-order purchases last year, I anticipated the glossy arrival of L. L. Bean,  Victoria's Secret, Smith &amp; Hawken, Williams-Sonoma, Harry and David, Damark, Lillian Vernon and all the others with bitter glee.


Brown, Hill, Hanson Sign Large Contracts
Three pitchers, all 30-year-old right-handed starters with more than 70 major league victories under their belts, fattened their wallets yesterday in the wake of DAVID CONE's signing with the Yankees the day before.
KEVIN BROWN got the biggest deal, a $12.9 million, three-year contract with the Florida Marlins.
Next was KEN HILL, who agreed to an $8.15 million, two-year deal with the Texas Rangers.
ERIK HANSON and the Toronto Blue Jays agreed to a three-year contract worth about $9.5 million.


Monitors Appointed for Trash Haulers
A justice in Manhattan appointed receivers yesterday to monitor the finances  and assets of 18 waste-hauling companies that are charged with being part of a Mafia-dominated cartel that used arson and threats to control New York City's commercial garbage business for more than half a century.
Justice Walter M. Schackman of State Supreme Court, in an order issued yesterday, gave the nine receivers broad powers to examine the records and activities of the companies to guarantee that they are operated lawfully.
The receivers are also to insure that the haulers' owners, some of whom are under indictment, do not try to dispose of nearly $270 million in assets while the criminal case is being resolved.


Don't Consign Freud to Scientific Trash Bin
To the Editor:
The suggestion that "It's Time to Reinvent Freud" (Op-Ed, Dec. 15) is paradoxically both tardy and premature.


Owls Slay Their Second Giant of the Year
The rasps in his voice, created by a losing record, already held a season's worth of complaints, and here it was not even Christmas.
"This is the worst team I've ever coached in my life," John Chaney said after his Temple Owls defeated the No. 1-ranked team in the country tonight.
He was laughing as he said it.
For the effort of the Owls distorted the signature balance of the Kansas Jayhawks with a unique, aggressive zone defense.
And with center Marc Jackson leading an assertive inside game with career highs in points and rebounds, Temple dominated the overtime period and earned a 74-66 victory over previously  undefeated Kansas in the Jimmy V Classic at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Bridge
One result of the computer revolution is that bridge players can compete from their homes with others who are far away.
This is ideal when time or circumstances do not permit play in a club or a tournament.
Friendships are often formed, sometimes international.
These are the four systems for computer play:


Hates Meat And Calls Its Fans 'Murderers'
Near the end of its sold-out concert on Thursday night at Irving Plaza, the hardcore punk-rock band Shelter passed the microphone to audience members to determine who in the crowd had the worst job.
A gas-station attendant appeared to be the winner, until one person yelled that he worked in a slaughterhouse.
Some punk bands might find a slaughterhouse job glamorous, but for Shelter, a band of Hare Krishnas (four out of five members) with songs trumpeting the truth of the Bhagavad-Gita and condemning meat eaters as murderers, that job is  anathema.
In "Civilized Man," the band's singer, Ray Cappo, railed against meat eating  with venom, throwing in statistics and even references to the depletion of rain  forests and the ozone layer.
These are not subjects most punk fans want to slam-dance to, but Shelter backs up its point with a fast beat, vocals as coherent as a rap song and catchy, shout-along choruses.


Scientists Alter Genes of Medfly, Giving Hope in War on Crop Pest
Scientists have inserted new genes into Mediterranean fruit flies, a step that could help control the orchard pest.


3 Modern Vocal Works, All Settings for Writers
In the first half of Tuesday evening's program at the Paula Cooper Gallery, the Orchestra of the S.E.M.
Ensemble, conducted by Petr Kotik, gave the premieres of one work composed and another commissioned by the baritone soloist  on the program, Thomas Buckner.
After intermission, Mr.
Kotik directed the S.E.M.
Ensemble (and played his own flute parts) in a new ordering of his 1971-72 "There Is Singularly Nothing."
In Mr.
Buckner's "In Moments of Great Passion," an expansion of his solo work "Resonances," the composer has done little more for John Ralston Saul's mildly provocative prose discussion of cultural illiteracy than call attention to the author.
As the strings play motivic fragments, the soloist sometimes reads, often intones and seldom sings much of vocal interest.


Butterfly McQueen Dies at 84; Played Scarlett O'Hara's Maid
Butterfly McQueen, the actress best remembered for her portrayal of Prissy in "Gone With the Wind," the vexing slave girl who confounded Scarlett O'Hara with  the tearful pronouncement, "I don't know nothin' 'bout birthin' babies, Miss Scarlett," died yesterday.
She was 84 years old.
Earlier in the day, Ms.
McQueen was critically burned when a kerosene heater  in her one-bedroom cottage just outside Augusta, Ga., caught fire.
She suffered  burns over 70 percent of her body and died at Augusta Regional Medical Center.


Families of the Victims Are United in Mourning
Jorge Medina, a concrete worker and proud new American citizen, was returning to his native land of Colombia to pack up his parents and bring them back to Parsippany, N.J., to share his new life.
Luz Angelica Sosa, a 5-year-old girl from Washington Heights in upper Manhattan, was going to Colombia with her family to visit her grandmother, but mostly she was trying not to be too scared on her very first flight.


BUYBACK OF SHARES SET TO OFFSET DROP IN STOCK
The Enron Corporation, the oil and gas company, said yesterday that it would  buy back shares to offset what it called an "unjustified drop" in its stock price on Thursday.
The stock had fallen on rumors that Enron would lay off up to 11 traders after it was hurt by a surge in natural gas futures prices this week.
It rose $2.375, to $37.375, in Big Board trading of almost 1.2 million shares, after sliding $2.625 on Thursday.
The Houston-based company said the move reaffirmed its confidence in its operations, including the trading operations within its Enron Capital and Trade Resources unit.
The company also said it expected to meet earnings and cash flow targets.


Special Counsel Named
James M. Cole, who worked on corruption cases at the Justice Department, was  chosen yesterday to examine accusations involving Speaker Newt Gingrich.
Page 9. (Associated Press)


George Craig, 65, Entomologist Who Studied Mosquito Control
George B. Craig Jr., a Notre Dame professor who was one of the world's foremost experts on mosquitoes, died on Thursday while attending a meeting of the Entomological Society of America in Las Vegas, Nev.
Dr.
Craig, who lived in  South Bend, Ind., was 65.
His son, James, said Dr. Craig died of a heart attack.


Holiday Closings
The Treasury bond market closed early yesterday, but the stock and futures markets operated on normal schedules.
Trading was light.
On Monday, all financial markets, government offices and banks in the United States will be closed in observance of Christmas.
Most markets overseas will also be closed.


Nathan Rosen, 86, of Israel; Physicist Worked With Einstein
Dr.
Nathan Rosen, one of Israel's foremost scientists, a theoretical physicist who collaborated with Albert Einstein on his historic and still argued-over attack on quantum mechanics, died on Monday at his home in Haifa.
He was 86 and had continued his research to the last day.
A native of Brooklyn, he was Gerard Swope Professor Emeritus of Physics at Technion-Israel Institute of Technology in Haifa and the founder of Technion's Institute of Theoretical Physics.
He had a pivotal role in the transformation of Technion from a small technical college into a leading technological and scientific university.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Named Kevin Malone assistant general manager.


CHINA AIRLINES TO PURCHASE $750 MILLION OF PLANES
China Airlines, Taiwan's top airline, has signed a contract to buy $750 million worth of 737-800 passenger planes from Boeing, the airline said yesterday.
The contract includes a firm order of six planes and options for another nine.
China Airlines expects delivery for the six planes to be around August and November 1998.
The new 737-800 planes will substitute for 737-200's and Airbus A320's now running in domestic routes and short international routes.
The new aircraft will be powered by CFM56-7 engines developed by General Electric and Snecma of France.


Mortgage Rates Go Up
Thirty-year fixed-rate mortgages averaged 7.23 percent this week, up from 7.15 percent last week, according to a national survey by the Federal Home Loan  Mortgage Corporation.
It was the highest since Nov. 30, when rates averaged 7.33 percent.


Talk of Move By Citicorp Alerts Mayor
Citicorp has long been one of the anchors of New York City's economy, but in  recent years, the company's chairman has often spoken of leaving, wondering whether a mammoth financial institution with such global reach would perhaps be  better off if it were not so rooted to one place.
Lately, these musings of the chairman, John S. Reed, have begun to attract the attention of the Giuliani administration, which has started talks with Citicorp to insure that it stays put, officials said yesterday.
If Citicorp, the nation's largest banking company, were to move, it would be a blow to the city's reputation and its ability to retain other large corporations.


Welfare Bill Cleared by Congress And Now Awaits Clinton's Veto
The Senate today gave final Congressional approval to a wide-ranging Republican plan to overhaul the nation's welfare system, clearing the bill for President Clinton, who has promised to veto it.
The 52-to-47 vote, which came a day after the legislation had won approval in the House, was almost entirely on party lines.
Only two Republicans voted against the bill, and only one Democrat for it.


Man Admits Setting Fatal Fire, Police Say
The father of three young children who were killed in a fire at their home two weeks ago confessed that he intentionally ignited a pile of newspapers and books in the stairwell, the authorities said today.
The father, Mark Mastin, was charged late Thursday with three counts of second-degree murder.
No charges were brought against his wife, Lisa, who said she lost her grip on her 6-year-old son before jumping from a second-floor window.


Securities Bill Becomes Law as the Senate Overrides Veto
For the first time, Congress overrode a veto by President Clinton today, as the Senate mustered the necessary two-thirds majority to enact a bill to limit stockholders' rights to file fraud suits.
Because the House had voted decisively on Wednesday to override the veto, the law took effect immediately upon the Senate's action.
As a result, it will be far more difficult for individual stockholders to file suits against underwriter-brokers, company officials and accountants in cases of securities fraud.


Wrong Way Corrigan Didn't Fly a Wreck
To the Editor:
Re "Douglas Corrigan, 88, Dies; Wrong-Way Trip Was the Right Way to Celebrity as an Aviator" (obituary, Dec. 14), on the pilot who took off on a flight from Brooklyn to Los Angeles and landed in Dublin:


Arts Center Chairman Leaving After Struggle
After a bitter struggle for leadership of the Dia Center for the Arts, its longtime chairman, Ashton Hawkins, has agreed to step down on May 31 next year.
He announced his decision on Wednesday at a special board meeting convened by trustees who had threatened to withhold donations from the downtown art center if Mr.
Hawkins, who is executive vice president and counsel to the trustees for  the Metropolitan Museum of Art, did not resign.
According to two trustees at Dia who spoke on condition of anonymity, there was dissatisfaction with Mr.
Hawkins because the center has had an annual operating deficit and has been drawing from its small endowment to stay afloat.
In addition, Dia is about to begin the public phase of a capital campaign drive  and some board members felt it would not be proper for it to be led by someone prominently affiliated with another museum.
It was also noted that such campaigns are usually headed by major donors.
Mr.
Hawkins, who assumed the chairmanship when Dia direly needed his administrative expertise and connections in the art world, is not a man of great personal wealth.


Shotgun Wound Kills Girl
A 14-year-old girl died yesterday in her boyfriend's Bronx apartment at 306 E. 171st St. after someone shot her in the face with a shotgun, the police said  yesterday.
The police were still investigating the circumstances surrounding the death of Ida Torres yesterday afternoon.
Neighbors said they believed it was accidental.
Lavia Hernandez, who lives on the third floor as Ms.
Torres did, said the girl, nicknamed Muneca, was visiting her boyfriend on the first floor when a friend of his accidentally shot her.


Panel Cites Philadelphia Police in Beating
A Philadelphia citizens panel has concluded that a police officer's excessive use of force contributed to the death of a tow-truck driver while he was in custody and that five other officers lied about the incident, according to a report issued today.
The report by the Philadelphia Police Advisory Commission agreed with the city medical examiner's office that the primary cause of death for the tow truck driver, Moises DeJesus, 30, was intoxication due to cocaine, valium and other drugs.
But it also agreed with the medical examiner's finding that at least three blows to Mr.
DeJesus' head had contributed to his death and that blunt-force trauma had been "the straw that broke the camel's back."


Pensive Pianist With Audience Participation
As the keyboardist for Elvis Costello's band, the Attractions, Steve Nieve provides mock-classical pomp, hooting organ riffs and tinkling cocktail flourishes.
In a solo piano concert on Tuesday night at the Knitting Factory, he was more introspective and open-ended.
His first set rambled around the border zone between New Age music and art-film soundtracks.
Arriving concertgoers found a slip of paper asking them to choose six notes on a diagram of a keyboard, and two of them heard their choices spun into improvisations.
One became a gently rippling arpeggio, a quasi-Baroque chain of  harmonies, and a modal, Celtic-tinged tune.
The other, even quieter, turned into a ghostly fanfare and rumination, with echoes of Satie and Copland.


In Other Words: The Bible's New Language
Christmas is a time when many people are inclined to recite a passage or two  of Scripture from memory, and an obvious choice is the story of Jesus' birth from the Gospel of Luke.
Mary, according to the Bible's King James Version, wrapped Jesus "in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger."


Metro Digest
NEW YORK CITY


Koch and Dinkins Denounce Mayor in a Feud Over Judges
The final traces of good will between Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and his two predecessors seemed to evaporate yesterday when a dispute over the selection of  city judges escalated into a full-scale row, complete with dueling press conferences and bitter charges of political manipulation.


Lillian Zabar, Co-Founder of Quintessential Deli
Lillian Teit Zabar, who fled the pogroms of her homeland, came to the United  States and became part of an American success story, died yesterday in Manhattan.
She was 90, or perhaps 92 or 93.
Mrs.
Zabar was a founder with her husband, Louis, of Zabar's gourmet delicatessen and food emporium on Broadway at 80th Street in Manhattan.
The business was started in 1934 and now has about 35,000 customers a week and $40 million in sales a year, her sons Stanley and Saul said last night.


MEDEVA TO DEVELOP VACCINE WITH JOHNSON &amp; JOHNSON UNIT
Medeva P.L.C., a British drug maker, signed an agreement with a unit of Johnson &amp; Johnson Inc. to develop and sell its hepatitis B vaccine in the Asia-Pacific region, excluding Japan.
Medeva said it would work in conjunction with Johnson &amp; Johnson's Janssen Pharmaceutica International unit, the largest international drug company in Korea and China.
Janssen will perform clinical trials, submit regulatory applications and market Medeva's hepatitis treatment locally.
Analysts said the drug, called hepagene, could be a big sales generator for the British drug maker if clinical trials proved it was effective as a treatment for existing carriers of hepatitis B in addition to being a vaccine to prevent contracting the disease.


Barclays Plans Sale
Barclays P.L.C. said yesterday that it would sell more than half of its French property loan portfolio to an investor group as part of a plan to wind down its French real estate investments.
Barclays, Britain's largest bank, said  it would sell 193 property loans valued about L114 million ($175 million) for office and housing developments in the Paris area to a group that includes Lehman Brothers Holdings, the Cargill Financial Services Corporation and La Salle Partners.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Make Way for You-Know-What


Madge Sinclair, 57, TV and Film Actress
Madge Sinclair, an actress who appeared on television and in film, died on Wednesday at Good Samaritan Hospital in Los Angeles.
She was 57.
She had had leukemia for 13 years, said an ABC spokeswoman, Julian Myers.


Tenneco Unit in Purchase
Tenneco Automotive, a Deerfield-based unit of Tenneco Inc., agreed today to acquire National Springs, a manufacturer of automotive coil and leaf springs in  Australia and New Zealand, the company said today.
Terms were not disclosed.
National Springs is owned equally by units of National Consolidated Ltd. and the Skellerup Group.
The company expects to record sales of $22 million this year.


Holiday on Monday
Christmas is Monday.


ARMSTRONG WORLD TO SELL ITS CERAMIC TILE UNIT
Armstrong World Industries agreed yesterday to sell its ceramic tile unit, the American Olean Tile Company., to Dal-Tile International Inc.
The transaction will leave Armstrong World with a 37 percent stake in Dal-Tile International, a  Dallas tile maker.
Terms of the deal also provide for Armstrong to pay Dal-Tile  $27.5 million in cash.
Armstrong, a Lancaster, Pa., maker of floor coverings and interior furnishings, said it expected the sale to result in an unspecified loss.
Preliminary plans for the sale were announced in September.


Jets Will Show Up but Will Their Fans
Anyone need, oh, 150 tickets for Sunday's sold-out Jets-New Orleans Saints game?
The Jets don't.
For many of them, it's getaway day: Christmas Eve of a 3-12 season, as the Saints invade Giants Stadium.
Usually, the players buy about 400  tickets.
Not this time.


Banana Business Sold
Fyffes P.L.C. said yesterday that its joint venture with the Windward Island  Banana Development Company had acquired the banana business of Geest P.L.C. for  L147.5 million ($225.7 million).
Geest said it would realize a one-time gain of  L21.5 million from the sale of the unit, which had been losing money for the company.
Geest said it would use the proceeds from the sale to reduce its debt and expand its fresh convenience foods business.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Cone Says He Looked For a Reason to Stay
David Cone has always been shrewd and savvy, whether he is discussing playing in New York or living in New York.
Yesterday, when Cone formally announced his renewed life with the Yankees, the $19.5 million pitcher was shrewd enough to thank his wife, Lynn, for teaching him to adore New York and savvy enough to credit his blustery boss for convincing him to stay.
In discussing why he had decided to re-sign with the Yankees, Cone stressed the importance of the no-trade provision that was put into his contract without  him even requesting it -- an element that could enable him to finish his career  in New York.
He said he was also influenced by George Steinbrenner's generosity  and the chance to make $29 million over the next five years.


Capital Suspended
CRAIG BERUBE of the Washington Capitals drew a 10-game suspension from the National Hockey League yesterday for coming off the bench to fight with Rangers  forward NICK KYPREOS on Dec. 18.
Berube came off his bench to replace KEN KLEE as Klee's minor penalty expired, skated across the ice, dropped his gloves and started the fight with Kypreos at 19 minutes 20 seconds of the third period. (AP)


BUSINESS DIGEST
Budget Stalemate Goes On, But With Quieter Tone There was one bit of progress in the talks on ending the stalemate over the Federal budget: The negotiations between the President and the Republican Congressional leaders ended without the usual rancor.


Tackling a Crucial Highway to Keep Skiers Happy
On a mountain slope, 23 feet of snow is a skier's blessing.
On a mountain highway, it is a skier's curse.
Interstate 70, which climbs through here and is the nation's highest stretch  of Interstate, winds past sheer cliffs and deep gorges.


Christmas? At Post Office, Just Another Day at the Sorting Machines
Every December, Julia Holland becomes one of Santa's helpers by speeding the  delivery of Christmas cards and gifts, but her holiday work is not filled with tinsel, mirth and jingling bells.
And certainly not with silent nights.
From 3 in the afternoon until 3 in the morning, Ms.
Holland, a postal worker, sits hunched over her workstation like a turn-of-the-century seamstress, sorting mail that automatically passes in front of her one letter per second, 60 a minute, 600 every 10 minutes.


Antiterrorism Law Used In Poison Smuggling Case
Federal agents have arrested an Arkansas man on charges that he possessed enough of one of the deadliest poisons known -- a favored and nearly undetectable weapon of the old Soviet K.G.B. -- to kill thousands of people, officials said yesterday.
The man, Thomas Lewis Lavy, was arrested on Wednesday morning in an F.B.I. raid on an isolated stone cabin in the Ozarks of northern Arkansas.
Mr.
Lavy, described as about 50 years old, is said by the authorities to have tried to smuggle 130 grams of the fatal poison ricin, a white powder distilled from castor beans, across Alaska's border with Canada in 1993.
Although Mr.
Lavy was  not detained at the time, the Canadian authorities confiscated all the powder that subsequent analysis showed to be ricin.


Fed Panel Voted in November By 10 to 1 to Hold Rates Level
Federal Reserve policy makers decided in November that they would not wait for resolution of the Federal budget stalemate if economic conditions warranted  to lower interest rates.
A summary released today from the Nov. 15 meeting of the Federal Open Market  Committee showed the panel voted 10 to 1 to keep rates unchanged but set the stage for a future reduction.


Alcatel to Sell Fiat Stake of 2%
The French industrial company Alcatel Alsthom said yesterday that it planned  to sell its 2 percent stake in the Italian car maker Fiat next year, ending a relationship that was once hailed as "an example for Europe." A spokesman for Alcatel said the company's new chairman, Serge Tchuruk, had ended a deal with the Agnelli family holding companies IFI and IFIL and was now free to sell its Fiat shares in 1996.
Mr.
Tchuruk, appointed in July, plans to sell 10 billion francs ($2.02 billion) in assets in the next two years as part of a drastic overhaul of the ailing company.
In Turin, Istituto Finanziario Internazionale said it and IFIL were ready to buy Alcatel's stake.
(Reuters)


Peres Says Israel, With Regional Pact, Would End Atom Effort
Prime Minister Shimon Peres said today that Israel would be prepared to close its nuclear program if there was a regional peace in the Middle East, though he  stopped short of confirming that Israel possesses nuclear weapons.
Mr.
Peres made his comments at a lunch with Israeli journalists in Tel Aviv,  after one of them asked whether his new priorities include a change in nuclear policy.


Corrections
Charts in Business Day on Oct. 14 with an article about Rockport shoes included incomplete data supplied by Footwear Market Insight, an industry research firm, on the competitive standing of various shoe manufacturers.
The figures omitted sales at discount and moderate-priced retail outlets.
Following are comprehensive market share data for three leading sales categories, according to the firm:


A Police Agency In Turmoil
The Police Chief is under investigation by Federal authorities.
Some of his officers have been accused of assaulting prostitutes and stealing cars to sell to friends.
Current and former Newark police officers say the cases are all symptoms of a troubled department that for several years has been allowed to run out of control -- a place where corruption was long tolerated, where criminal behavior was often ignored and where would-be reformers were punished or harassed.


Corrections
An article in The Living Section on Wednesday about holiday gifts that pair books with tools or foods on the same subject misspelled the surname of the author of "Olives" (10 Speed Press, $15.95).
He is Ford Rogers, not Rodgers.


Mother Tried to Save Children
The three young children killed in a fire early Thursday morning had not been left at home by themselves, the police said yesterday, revising an earlier account.
After smelling smoke, the children's mother, Shirley Willocks, 26, ran from the second-floor apartment to call for help from a pay telephone, according to Deputy Police Chief Joseph Constance.
Ms Willocks was badly burned  trying to rescue her children, Onera Willocks, 5, and Desiree Willocks, 4, and her 14-month-old, Kamil Sloan, all of whom died of smoke inhalation.
Ms.
Willocks was in critical condition at St.
Barnabas Hospital in Livingston.


Drugs and Prisons
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 17 news article on a New York State Senate investigation to determine whether prison officials should have greater power to search for drugs raises a question at the center of national drug policy.
If prisons -- which are, after all, the ultimate police state -- cannot stem the flow of drugs, what shall we make of a drug policy that promises a drug-free society if we just sacrifice a bit more of our liberty to the drug war?


Religion Journal;Celebrating 250 Years of Perseverance
As millions of Christians prepare to celebrate Jesus' birth, hymns and Scripture readings provide pointed reminders of the humbleness of the event: the baby born to temporarily homeless parents, in a stable, of all places, with shepherds for witnesses.
Given that tradition, it should perhaps not be surprising that some of Christianity's relatively modest works have real durability.


Let's Not Forget Social Security's Aim
To the Editor:
The nearly unanimous vote that took place in the House of Representatives earlier this month to raise the Social Security retirement income test to $30,000 by 2002 is evidence of both political parties' disregard for the purpose of the Social Security Act: to replace income lost because of retirement.


Crime Is Down, Again
Violent crime has been declining in New York City for several years, and at dramatic rates in the last two.
The recent multiple killings in the Bronx and Harlem have drawn national headlines, but in fact crime has fallen more over a longer period of time in New York City than in most other big cities or in the nation as a whole.
Either a major social phenomenon is under way or the police and the criminal justice system deserve substantial credit.
Consider the following remarkable statistic.
According to Federal Bureau of Investigation numbers issued last weekend, serious crimes throughout the country went down 1 percent, or about 67,000 crimes, in the first six months of  1995, compared with the same period a year earlier.
In that same period in New York City there were 41,000 fewer crimes, or about a 16 percent drop.


Zhoukoudian Journal;Peking Man's Bones, and Affairs, Remain Unsettled
More than 70 years after the remains of Homo erectus pekinensis were first discovered at a place the locals here called Dragon Bone Hill, Peking Man is having a difficult time finding a permanent resting place.
"These old bones are like my own children," said Prof.
Jia Lanpo, who at 87 is among the last living members of the excavation team that unearthed Peking Man at this site 30 miles southwest of Beijing.


Man Slain on Holiday Visit
A father of three who had just arrived in Buffalo to visit his mother for the holidays was shot to death early today for no apparent reason, the police said.
The victim, Robert Crawford, 31, a record promoter who lived in Brooklyn, was shot about 12:40 A.M. in front of his mother's home.


HA-LO INDUSTRIES ADDING FLETCHER-BARNHARDT &amp; WHITE
The advertising products distributor Ha-Lo Industries agreed yesterday to buy Fletcher-Barnhardt &amp; White Inc. of Charlotte, N.C., a privately held promotional marketing concern.
Ha-Lo's stock rose $1.875 a share, to $21.25 in Nasdaq trading yesterday.
The company said Fletcher-Bernhardt had annual revenues of about $45 million.
Ha-Lo, a distributor of specialty and premium advertising products, had annual revenues of about $69 million in 1994.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


COMPANY BRIEFS
HOLBERG INDUSTRIES, Greenwich, Conn., said its Nebco Evans Distribution Inc. unit would buy Ameriserv Food Co., Dallas, to form a food distributor with sales of $1.4 billion.
Terms were not disclosed.


At Christmastime It's Time to Travel


Some Skeptical and Scared, Company C Is Set for Bosnia
The lights went down and several hundred groggy infantrymen in a movie theater here fixed their eyes on bloody images of the country they will travel to in a few short days.
They saw bombed-out buildings, men dragged dead through the streets, children with limbs blown off from mortar rounds.
"Can you see our purpose in Bosnia?" Col.
John R. S. Batiste, commander of the Second Brigade of the First Armored Division, asked the soldiers when the five-minute video ended, sometime around dawn on Thursday.
"Can you see the suffering and repression that has been going on for 41 months?


Man in the News;Anticorruption Expert: James Michael Cole
The lawyer chosen today as special counsel in the House ethics committee's investigation of Speaker Newt Gingrich comes to the job with a resume that includes three years as a defense lawyer in cases involving white-collar crimes  for two of the top law firms in Washington and 13 years in the Justice Department, during which he successfully prosecuted a member of Congress and two Federal judges.
He was also a lead investigator in the House banking scandal.


Tom Pettit, 64, TV Reporter for NBC
Tom Pettit, an award-winning television reporter who was the only broadcaster on the scene and on the air when Lee Harvey Oswald was killed in Dallas, died on Friday at Columbia- Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 64 and lived in Hamilton, Bermuda.
A spokesman for NBC News said the cause was complications after surgery to repair a ruptured aorta.


QUALITY DINING PURCHASES GRADY'S RESTAURANT CHAIN
Quality Dining Inc. said yesterday that it had bought the 42-restaurant Grady's American Grill chain for $74.4 million.
Quality Dining, owner and operator of fast-food and casual dining restaurants, bought Grady's from Brinker International, a restaurant operator based in Dallas.
Quality Dining, based in Mishawaka, Ind., said it had also acquired the United States rights to Brinker's Spageddies Italian Kitchen concept.
Financial terms were not disclosed.
Grady's and Spageddies are both midpriced, casual dining restaurants.


The List of the 164 People on Flight 965
Following is a list of the 164 people on the American Airlines Flight 965 that crashed in Colombia, compiled from the airline and other sources, including families and colleagues.
American Airlines says that except for the four survivors, all aboard are presumed dead.
Ages and hometowns are noted when available.
SURVIVORS DUSSAN, Gonzalo, 36, Somerville, N.J.
DUSSAN, Michelle, 6, Somerville RAMIREZ, Mercedes, 21, Kansas City, Mo.
REYES, Mauricio, 19, Southfield, Mich.


Canadians Bearing Trees Invade Manhattan;Evergreenery From the North For Sale at a Street Corner
A merry little street-corner forest stands at Seventh Avenue South and Perry  Street, one of scores of such emerald eruptions around New York City city.
There are Fraser and Douglas firs and, most popular and fragrant, balsam firs.
The magic is enhanced by the sudden appearance of the 200 or so trees here on Dec. 1, and by their abrupt disappearance the day after Christmas.
But it is the Pan flute of Nicholas Cifarelli that is the enterprise's signature.
He hails each sunrise -- and most other turns of the clock -- with loud, clear tones of musical celebration.


HIGH-LEVEL TALKS AGAIN FAIL TO END BUDGET STANDOFF
Two hours of budget talks between President Clinton and Republican Congressional leaders ended today without the kind of rancor that has so far characterized these negotiations, but it remained clear that the standoff that has closed much of the Government for a week is nowhere near ending.
Indeed, the principals said after the White House meeting that they would not even meet again until next Friday, making it almost certain that many Federal parks and many Government offices will remain closed, at least until the New Year.


Wrecked by Years of Civil War, Beirut Is Rising From the Ashes
Five years after the end of Lebanon's civil war, the lights are burning brightly again in this ravaged capital.
Its famous hotels -- the Phoenicia, the St.
George's, the Holiday Inn -- remain scarred monuments to battle.
Its city center, much of it, has been bulldozed, wrecked beyond repair by the savagery along the Green Line, the dividing line between the Muslim and Christian-held sectors.


'Messiah,' No Matter What Period
These days performances of Handel's "Messiah" tend to fall into two camps: there are period-instrument ensembles and choruses that favor fleet tempos, crisp rhythms and light textures; and there are modern-instrument ensembles that value full-bodied choral sound and richer orchestral textures.
Richard Westenburg's performance on Thursday night with Musica Sacra, the orchestra and chorus he has directed since its founding in 1968, combined the best aspects of both approaches.
His work was informed by qualities that are prized in period-instrument groups.
The orchestra playing was lithe, articulate  and rhythmically incisive.
The modest-sized chorus (35 singers) kept the contrapuntal textures clear; yet the choral sound was resonant and unforced.


For the Victims of Communism
There would be a Hall of Infamy with a piece of the Berlin wall, a re-creation of the gulag and a Hall of Heroes with statues of anti-Communists like Ronald Reagan and Andrei D. Sakharov.
There would be a big statue of the Goddess of Democracy.
That's how a group of prominent conservatives envisions a  proposed $100 million Victims of Communism Memorial Museum, honoring an estimated 100 million people killed in this century because of Communism.
The group includes Lev E. Dobriansky, chairman of the Captive Nations Committee; Grover Norquist, president of Americans for Tax Reform, who also advises Speaker Newt Gingrich on tax policy, and Zbigniew Brzezinski, the national security adviser to President Jimmy Carter.
Lee Edwards, president of the Victims of Communism Memorial Foundation says fund-raising will begin in January.
Mr.
Edwards is a biographer of Barry Goldwater and senior editor of The World and I, a magazine owned by The Washington Times, founded by the Rev.
Sung  Myung Moon.
The foundation hopes to house the museum in the Old Tariffs Building in Washington, and to open it by December 2000.


Congress Overrides Veto on Fraud Bill
For the first time, Congress overrode a veto by President Clinton yesterday.
The Senate -- as the House had on Wednesday -- mustered the necessary two-thirds majority to enact a bill to limit the rights of stockholders to file suits charging fraud against underwriter-brokers, company officials and accountants.
Business Day, page 39.


U.S. Honors Duty in Bosnia Mission
To the Editor:
Twice in this century we engaged in world wars that might have been averted if we and our allies acted sooner.


Unfinished Justice in Honduras
Gen.
Luis Alonso Discua, the Commander in Chief of the Honduran military, needs a refresher course in democracy.
Defying the people and the elected civilian President of his country, he is shielding fellow officers charged with  committing criminal human rights violations in the 1980's.
The general arrogantly says that "the armed forces do not trust the present system of justice."
General Discua's contempt for civilian authority and the rule of law draws on a long, dishonorable tradition of military dictatorship in Latin America.
But he seems not to realize that medal-bedecked strongmen are a disappearing breed.
There are no longer cold-war excuses for his kind of defiance.


British Soldiers Get an Unexpected Welcome From Bosnian Serb Troops
In the largest movement of NATO forces yet to enter territory formerly controlled by the Serbs, the British Army reached the blustery peak of Kula Mountain today to confront men in the Bosnian Serb army.
Despite the army's reputation, the British soldiers found the Serbian soldiers meek.


Black Faith Healer Helped the Oppressed
To the Editor:
Re "Harlem Church Is Outpost of Empire" (news article, Dec. 17), on the United House of Prayer for All People, which became a crucial player in a racially charged dispute involving its tenant, Freddy's clothing store in Harlem, the site of the recent tragedy:


Basque Bomb Suspected In Spanish Major's Death
In the latest attack blamed on Basque separatists, a Spanish Army major was killed and his daughter was wounded today when a bomb exploded under his car.


Dialing Will Take Longer
Making some local phone calls will become more complicated for 2 million Bell Atlantic customers in 100 North Jersey municipalities beginning next month, The  Associated Press reported yesterday.
Customers who live in areas near the border for area codes -- and are now able to call across the border without dialing "1" and the neighboring area code -- will need to dial all 11 digits.
The change, which becomes mandatory July 1, is necessary because of the growing  demand for phone numbers as lines are added for faxes and modems, a Bell Atlantic spokesman said.


Serving Their Country
To the Editor:
As much as I like Russell Baker's writing, I have to take exception with a couple of observations in his Dec. 16 column.


4 Clerks Charged With Taking Bribes from Illegal Immigrants
Over the last four years, a small group of low-paid immigration clerks in Manhattan took hundreds of thousands of dollars in bribes to issue employment authorization cards and other documents to tens of thousands of illegal immigrants and others who were not entitled to them, Federal officials said yesterday.
The purported scam -- a virtual case history of how a few obscure workers with access to valuable, coveted documents can wreak havoc on a system -- was penetrated in a yearlong Justice Department undercover investigation and disclosed yesterday after the arrest of four immigration clerks on bribery-conspiracy charges.


Cyrix, Blaming 486 Chip Woes, To Report Loss For 4th Quarter
The Cyrix Corporation disclosed yesterday that it would post a loss in the fourth quarter because it was writing off its 486 chip inventory as a result of  falling prices and sales.
The company said the loss would put it in default of some loan agreements.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Federal budget negotiations misstated the number of Cabinet agencies closed in the current Government shutdown.
Nine agencies, not six, are shut for all but essential services: the Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, Education, Commerce, Justice, State, Interior, Veterans Affairs, and Housing and Urban Development.


A New Plan for the Uninsured
With Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's proposal to raise cigarette taxes to finance hospital treatment for the poor stubbed out in the Legislature, Assembly Democrats said yesterday that bipartisan support was mounting for a plan to tap into the general fund.
"Our position is, the money is there," said Neil M. Cohen, the Assembly's minority whip, who co-sponsored a bill that would set aside $350 million in 1996 and $325 million annually through 2000 to reimburse hospitals for care of uninsured patients who cannot pay for medical care.
Mr.
Cohen said 28 Democrats and 8 Republicans had indicated support for his measure.
That is five votes short of a majority, although he conceded that support among  the Republican leadership might be harder to muster.
Jayne Rebovich, a spokeswoman for Governor Whitman, said, "The Governor is willing to consider other viable plans, but if it is taken entirely from the general fund, the Governor does not believe that is a viable plan."


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-6


Takeover Of Schools Is Upheld
In a major victory for the state, an appeals court today upheld the New Jersey Board of Education's takeover of Newark's failing public school system.
The three-member panel rejected the Newark Board of Education's argument that it was entitled to a special hearing before state officials assumed control on July 12.


SCEcorp Unit Buys British Power Business
The Mission Energy unit of the SCEcorp of Rosemead, Calif., acquired the First Hydro Company, the pumped storage business of the National Grid Company of Britain, this week for $1 billion.
Mission Energy was the high bidder for the company.
Mission Energy said First Hydro consisted of two pumped storage stations in  North Wales that have a combined capacity of 2,088 megawatts.
Pumped storage stations consume electricity when it is comparatively less expensive to pump water for storage into an upper reservoir.
Water is then allowed to flow back through the turbines to generate electricity when its market value is higher.
(Dow Jones)


Jockey Critically Hurt
The jockey NICK SANTAGATA was in guarded, critical condition in a hospital yesterday after a three-horse spill in the first race at Aqueduct.
Two other riders, RAFAEL MOJICA and FILIBERTO LEON, were shaken up.
Santagata was taken to North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I., where Dr.
MICHAEL KENNEDY said Santagata was alert after sustaining head injuries, chest trauma and rib fractures.
Santagata's mount, Time for Another, fell entering the stretch, and Calais and Gray Dawn Pixie fell over her.
Time for Another was destroyed.
(AP)


INSIDE
Work Permits for Cash


Financier Purchases a 12.3% Stake in Charter Medical
Richard Rainwater, the Fort Worth financier who made a fortune in hospital investments, has agreed to buy a 12.3 percent stake in the Charter Medical Corporation, a troubled chain of psychiatric hospitals that is moving into managed care.
The company said yesterday that Mr.
Rainwater and his wife, Darla  Moore, would pay $69.7 million in cash.
The shares of Charter Medical, which changed its name yesterday to Magellan Health Services Inc., jumped 16 percent on the news, closing at $22.625 yesterday on the American Stock Exchange, up $3.125.


Card-Show Promoter Gets 14 Months for Tax Fraud
A memorabilia promoter whose shows spawned a tax-evasion scandal involving former baseball stars was sentenced yesterday to 14 months in prison after describing a dream life for himself that turned into a nightmare for some of the stars.
Michael Bertolini received the sentence in Federal District Court in Brooklyn after pleading guilty to tax-fraud conspiracy stemming from a 1989 autograph show that he helped produce.
At the show, he schemed with some of the retired stars who took part so that they could avoid paying taxes on income from the show.


No Time Like the Present for the Devils' New Lemieux
Last June, Jocelyn Lemieux tagged along with the Devils and their playoff most valuable player, Claude Lemieux -- who just happens to be his younger brother -- for the taping of their appearance on "The Late Show With David Letterman" after New Jersey won the Stanley Cup.
Jocelyn Lemieux, then a Hartford left wing, allowed himself to daydream about being a Devil.
"I thought, it'd be fairly easy for me to adjust to playing with this team, knowing all the guys," Lemieux said.


Spain Cuts a Rate
The Bank of Spain lowered its benchmark interest rate yesterday for the first time in 16 months, emboldened by prospects for lower inflation and recent rate cuts in Germany and the United States.
The central bank lowered the marginal rate on securities repurchase certificates to 9 percent from 9.25 percent, opening the way for further rate cuts early next year, investors said.
(Bloomberg Business News)


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Russia's New Style of Hero
NO doubt many people in the United States saw the Communist triumph in parliamentary elections here last week as more proof, if ever it was needed, that whatever else Russians are, they're nothing like Americans.
Nobody could argue differently.
But voters in the two countries do share one  clear trait: a deep, pervasive and apparently incurable dislike of politicians.


London Flats
To the Editor: In reference to rentals in London mentioned in a letter from Hector MacKethan ("Flats in London," Oct. 1), we, too, stayed at Chelsea Cloisters there.
Our experience was worse than his, if that is possible.
They asked for a $1,300 deposit in advance, and on our arrival Aug. 1, demanded payment in full for all five weeks we were staying, about $4,500.


Ask Too Many Questions, And the Bank Will Collect
For another month, clients of First Fidelity Bank may quiz tellers to their hearts' content about account balances, dates of deposits, checks that have cleared.
But starting on Feb. 1, some customers will have to pay if ask too many questions.
"Some people were making two or three inquiries a day," said Henry T. Wallhauser, a First Fidelity vice president.
"We've been getting about 1.2 million account inquiries per month throughout our system."


Fish Business Brings Sweet Success
IF Peter Heineman has his way, smoked salmon, the centerpiece of many a recent holiday gathering, would be stripped of its star billing.
And because Mr.
Heineman and his partner, Karen Benvin Ransom, own Homarus, a wholesale smoked-fish company here that has won awards and reviews for the quality of its products, Mr.
Heineman's attitude seems unusual.


Alpine Skiing
To the Editor: Jane Karr's article "French Alpine Skiing: A Bumpy Ride" about Val d'Isere (Dec. 3) follows the regrettable practice of writing about oneself within a context.
Fortunately, the subject matter soars above the writer.
During a visit to Val d'Isere last April with my daughter, we experienced blizzards and azure skies, winter powder and spring conditions and never managed to become lost.
The pistes were well tracked and marked with poles to assure visibility.
One could wander off the secured piste by a mere deviation in descent, or venture off altogether behind a peak into an unmarked valley, albeit with a stone hut selling lunch at midroute.
The vastness of the terrain provided an opportunity to explore not available in the United States.
We were guided by readable maps and the most basic source of all travel information, the good advice of our innkeeper.
Val d'Isere has long been popular with British skiers and French "beautiful  people," and we found both in evidence.
While the British pubs emitted more noise, Ms.
Karr could have found quiet French wine bars and restaurants run by local families in the old village.
Happily, we found a different Val d'Isere than she did.


A Manor House Wrapped for Christmas
EVERY year around Christmastime cars slow down on Hegeman's Lane in Old Brookville to admire the holiday decorations of the crisp white colonial that rests atop a hill.
Alex Nichols, who owns a company in Elmont that leases airport containers, and his wife, Sally, have made decorating the circa 1780 manor home a holiday tradition.


SoHo's Taste For Adventure
CASCABEL ** (212) 431-7300; 218 Lafayette Street, near Spring Street; $$(c) all major credit cards


What SUNY President Really Wrote in Letter
We, too, read "Arts Cut at Old Westbury Revives a Battle" [Dec. 3] and the response by the president, Dr.
L.
Eudora Pettigrew [Letters, Dec. 10].
Although  she accuses you of not making "the effort to interview the administration," in her own letter Dr.
Pettigrew gives evidence to support that you did make the effort to interview the administration and did give Dr.
Pettigrew and her administration opportunities both for input and response -- a visit and at least two phone calls.
Dr.
Pettigrew says, "The reporter had called me at least twice  to respond to the allegations contained in the article."


Photographs With a Puerto Rican Imprint
EN FOCO'S mission is to spread the word about photographers whose backgrounds are Hispanic, black, Asian-American and, last but not least, American Indian.
The Bronx-based operation, now in its 22d year, achieves its end by way of Nueva Luz, a photographic journal written in English and Spanish, and by exhibitions in various public spaces.
Charles Biasiny-Rivera, Nueva Luz's editor, is himself a photographer, as is  Frank Gimpaya, who designed the spare but elegant publication.
Exhibitions are organized jointly by Mr.
Biasiny-Rivera and his associate editor, Betty Wilde.
Their latest is "Island Journey," which graces the spiffy gallery at Hostos Center for the Arts here.


Cutback on Fees for L.A.
Starting Jan. 1, any airline ticket issued for a flight departing from Los Angeles International Airport will cost $3 less.
That's when the airport will stop collecting the per-ticket passenger facility charge, which helps airports maintain and improve their runways and terminals and meet other capital-improvement costs.
Airport officials say careful management has made the fee unnecessary.
Los Angeles International is one of the first major United States airports to drop the charge.
In a high-rolling town like Los Angeles, $3 may not seem like much, but with maps of celebrities' homes costing about the same, it could be your ticket to the stars.


The Electronic Confessional
To the Editor:
Do trailer-trash sitcoms stretch credulity to the breaking point, as suggested by Caryn James in her article "Dysfunction Wears Out Its Welcome" [Dec. 3], or do they simply play the same vulgar roles in the American consciousness that daytime television talk shows do?
Both types of shows have many of the characteristics of tent-show revivals: the sins, the sinners, the self-righteous audience, the slatternly confessions.


President Gives Congress More Whitewater Papers
Federal investigators and Republican lawmakers received their Christmas present a little early this year, when on Friday the President acquiesced to Congressional demands and turned over more Whitewater material.
The White House said there was nothing new or interesting in the material, 13 pages of cryptic notes taken at a 1993 meeting of Mr.
Clinton's top Government and private lawyers who were gathering information about two politically sensitive investigations touching on the President and First Lady.


NEWS AND TOPICS


Try to Remember It's Just a Game
Balto An animated film with the voices of Kevin Bacon, Bridget Fonda, Phil Collins, Bob Hoskins Directed by Simon Wells G 74 minutes


ON THE TOWNS
Music


A 'Park' May One Day Become One
Petrosino Park is not much to look at.
Nary a tree grows in the three-hundredths-of-an-acre triangle bounded by Kenmare and Lafayette Streets and Cleveland Place.
"It's an open-air pissoir," said Carl Rosenstein, a neighborhood activist.
"The stench is so bad, people cross the street to avoid it."
The Parks Commissioner, Henry J. Stern, calls it "a traffic island," and to Ralph Velazquez, who runs the Genia Coffee Shop and Deli across the street, it's "junkie heaven." Last summer, he says, a man died from a heroin overdose in the  park.
Mr.
Velazquez, 32, who grew up above the restaurant, which his father started, can't recall ever setting foot in the park.
"It's good for nothing," he said.


IN BRIEF
It's a major victory both for religious freedom and the First Amendment.
It  says that when you put up a holiday display, you can't discriminate against religion by having all religious symbols purged from the display."
BRET SCHUNDLER Mayor of Jersey City, on a Federal judge's ruling permitting a secularized holiday display


WHO NEEDS AMERICA ONLINE?
Ah, doughnuts, breakfast of champions!" Ted Leonsis exclaimed as he entered a conference room one morning in March and spotted a tray of standard-issue pastries. Leonsis is not a small man, so his quip drew a laugh. It also reassured his associates, who remembered how little pleasure Leonsis had found in his last meeting in this room.
A month earlier, two Californians traveled to America Online headquarters in  Vienna, Va., to present a proposal for an on-line site dedicated to surfing, the real kind, done in water.
Assuming that the members of America Online's staff would be corporate types, the two Californians, Mark


Books in Brief: FICTION
ANGEL LIGHT An Old-Fashioned Love Story.
By Andrew M. Greeley.
Forge/Tom Doherty, $23.95.
In a brief introduction to his latest novel, Andrew Greeley assures us that "the basic theology of love that supports this book is quintessentially orthodox." But readers fearing high seriousness need not be concerned: "Angel Light" is a bit of froth featuring a genial Irish-American, computer technology, romantic fantasy and the Old Testament book of Tobias.
In this breezy narrative -- which  reads more like the first draft of a novel than a finished piece of work -- a mysterious force compels a Chicago computer nerd named Toby Tobin to type some travel queries into his computer.
The replies come from an unexpected correspondent -- none other than the patron saint of travelers, surfing the Net  in search of someone to help.
That heavenly being, who signs on as Rafe, uses both the names Raphael and Raphaella in the course of the novel.
Although the saint takes human form in "her professional woman modality" of a "dark blue suit, beige blouse, nylons, sensible shoes, even rimless glasses," she is really the Archangel Raphael.
Things in heaven must be a lot more complicated than mere mortal writing machines like Father Greeley can convey!
Rafe offers Toby an abbreviated version of a biblical tale before sending him off to O'Hare Airport, including a reminder that the original story has "profound and powerful and modern, almost feminist, concern for respect of women." Angelic intervention is  an old-fashioned plot device, no matter how newfangled the trimmings.
Why is Rafe getting involved?
Another old-fashioned plot device: it seems that a great-uncle has left Toby $10 million on the condition that he end a family feud by going to Ireland and marrying his distant cousin, Sara Anne, a proposal he has refused.
Guess where Toby ends up and whom he ends up marrying?
Sara Anne, when he finally meets her, turns out to be a beautiful liturgical composer, a computer whiz and, of course, something of a feminist.
MARY BREASTED


Preval Is Declared Winner of Election
Rene Preval was declared President-elect of Haiti today, easily winning an election that most voters stayed away from.
Mr.
Preval received 87.9 percent of the votes -- 818,000 out of 994,000 -- in the Dec. 17 election, the Provisional Electoral Council announced.


Corrections
The Perspectives column on Dec. 10, about vacancy decontrol of rent-regulated apartments, included a series of mathematical errors in a hypothetical example.
The case assumed the 12 1/2 percent increase permitted by current guidelines upon vacancy and a $250 monthly rise caused by upgrading.
For the vacant apartment to exceed the $2,000-a-month threshold for decontrol, the original rent would have had to be $1,556 a month, not $1,500.


Federal Suit Likely to End Without Penalizing Hyde
The Federal Government's two-and-a-half-year-old lawsuit here blaming Representative Henry J. Hyde, the powerful head of the House Judiciary Committee, and 11 other former directors of Clyde Federal Savings and Loan Association for the thrift's bankruptcy appears to be losing steam.
Last week, United States District Court Judge Brian B. Duff threw out most of the charges against the directors.
He ruled that the only basis for going to trial was an allegation of gross negligence, perhaps the hardest to prove of all the charges the Government had put forward.
With no order entered setting up a schedule for pretrial discovery, or even a date to discuss such an order, progress in the slow-moving case seems to have ground to a halt, at least temporarily.


Warning Follows Firing at Aircraft
The commander of NATO operations in Bosnia, United States Adm.
Leighton W. Smith Jr., delivered a sharp warning today after American and British military aircraft were fired at.
"Knock the shooting off," the admiral said during a whirlwind visit here today.
"It's stupid."


Amtrak Adds Services, East and West
Amtrak has added limited-stop service to the schedule of the San Diegan, which runs between Santa Barbara and San Diego.
On weekdays the San Diegan Express leaves San Diego at 6:33 A.M. and arrives in Santa Barbara at 11:36 A.M.
The southbound trip leaves Santa Barbara at 2:30 P.M. and arrives in San Diego at 7:40 P.M.
The express makes 10 other stops between these cities, four fewer than the regular schedule, reducing travel time by up to 50 minutes.
Last month weekend service was added on the Atlanta-New Orleans leg of the Crescent train, which operates three times a week between New York and New Orleans.


Wendy A. Ziegler, William C. Urban
Wendy Ann Ziegler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John K. Ziegler of Chatham, N.J., was married yesterday to William Christopher Urban, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Urban of Chestnut Hill, Pa.
The Rev.
Thomas Hagan performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of Our Saviour in New York.
The couple, both 25, graduated from Lafayette College, in Easton, Pa.


Help for the Self-Employed
To the Editor:
In "Workers Out on Your Own, Unite!" (From the Desk Of, Nov. 26), Edith Rotkopf calls for the formation of a union to represent the interests of the self-employed.
What she needs is a trade association.


Performing A Miracle On 27th St.
KENNY SCHARF, the pop artist, wasn't feeling any good will toward men on Dec. 15.
The opening reception for his Cosmic Cavern lounge at Tunnel, the nightclub  on West 27th Street, had already started, and the room wasn't nearly ready.
"This is like being naked in public," Mr.
Scharf said.
"It's like the worst nightmare of my childhood come true."


Corrections
A chart in some copies last Sunday about Gov.
George E. Pataki's budget proposal for state aid to school districts misstated the current and proposed totals for Mamaroneck, Peekskill and Yonkers.
A corrected version appears today  on page 24.


A Tour Agency Closes Its Doors
THIS is not a happy Christmas story.
On Nov. 6, I got a call from Dorothy Russell of Bethesda, Md., a friend of an old friend.
She was at the Hotel Fortuna in Taipei with 24 others on a group art and architecture tour, and they  were about to be put out of their rooms, although they had paid for the tour in  advance, because the hotel said it did not have its money and the local tour agent would not guarantee payment.
The alternative was to pay for the rooms again, at $175 a night for a double.
Ms.
Russell asked me to call Inter Pacific Tours International, an established company in New York that had set up the tour and sold it directly to the participants, with no travel agent involved.
The participants from the Washington area paid $2,000 each, including air fare, for a trip of 11 days.
Ms.
Russell hoped I could persuade the company to send the money to the Taipei operator.


The Mr. Fix-It of the Pipe Organ
It's hard to get Larry Trupiano to take credit for things.
He insists that almost anybody with basic woodworking tools can fix a pipe organ.
"No black magic involved," said Mr.
Trupiano, 45, who not only repairs pipe organs in his South Brooklyn shop, but also builds them -- the only craftsman in the borough to do so.
He shrugs at the distinction.
"I was born in Brooklyn and haven't had the common sense to get out," he said.


Visitors From Parliament Study the Welfare System
The world of the welfare recipient is changing, and nowhere more than in New  Jersey.
Since the state overhauled its public assistance system three years ago, other states and the Federal Government, began to look at New Jersey's law and its results to see what they wanted to do.
Now, even Members of Parliament are coming to see what changes they want to make to Britain's welfare system.


Bosnia Issue Hits Home For an Aide to Gingrich
Sometimes the human dimension of a political dispute strikes home deeply, as  when Tony Blankley, the spokesman for Speaker Newt Gingrich, saw his wife off for Bosnia the other night as an Army reservist activated in President Clinton's controversial peacekeeping commitment.
"She was composed, and the kids were O.K.," said Mr.
Blankley.
Only days before his wife, Capt.
Lynda C. Davis, was ordered to duty, he had been in a debate on television with Michael D. McCurry, his counterpart and adversary at the White House.
In this, Mr.
Blankley had carefully underlined the warnings of  history against Balkan involvements.


Habitats: The Decker Building;Palm Beach to Union Sq.
SCOTT MATHIS agreed to leave Palm Beach only if he could find a New York City rental apartment to compare with his waterfront bungalow a block from the Kennedy estate.
He found it. In Union Square.


Is That Pink Atop the Poinsettia? Or White?
FOR many years, during childhood, it was a treat to drive out to the country  to visit with the egg farmer, as he was known by our family.
Our goal was to get the week's supply of farm-fresh eggs and maybe some of his smoked sausage.
It was always fun, for the farmer knew my father well and it was exciting to pet the noses of his wonderful Jersey dairy herd.
When visits were close to the Christmas season, the farmer, whom I later learned was more formally known as John, would always tell us that it was nearly time to get the customary "pernt-setta" for his wife.
I also found out that her  name was Emily.


Joyful, Hopeful Sounds
Dancing, singing and Bible readings enliven Christmas, Hanukkah and Kwanzaa events.


MANHATTAN MINUTE
TAKING IT TO THE CLEANERS: The actor Harvey Keitel, the MTV executive Tom Freston and their neighbors in a luxury condominium at 39 North Moore Street have succeeded, at least temporarily, in stopping a dry-cleaning plant from moving into the building's ground floor.
A State Supreme Court justice issued an order on Wednesday barring the business from opening because of concerns over the dry-cleaning agent perchloroethylene.
Another hearing is scheduled for Jan.  19 . . .
GOING, GOING . . . : ABC No Rio, the Lower East Side performance space that has been fighting to remain at 156 Rivington Street, appears to be one step closer to eviction.
A City Council committee rejected the avant-garde art group's proposal to develop low-income housing in the building.
Instead, the Council agreed to turn over the building to Asian-Americans for Equality, an organization that plans to convert the building to apartments . . .
EIGHT TREES, HOLD THE LIGHTS: It took five years, but neighborhood advocates have succeeded in bringing greenery to the SoHo-Cast Iron Historic District.
Local residents, joined by Parks Commissioner Henry J. Stern, planted eight trees along West Broadway.
The Grand-Canal Park Group had persuaded the Landmarks Preservation Commission to bend rules that bar street trees in the historic district.
Foliage was never a part of the former manufacturing quarter's streetscape, the commission had argued . . .
RESTAURANT WOE: Labor unrest at Chinatown's Silver Palace restaurant has been quelled, but troubles at the Jing Fong Restaurant on  Elizabeth Street are heating up.
The Chinese Staff and Workers Association has announced plans for daily protests and a boycott at Jing Fong, Chinatown's largest eating place, which it says is openly violating labor laws.
According to the State Attorney General, Jing Fong owes its employees $1.1 million in back wages and tips . . .
SOUND OF SILENCE: A self-styled mosque at 247 West 99th Street has moved out after an out-of-court settlement with the landlord, the Red Apple Group.
Neighbors complained that the mosque amplified calls to prayer, blared radios and sometimes hurled invectives.


POSTINGS: Office Building at 111 Livingston Street Is Sold;Nynex to Leave Brooklyn Site
Class A office space in downtown Brooklyn is at a premium.
Nynex no longer needs the space it occupies as a tenant in the office building at 111 Livingston Street.
And so a deal has been struck for purchase of the 23-story building that stands across from Board of Education headquarters.
The building has been bought by a group of investors, headed by Abraham Leser and Louis Stahl, from Empire Equities Inc., which has owned it since it was built in the mid-1970's.
The purchasers previously bought and renovated the former Brooklyn Union Gas building at 195 Montague Street.


In the Region;In Westchester, Office Space Is Less Wide Open
REPORTS on the 1995 office market in Westchester County have just been issued, and brokers are sounding celebratory about an overall strengthening of the market and a greater interest in Westchester buildings from outside developers.
Three of the four reporting companies show a decrease in the county's office  vacancy rate and all point to improvements, especially in downtown White Plains, which is considered a linchpin of the county's economic health.


California Dreamers, Still
EVEN CALIFORNIANS have California dreams.
Palm trees sway, young lovers kiss; everything is bathed in a Technicolor golden glow.
In a California of floods and earthquakes, of ghetto riots and anti-immigrant furor, those dreams are nostalgic ones, receding farther with each new dose of reality.
But the longing remains, and it is the essence of Brian Wilson and Van Dyke Parks's new  album "Orange Crate Art."
Wilson, 53, shaped the modern California mythos as the songwriter and voice of the Beach Boys.
Although his own psyche was deeply troubled, his songs were a vision of sun-swept pleasure, of California girls and good vibrations, with pealing guitar chords and cascades of vocal harmony.


When a Reporter-to-Be Was a Cub Scout Leader
To the Editor:
Joe Sullivan was my Cub Scout leader in 1947 ("What's Up? Listen . . . A Reporter's Life in Politics," front page, Dec. 10).
A giant of a St.
Peter's Prep football player at the time, Joe's twinkling eyes, easy laugh and just-plain-folks intellectuality made him a much-beloved figure on Fairmount Avenue in Jersey City.


School Squeeze Gets a Heave
Bulging classrooms are nothing new at Intermediate School 145 in Jackson Heights.
Even in the 1960's, classes were on split session; today, the school is packed at 150 percent of capacity.
Nevertheless, for more than a decade, board members in Community School District 30 have resisted redrawing the school's boundaries because parents have opposed moving their children from one school to another.
But now, under orders from the Board of Education, District 30 administrators and school board  members are planning to shrink the I.S. 145 student body by prohibiting enrollment from outside the school's immediate neighborhood, transferring some students to an adjacent school district and rerouting children from two elementary schools that now feed into I.S. 145.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-9


Fidelity's Technology Stocks: From Gangbusters to Burdens
STOCK MARKET watchers have fretted all year about what would happen if Fidelity Investments started selling some of its large holdings in technology stocks.
But it now seems that investors should have worried as much about the consequences of Fidelity's keeping them.
Eight of the 10 Fidelity equity funds with the largest percentage of their assets in technology stocks lost ground in the fourth quarter, through Thursday, giving back as much as a third of the gains registered in the year's first nine  months.


Visions of Sugar Plums and Leggy Toy Soldiers
DECIDING THAT I NEEDED a vacation, I dropped into the Radio City Christmas Spectacular to see the world's most famous precision dancers and was anything but disappointed.
I was, in fact, thrilled to learn that the Rockettes are still marching around in the costumes that Vincente Minnelli designed for "The Parade  of the Wooden Soldiers" in 1933.
Some things do change, however.
The Rockettes, who dance five dazzling numbers in the holiday show that runs through Jan. 7 at Radio City Music Hall, are now more hip than their traditional well-scrubbed image suggests.
Their brief costumes are cut higher on the thigh than they were some 15 years ago, and the dancers are prone to a mean hip swivel amid the tapping and kicking.


A Long Detour in Search of Respect
GEORGE MICHAEL WAS miffed.
He had just finished a concert in Toronto in October 1991, and he was looking backstage for the two top executives of his record company: Don Ienner, the head of Columbia Records, and Tommy Mottola, the president of Sony Music Entertainment, the label's corporate parent.
They had flown in from New York on the company jet to catch the show but then, as Mr.
Michael discovered to his considerable annoyance, had left before his performance ended.
To Mr.
Michael, one of the biggest pop stars of the 1980's, first as one half of "Wham!" and then on his own with the worldwide hit album "Faith," the executives' premature departure was a deliberate snub.
Worse, it was part of a pattern of behavior that left Mr.
Michael convinced that Sony had little respect for him and little patience with his attempts to transform himself from teen idol to mature musician.


Legal Fees Are Sole Issue in Warhol Case


Vacant Bank Irks Neighbors
The former headquarters of the Jamaica Savings Bank, a vacant Beaux-Arts building at 161st Street and Jamaica Avenue, has been an eyesore to merchants and community activists for decades.
But to the Jamaica Arts Center next door, it's more than just unattractive -- it's dangerous.
"That building is in massive decay," said Veronique Le Melle, executive director of the Jamaica Arts Center.
"The roof is tilted, and when it rains, the water runs through our building. It is also infested with rats. They should do something about it."


Lawrence Berk; Music Educator, 87
Lawrence Berk, a composer who founded the Berklee College of Music here, died on Friday.
He was 87.
The college had three students when it opened in 1945.
Now, with 2,700 students from 70 countries, it is one of the world's most famous jazz schools.


INSIDE
INVESTING IT /Page 5/ Stocks have risen so much this year that some experts doubt there will be a January effect next month.
By Leah Beth Ward.


STONE-FACED
THEY ARE EASY ENOUGH TO OVERLOOK, UNLESS YOU HAVE BEEN drawn in by their gaze, and then, like John Yang, you'll see them everywhere.
The photographer's three-year obsession with the stone faces that decorate the buildings and brownstones of New York is recorded in his new book, "Over the Door," from Princeton Architectural Press.
No historian has formally documented these exuberant creatures, but Yang has succeeded in picking up scraps of information, often from curious neighbors, who will crowd around the photographer, draped in a silver hood, as he aims his camera's bellows lens at their stoops and cornices.
From a stonemason who once worked at St.
John the Divine, Yang learned that  almost all the carvings (he has recorded more than 100, but thousands of others  exist) were the handiwork of masons from the British Isles and northern Europe during a building boom at the end of the 19th century.
The imagery is often drawn from Celtic mythology, though some of the heads were of actual residents.
One particularly lovely face (No. 3), known as Jane, is thought to have been the sweetheart of the developer.
Yang, who last documented suburban golf courses in  panoramic eight-foot prints, returned to the buildings repeatedly, often finding subtle, sometimes devastating, alterations, even, on occasion, obliteration.
But Yang's work isn't about preserving the faces before they disappear.
Rather, he says, "I was trying to photograph how they are disappearing."
JULIE V. IOVINE


Mythic Shields of Blinding Light
WHEN THE CHIEFS OF ancient Panama went into battle, they wore golden disks the size of Frisbees on their chests.
The disks were said to represent the sun god, and in the blazing sunlight, as myth has it, they shone so brightly that they blinded the enemy.
The disks were also status symbols that signified the power and wealth of the pre-Columbian chiefs, who reigned from the eighth to the 10th centuries.
Each disk was lavishly embossed with fantastic faces and ferocious figures, variously combining the heads of crocodiles, wings of bats, mouths of sharks, claws of lizards and torsos of men, all of which are believed to have mythic significance.
Gold conveyed supernatural power, and the zoomorphic motifs were thought to reinforce a chief's potency.


Where Crunchy Seaweed Makes a Salad
OF all the ethnic cuisines to storm the state's bastions, Japanese has made perhaps the least headway, a surprising fact given the Japanese influences on other aspects of American life.
So when a new Japanese restaurant is sighted, it is news.
And Japanica, in Farmington, is no small, tentative operation.
It occupies a  vast space in a complex called the Exchange.
Just inside the entrance, one has an overview (nine steps down) of the large dining room.
On one side are three tatami mat rooms for private dining, beyond them two large hibachi tables for the sizzling dishes cooked before one's eyes.
A long sushi bar with sparkling-fresh sea specimens is at the rear, and throughout the rest of the room are tables galore.


WANT 28 STEAKS AND A RADIO?
It was good to be reminded that these operators are real people.
It somehow has become O.K. for otherwise civilized people to be rude to these callers, and  your article reminds us that they deserve courtesy, even though their calls are  irritating.
I'm impressed that they always know when to interrupt dinner, despite my erratic schedule.


Corrections
A picture last Sunday with the restaurant review of Park and Orchard in East  Rutherford was published in error.
It showed another restaurant, the Stage House Inn in Scotch Plains.


E-Mail
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review


A Dose of Smelly Chemicals Keeps Tree Poachers Away
Crime is down again in New Jersey, the FBI reported last Monday.
The car theft rate is falling.
Murder is going out of style.
Lost in all these encouraging statistics, however, is a minor but seasonally significant triumph of crime prevention: the theft of Tannenbaum-sized evergreens from the waysides and berms and embankments of the state's highways has all but ceased.
No one is sure exactly why this is.
It may be linked to the drop in Christmas-tree prices over the past decade.
It probably has a lot to do with highway agencies' well-publicized practice of spraying a repellent on trees that causes them to stink mightily at living-room temperatures.


Self-Deception as a Path to Peace
THIS is a place where people who live next to each other have too many bitter memories to either trust each other or want to fight each other again.
So it's just as well to never look some uncomfortable facts in the eye.
Take the matter of a census.
The last one was conducted in 1932, but no one is eager for a recount.


SUNDAY December 24, 1995: BATTLE STATIONS;A Town Without Pity
In the village above, tensions run high.
Twenty-four hours a day, seven days  a week, American and other NATO forces do their best to keep the peace, quelling riots, rooting out snipers and generally trying to stop the warring factions from annihilating one another.
It's as real as a picture postcard from Bosnia, but this is Ubungsdorf, Germany, or Udorf, as the troops call it, some 200 miles from the Bosnian border in the hills of Hohenfels.
Ubungsdorf, which means "training village," is a souped-up Doughboy City, part of the United States Combat Maneuver Training Center.
With its 20-odd stucco-and-brick buildings, cemetery, fully grown trees, burned-out cars, electric lines, water mains and underground sewer system (the better to accommodate snipers), it is the most realistic mirage created by the U.S. military.
There's even a tavern where brawls can break out.
So far, 15,000 of the 20,000 American troops slotted for Bosnia have trained in Udorf, and the rest are scheduled to "occupy" it in the coming months.
The simulated town offers the best kind of training, its officers believe, one that puts "Miles" of experience on the soldiers.
In this case, though, Miles stands for the Multiple Instrumented Laser Engagement System, a computer program that tracks humans, weapons and vehicles by laser beams.


Royal Court


Sema G. Bank, Asher Goldstein
Sema G. Bank, a daughter of Edith and Bruno Bank of New Rochelle, N.Y., is to be married today to Asher Chaim Goldstein, a son of Seema and Jacob Goldstein of Brooklyn.
Rabbi David Edelman, the maternal grandfather of the bridegroom, is to officiate at the Lake Isle Country Club in Eastchester, N.Y.
The bride, 22, is to graduate from Barnard College in January.
Her father retired as a supervisor of water and sewer systems for the New York City Department of Environmental Protection in New York.
Her mother is an accountant and a financial planner in New Rochelle.


Try to Remember It's Just a Game
Sabrina Harrison Ford, Julia Ormond, Greg Kinnear, Nancy Marchand, John Wood Directed by Sydney Pollack PG 127 minutes


Way Off Broadway, a Revue Finds Its Niche
JUST two years ago, a little revue in tribute to Rodgers and Hammerstein was  unkindly plucked from its cabaret roots and transplanted to Broadway, at the Roundabout Theater Company.
Never mind that the 30-year-old Roundabout, a nonprofit institutional theater of a mission and size philosophically removed from the commercialism and hype of the main stem, as it was once called, happens to qualify as a Broadway house by  technical and geographical chance.
That's because it moved some 30 blocks north  of its downtown digs in 1991.


Mexico Still Lags on Democratic Reforms
To the Editor:
Re Thomas L. Friedman's Dec. 17 column on Mexico:


In Germany, St. Lucy's Feast Ushered In Yuletide Season
To the Editor:
Re "Swedes Light Up the Season" (Living Section, Dec. 13), on how Swedes in New York are keeping up their Santa Lucia traditions:


Carols for Christmas Eve
THERE'S still time to squeeze in some last-minute Christmas listening at South Congregational Church in Hartford and at United Church on the Green in New Haven.
In Hartford, four choruses from Handel's "Messiah" may be heard at 10 this morning, and anthems and organ provide "Music for Christmas Eve" at 7, with carols and hymns tonight at 11.
Richard Donohue presides at the podium and at the organ; all events are free, although donations will be received.


WANT 28 STEAKS AND A RADIO?
Thank you for Barry Singer's article on Omaha's telemarketers, "It's 7 P.M.,  and 5 Percent of Omaha Is Calling. Want 28 Steaks and a Radio?" (Dec. 3).
I'll keep their photos near my phone to remind me that there are real people behind the voices who come into my home, mispronounce my simple name ("Uh, could I speak to Mr. LEAN-in?") and urge me to buy what I neither need nor desire.
Perhaps next time you'll include their home phone numbers so I can interrupt their dinners or naps to apologize for sounding like a bully.


Child-Sex Bill Is Signed
President Clinton signed legislation today that sharply increases the punishment for an array of sex offenses involving children.
The new law, intended to crack down on child pornography, raises to between 70 and 87 months the prison term for a person convicted of causing a child to engage in sexually explicit conduct before a camera.
The range had been 57 to 71 months.


'Gold Mine' To Repair Piers For Public Use
New Yorkers living near the Hudson River have long bemoaned the proliferation of car pounds and parking lots that dominate the West Side waterfront.
Only a handful of the three dozen piers that dot the river from Battery Park City to 59th Street are accessible to the public.
But most commercial piers are tiny economic engines that are helping to pay for a waterfront park in an era of dwindling public dollars.
The rents collected for their use by the State Department of Transportation, which owns the piers and headhouse structures, have already paid for an interim esplanade as far north as Gansevoort Street in the West Village and a modest recreation area on Pier 25 in TriBeCa.
Now, another $12 million is available to renovate at least three piers in the Village, TriBeCa and Chelsea.
The money will be used to bolster pilings, renovate pier sheds and install benches and railings along at least three piers.
The department hopes to start construction by December 1996.


Legal Services Seeks Ways To Make Up for Lost Money
When poor people need legal help in civil matters, they turn to the Legal Services Corporation.
Now, with state aid cuts looming and Congress threatening  to cut Legal Services' appropriation by a third, the corporation's New Jersey arm wants all litigants, rich and poor, to help make up the difference here.
Melville Miller Jr., president of Legal Services of New Jersey, has proposed  increasing the fees for filing civil motions to raise $8 million for Legal Services, The New Jersey Law Journal reported this week.
The fee for filing a civil complaint, for example, would rise to $160 from $135, a change endorsed by the presidents of the New Jersey Bar Association and the Association of County Bar Presidents.
Legal Services plans to push for the increase in early 1996.


Burmese Nobelist Detained
The Government briefly detained the Burmese opposition leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, as she tried to attend a dissident group's New Year's celebration, her  political party said today.
Four supporters of Ms.
Aung San Suu Kyi, who won the 1991 Nobel Peace Prize,  were arrested and have not been released, said Win Htein, a spokesman for her party, the National League for Democracy.


Q &amp; A
Depreciate Or Don't Depreciate?


Sarah Fineberg, Kenneth Wagner
Sarah Deena Fineberg, a daughter of Sylvia J. Weissmann of Memphis and the late Louis A. Fineberg, is to be married today to Kenneth Steven Wagner, a son of Roselin and David Wagner of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Rafael Grossman is to perform the ceremony at Congregation Baron Hirsch in Memphis.
The bride, 26, is a stepdaughter of David J. Weissmann.
She graduated from Yeshiva University, as did the bridegroom.
Mr.
Wagner, 34, received a master's degree in public and private management from Yale University.
He works in Paris as the director of human-resources information systems for the European operations of Bristol-Myers Squibb.


Kanu Chauhan's Christmas Spectacular
THERE is a Christmas Eve show at Nassau Coliseum tonight -- but the serene verses of "Silent Night" won't be part of the program.
Instead, the arena will echo with the sentimental love songs of a cherubic Indian balladeer named Kumar Sanu -- the Babyface of Bombay, if you will -- and  raise the curtains for the premiere of the latest high-octane action-adventure film from India.


Kindness of Strangers
CLICK.
Click.
Click.
On a recent Wednesday, Ruslan Pantaeva, 6, was sitting in a friend's bedroom in SoHo.
He was getting frustrated trying to figure out a  Macintosh computer with a CD-ROM.
His mother, Irina Pantaeva, the Siberian-born  Ford model, was nearby in another room, where a holiday party given by Andre Balazs and Katie Ford was in full swing.
Ruslan, a boy with Tiny Tim's cheerful nature and a wide, trusting face, arrived two months ago from Ulan-Ude, Siberia, to live with his mother.
He speaks little English, so he couldn't understand all the options on the screen.
He understood what a map of the world was but didn't know how to activate it.
He ran his cursor over his options.
"Edit." "File." "Help." "Quit."


On Sunday;Lights Glow In the Bronx
HE ain't coming down this street," George Wilson, a streetwise 18-year-old with a sure sense of his Bronx neighborhood, said of tonight's visitor, so confidently expected elsewhere in the city.
"They might try to take his head off, if he came through a window," said Bob  Jubet, 16, adding to his friend's antiseasonal thought.


Budapest Spruces Up Its Subway Line
When Budapest blossomed as one of the grand cities of Europe in the late 19th century, farsighted politicians built the Continent's first subway line.
Running under Andrassy Avenue, it featured comfortable yellow coaches with polished wood and brass interiors.
Emperor Franz Joseph was among the first passengers after the opening in 1896, the year of Hungary's millennium.
The 2.3-mile line, closed last year for renovations, reopened in October, not only as a nod to nostalgia but as a pragmatic solution to the city's colossal traffic jams and smog.


Support for Reich
To the Editor:


City Agency's Lapses Cited Time and Again
Month after month, while there was still time for Elisa Izquierdo to be saved, state officials reviewed the deaths of other children who had been known  to the child protection system, and documented patterns of poor supervision and  rule violations like the ones that have since emerged in Elisa's death.
There was a 2-year-old girl scalded to death in the filthy home of her aunt,  who had been approved as her foster parent.
In the confidential review sent to the city's Child Welfare Administration last February, 11 months after that child was killed, the state Department of Social Services noted: "In-person contacts, provision of services, monitoring and general oversight were not provided to the deceased child and her sibling."


Lillian Zabar, Co-Founder of Quintessential Deli
Lillian Teit Zabar, who fled the pogroms of her homeland, came to the United  States and became part of an American success story, died Friday in Manhattan.
She was 90, or perhaps 92 or 93.


Here's Looking at you, Squid
MAYBE it was the underwater scooter rides to the squid sites to observe the iridescent, giant-eyed creatures, or the 10-foot manta doing stately barrel rolls 40 feet beneath the surface of the Caribbean.
Or maybe it was the full moon -- a time period specifically selected to aid in our night diving.
But after a week as a volunteer scuba diver with Cedam International, a marine conservation organization, I felt transformed -- from an ordinary recreational diver into a scientific explorer.
This was my second trip with Cedam, a 28-year-old nonprofit group that organizes volunteer scuba divers to assist marine scientists with their underwater research as part of its overall program in marine conservation, education, diving, archeology and museums (hence the acronym).
On my first Cedam trip, in the summer of 1994, in Bonaire, the Netherlands Antilles, I had monitored and counted tiny shrimp and became enamored of diving with a purpose.
This current trip, my first on a live-aboard boat, was a squid-research expedition at the coral reefs off the coast of Little Cayman Island.


Sixties Pioneer Trades Martial Art for a Healing One
In the late 1960's, Roberta Schine was studying modern dance and -- like most of her peers -- protesting the war in Vietnam, agitating for civil rights in the South and living "here and there" around the East Village.
Then she visited a friend's karate class.
"Dance suddenly struck me as incredibly bourgeois, and karate seemed like a practical way to protect myself during civil disobedience," said Ms.
Schine, a 52-year-old self-described "aging hippie" who went on to found one of the city's first karate schools for women.
Now, after 20 years of running the Karate School for Women at 149 Bleecker Street, Ms.
Schine will close her studio next week to  teach a far less martial art -- yoga.


A Hidden Christmas Tree And Other Tales of Bayonne
To the Editor:
Jim Callaghan's essay "Christmas in Bayonne, Circa 1950" (Soapbox, Dec. 17) reminded me of how exciting Christmastime was for me as a boy in Bayonne, even though my family was Jewish and celebrated Hanukkah.


JESUS BEFORE HE COULD TALK
REAL EVENTS -- EVEN TRAUMATIC, life-changing events -- can assume over the years the dreamlike character of stories told once upon a time.
War stories, for soldiers genuinely eager to forget, acquire that quality.
In the abstract, no one forgets that a given war really happened, but the hideous concrete details slip from the mind.
By the same token, a made-up story that everyone knows is made up can assume over centuries of active retelling the sanctioned solidity of public history.
In the abstract, no one forgets that the events in the story never really happened, but its concrete, quasi-historical details gradually come to seem more remembered than imagined.
The Christmas story is that kind of story.
Jesus was born in Palestine sometime near the turn of the era.
That much is historical.
The rest -- the census, "no room at the inn," the manger, the shepherds, the wise men, the slaughter of the innocents and the flight into Egypt -- is not historical.
Conservative scholars like Raymond E. Brown and John P. Meier agree with radicals like John Dominic Crossan and Burton Mack that these legends are theology in narrative form, stories told to convey and inspire religious belief  rather than to establish historical fact.
Arguments continue to rage about the historicity of the Gospels as a whole, but about the historicity of the "infancy narratives" -- prologues added to the Gospels of Matthew and Luke long after the core passion and resurrection narrative in each was written -- there is at this  point virtually no debate.


Support for Reich
To the Editor:
"Opposing the System" comes in for some very severe criticism in the Nov. 26  Book Review.
According to Francis Fukuyama, Mr.
Reich's view that the corporate  system is responsible for most of our ills is "of course" not widely shared, and shows him to have been asleep for a generation of changes.
But I believe an honest appraisal of corporate power and influence shows it is Mr.
Fukuyama who is asleep, or, worse, disingenuous.


Syrian Leader Tells of Hope For Speedy Moves to Peace
In his first public remarks since his country agreed to resume talks with Israel, President Hafez al-Assad of Syria said today that he wanted to see faster moves toward peace in the Middle East.
Mr.
Assad said Syria was going into the peace talks with "no preconditions."
He also said Prime Minister Shimon Peres of Israel was showing new signs of flexibility in seeking resolution of the disputes that have made the two countries the region's most intractable foes.


Defining Good Dance
To the Editor:
In William Harris's article "Her Credo: 'If You're Not Flying, What's the Point?' " [Dec. 10] Elizabeth Streb is quoted as saying: "Modern dance has spent a lot of time developing private languages that speak to only a few people. That stinks of elitism."


And to All, a Universal 'God Bless You'
NOT long ago, as the Middle Eastern cold-season joke goes, Saddam Hussein was giving a speech to his Iraqi party underlings when suddenly, a resounding "Achoo!" broke his listeners' cowed silence.
"Who sneezed?" he demanded.


One Man's Home, for the Holidays
TALK about holiday anxiety.
Mark Morris broke into the Camden County Jail just so he could spend Christmas in peace and safety.
Twice.
Mr.
Morris, 38, is a career criminal, but not much of one.
The long fanfold of his arrest record presents a sorry resume of low crimes and misdemeanors: disturbances of the peace, fights, simple assaults, penny-ante burglaries.


Try to Remember It's Just a Game
Sense and Sensibility Emma Thompson, Hugh Grant, Kate Winslet, Alan Rickman, Greg Wise Directed by Ang Lee PG 135 minutes


All This, and 30 Kinds of Rice
IT may be best to describe Summer Yang as a blur.
She is perpetually in motion, a hands-on business owner who seems to do a hundred things at once at Maxim's Oriental Food Market.
Pack groceries?
Place orders on a cellular phone?
Point out the pickled shallots or durian ice cream?
She handles it all with aplomb and ardor.
"I like the challenge," she said on a recent weekend afternoon, in between inspecting the live fish tank and the frozen foods section.
"I like to work seven days a week."


How Movies Fade Out on Politics
Lines Between the Lines


Concert Society Adds Year-End Performance
IN response to full-house attendance year after year," said Richard Serbagi,  president of the Concert Society of Putnam and Northern Westchester, "we are expanding our traditional holiday concert to two performances, so bring your family and guests either Thursday or Friday for another resounding year-end musical celebration."
Adding a family note to the proceedings are the Katonah wife-husband, violin-viola duo of Ann Leathers and Abraham Appleman.
They will play Mozart's Sinfonia Concertante with Mr.
Serbagi conducting the Concert Society Chamber Orchestra.


Travel at Home
International travel has always been a roll of the dice in many respects, and now comes a form of travel where that is literally so.
Travel Buff, a new board  game, takes players around the world as it tests their knowledge of geography and other cultures.
The game, which has good-quality graphics, is similar in format to Trivial Pursuit.
Questions vary in difficulty (at least one qualified as impossible, since it had a misprinted answer) and two to six people can play.
It costs $29.95.
For information, call (800) 378-8581.


The County's Changing Health Care Scene
THE New Rochelle Hospital Medical Center develops a partnership with the County Medical Center.
Memorial Sloan-Kettering and Mount Sinai hospitals announce affiliations with Phelps Memorial.
Columbia-Presbyterian forms a strategic partnership with the White Plains Hospital Center.
Montefiore Medical  Center affiliates with a local oncology group.
These are some of the latest headlines in Westchester's health-care marketplace as affiliations, mergers, alliances, agreements, contracts and combinations of them increasingly become the rule.
Observers say that nothing is the same in the health-care industry these days, and little will ever be the same again.


Sviridov: A Known Quantity
To the Editor:
In his article about the operatic baritone Dmitri Hvorostovsky ["His Career Path Is Plotted: Mostly Up," Dec. 3], Jamie James describes Georgi Sviridov as a "little known" Russian composer.
This may be true in regard to Mr.
Sviridov's reputation in the West, but in Russia he is admired by many as the greatest living native composer.
In fact, Mr.
Sviridov's birthday (he turned 80 this month) is being celebrated in Russia by an unprecedented five-month-long festival featuring his extremely popular vocal and choral music.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Canine Christmas


Magic and Murals in an Opera for Children
OPERA and children are not always a winning combination, but "Aldo and the Magic Lamp," a collaboration of the Vineyard Theater, the Parks Department's Operation Greenthumb and Artmakers Inc., a nonprofit group, "is more accessible  to children and is not exactly in the traditional opera format," said Sam Rudy,  a spokesman for the production.
The opera, inspired by the tale Aladdin and his Magic Lamp, focuses on three  youngsters who confront a drug dealer in their community garden.
The work marks the start of a six-month project in which 300 youngsters who see "Aldo" will create 10 opera-inspired murals.
After each show, several children in the audience will meet for a creative-writing workshop.
Beginning in March, they meet twice a week for six weeks to create murals and sculptures for installation in community gardens.


ALSO INSIDE
URBAN VISTA 3 A New York rarity: Street signs, Parisian-style.


Santa, the Hard Way


Try to Remember It's Just a Game
Jumanji Robin Williams, Bonnie Hunt, Kirsten Dunst, David Alan Grier Directed by Joe Johnston PG 106 minutes


Writing to Get to Know Oneself, and Maybe Find a Home
It is Tuesday, writing night at the Hoboken Clergy Coalition Shelter.
In the  basement of St.
John's Lutheran Church, homeless people taking refuge from the blowing, sifting snow stand in line for boiled hot dogs, baked beans, an orange.
Cleanup follows, with shelter residents emptying garbage, mopping floors, carrying tables out and beds and blankets in.
But a handful slip upstairs, carrying notebooks and ballpoints and settling into pews.
Mandy Gardner, a volunteer who has published poems in small magazines, and Chris Pilcher, a Union City custodian who spent some months living at the shelter, are the leaders.
But there's no conventional teaching here -- nobody is right or wrong, smarter or dumber, more or less knowledgeable.
There is simply writing, reading aloud, listening and praising.


Retraining America Isn't Impossible Job
To the Editor:
In "American Inequality: Its History and Scary Future" (Op-Ed, Dec. 19), Benjamin Schwarz estimates the cost of reversing the slide toward inequality by  upgrading people's skills at $170 billion a year, a "politically impossible" price.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
PLAYFUL ART


TERROR ON AN EIGHT-HOUR SHIFT
I was prepared to feel sympathy for Mike Hensley, a man who risks his life every day for what must be a thankless job.
Instead, I came away with the impression of a man who has more in common with his charges than he may realize.
He seems to have a similar diluted sense of principle, albeit within the confines of the law.


A Cajun Christmas Tradition Won't Die Down
Some things, you do just because your daddy did.
In Paulina, in Gramercy, in Lutcher and in a dozen other little towns that line the banks of the Mississippi River, much of life is not learned in school or even in the Catholic and Baptist churches that seem to appear every other mile along the River Road.
Some things, say the people who live here, you know from the cradle and act accordingly.


Michael Blackman, Susan Rosenau
Susan Jane Rosenau, a daughter of Jane Rosenau of White Plains and the late William W. Rosenau, was married yesterday to Michael Brian Blackman, a son of Meryl and Kenneth Blackman of Armonk, N.Y.
Rabbi Daniel S. Wolk performed the ceremony at the Plaza in New York.
Mrs.
Blackman, 33, teaches the third grade at the Day School in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont and received a master's degree in education from the Bank Street College.
Her father was a senior partner in Fowler, Rosenau &amp; Geary, a stock brokerage in New York, and was a governor of the New York Stock Exchange.


RUDOLPH GIULIANI HAS HIS WAY
Rudolph Giuliani indeed "has his way" in John Tierney's article "The Holy Terror" (Dec. 3).
We are to believe that the Mayor's only true weakness is his somewhat autocratic behavior, which Tierney implies is a necessary part of any visionary reformer's personal makeup, hence the connection to Fiorello La Guardia.
What Tierney neglects to say is that Giuliani's policies are merely another example of Reagan-era redistributing of resources to the top.
Yes, a transit-fare hike is a tax; a tuition increase at the city's public colleges and universities, where the majority of the student body is lower and lower-middle class, is a tax.


At the Casinos
What's happening onstage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets  are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.


What Do 'Money Train' Critics Say Now?
To the Editor:
Hypocrisy is breeding fast among those who slash movies for promoting crime.
Senator Bob Dole, The Wall Street Journal, the head of the New York Transit Authority and New York City's Police Commissioner have cited the movie "Money Train" as instigating a copycat murder in the burning of a token-booth clerk in  the New York City subway.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Word for Word;Might the Founding Fathers Have Said Something Stupid?
WHAT'S the stupidest feature of the Constitution?
What kind of question is that for a group of reputable law professors?
A question, it turns out, intended to provoke challenging, far from stupid critiques of the document we have all been taught to revere.


Wendy's Workshop
The holidays at our house are a time for family, sharing and warm celebration.
But it only happens through careful preparation.
I begin planning on Jan. 2, when I cut off all the amaryllis blossoms in the house and lock them  in the bathtub.
The door remains sealed until Christmas Eve, when I discover a tubful of blooming trumpets.
Frankly, I want to slap the hand of anyone who thinks nothing can be done with used votive candles.
My family uses them as shoe trees, until the holidays  roll around, when we put one on every step.
Last Christmas, we had such a laugh  when I accidentally burned my Manolo Blahnik pumps.


At Home Across the World's Cultural Map
THE ITALIAN PAINTER Francesco Clemente, now 43 years old, has steadfastly gone his own way while some contemporaries marched up the hill of fame in the 1980's and tumbled down again in the 90's, when fashions changed.
Clemente's work has never fought for our attention, and in the show of 18 mostly small and early paintings by him at the Peter Blum Gallery on Wooster Street in SoHo,  he is manifestly not striving for a major statement.
These early pictures, on view through Jan. 31, look as fresh, mischievous and provocative as they ever did.
As always, Clemente himself is present in the work as a one-man repertory company.
Even when his head is severed from his body, it  seems to carry on regardless.
At other times, as in "Waiting," he is clearly all set to dive into the maelstroms of fancy.


SUNDAY December 24, 1995: TOYLAND;Sky's The Limit
Last Christmas Day, this Magazine's cover story posed an engaging question: "Will a Flying Doll . . . Fly?" Back then, Sky Dancer was unknown to just about  everyone except its creators, and they could only hope it would become a success, not a joke.
The results are in.
According to its maker, Lewis Galoob Toys, 1995 sales are expected to reach $75 million, three times its first estimate.
For two months, in fact, the doll was the best-selling toy in the nation -- the first time any girl's plaything (except Barbie) has topped the list.
Beyond helping to triple the price of Galoob stock, the doll has become a minor celebrity, even ballooning forth at the Macy's parade.
And, given its success, there has been a customary tempest of merchandising: Sky Dancer's inventors have licensed its image for more than 50 products, from underwear to wallets.
That's not counting an animated TV series going into syndication in the fall.
Or the Sky Dancers Ice Capades, which starts a 38-city tour next summer.


Missionaries of Human Possibility Who Sought Solutions for All
IT WENT LARGELY UNNOTICED, but 1995 brought the 100th birthdays of both Lewis Mumford and R. Buckminster Fuller.
Neither man was around to mark the occasion -- Mumford died at 94 in 1990, Fuller at 87 in 1983 -- and I doubt that either one of them would have thought much of my noting their centennials together.
The two could not have been more different: Mumford, the scholar, moralist, deep believer in the dangers of technology and the virtues of small communities; Fuller, the apostle of technology, celebrant of the liberation he was sure science would bring to mankind.
"The Myth of the Machine" is how Mumford sternly titled one of his books.
"Spaceship Earth" is what Fuller gleefully named the world.


A Variety of Festivities For Ringing in the Year
SAMBA and gypsy dancers, a chamber-music ensemble and Brazilian, jazz and Cajun bands will all be part of a kaleidoscope of ethnic festivities this New Year's Eve.
Tupelo Honey at 39 Roslyn Road in Sea Cliff (671-8300) is celebrating its first New Year's Eve with a New Orleans Mardi Gras meal.
The first seating, at 5 P.M., costs $50.
The second, at 7 P.M., is $6o and the 9 P.M. dinner, with live Cajun and jazz music, is $150.


WANT 28 STEAKS AND A RADIO?
None of the people featured in your article seemed to understand that there is a distinct difference between the act of ordering by phone and telemarketing.
When a consumer initiates a call to a business for a specific item, it is called shopping.
When a telemarketer makes uninvited calls to private residences to peddle unwanted items, it is called harassment.
No definition of free enterprise will ever change the inherent nature of that difference.


Powell and Whitman, Entente Cordiale
William Kristol, the Republican guru, launched Christine Todd Whitman's career as a mentionable in the game of Presidential politics by suggesting, early last year, that a Colin Powell/Christie Whitman combo would be a Republican dream team in 1996.
That May, the Governor and the general shared the speaker's platform at a Princeton business event and Mr.
Powell joked in an aside to the Governor, "Let's see, am I supposed to call you, or are you supposed to call me?"


CLINTON PREDICTS A PACT ON BUDGET WILL BE REACHED
President Clinton predicted today that an agreement would be reached on a seven-year plan to balance the budget, saying, "I am confident we can end this impasse."


Under Age


Is That Pink Atop the Poinsettia? Or White?
FOR many years, during childhood, it was a treat to drive out to the country  to visit with the egg farmer, as he was known by our family.
Our goal was to get the week's supply of farm-fresh eggs and maybe some of his smoked sausage.
It was always fun, for the farmer knew my father well and it was exciting to pet the noses of his wonderful Jersey dairy herd.
When visits were close to the Christmas season, the farmer, whom I later learned was more formally known as John, would always tell us that it was nearly time to get the customary "pernt-setta" for his wife.
I also found out that her  name was Emily.


F.Y.I.
Yuletide Never Ebbs Q. I was looking for gifts in Trump Tower and came across a place called the Incredible Christmas Store.
The place was bustling, but all the activity begged  the question: What do they do the rest of the year?


For Clergy, Christmastime Means Overtime
The Rev.
Arthur Caliandro, pastor of New York's distinguished Marble Collegiate Church, has a recurring way of responding to what he calls "my favorite season of the year": He gets sick.
Returning to work early last week after four days laid up, Dr.
Caliandro reflected on the special strains, psychological and spiritual as well as physical, that Christmas puts on Christian clergy.


Wall St. Shedding Its Budget Blinders
All year, the markets blithely ignored Washington's budget histrionics.
No matter how strident the warnings -- Newt Gingrich's prediction a few weeks ago of a "market crash" if the White House failed to give way to the Republican  agenda, and Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin's admonition about the danger of  playing political games with the debt limit and the prospect of national default -- investors just kept buying.
Wall Street was convinced it understood the odd theatrics of Pennsylvania Avenue, and had seen it all before.
When the table-pounding ended, investors were certain, a plan would emerge to balance the budget by early in the next millennium.


Boy Near Death; Mother Is Held
A woman brought her 3-year-old son into a Bronx emergency room yesterday with his stomach full of methadone and his body covered with burns and bruises, both  faded and fresh, police said.
Soon afterward, the mother, Judith Frade, 34, was arrested on suspicion that  she had fed him the powerful drug and was responsible for his wounds, said Officer Robert Samuel, a spokesman for the New York City Police Department.


A Surging Market In Holiday Cheer For Employees
The office Christmas party is bigger than ever this season.
Battalia Winston  International, an executive recruiting firm in Manhattan, studied holiday revels and found that 89 percent of the 101 companies it surveyed were holding companywide parties this year, up from 16 percent in 1990.
The companies see the festivities as a good way for their employees to bond, the firm said.
But the parties are getting to be the only thing that companies do for the holidays.
Battalia Winston found that corporate gift-giving is going the way of the Christmas goose, with only a third of the companies surveyed offering gifts to employees this year, down from almost half in 1990.
And here is more bad news: This year, more companies were asking their employees to pay for the gatherings.


Playing to Tomorrow's Audience
AT THE CONCERT HALLS and in the museums, children are everywhere.
In the lobby of Avery Fisher Hall at Lincoln Center, some crowd around a table where an oboist from the New York Philharmonic shows how reeds are made.
Others press forward to put flutes to their lips or violins to their chins, or to ask musicians to sign pictures of the orchestra.


Rent Controls And the Belnord
To the Editor:
Your article on the landmark Belnord's experience with decontrol of luxury apartments (Perspectives, Dec. 10), makes a passing reference to the building's  former owner, Lillian Seril, having negotiated tenancy of a rent-controlled apartment as part of her sale of the property in 1994.
What an eloquent, perhaps unintended, testament to the sheer stupidity of New York's rent laws.
Why should a woman who has just pocketed $15 million be protected by the government from high rents?
Far from favoring our most needy and vulnerable citizens, rent control and rent stabilization are stacked heavily in favor of the well-heeled and well-connected.


Cheek by Jowl's Dynamic Style Shows Off the Group's Bravery
SOMETIMES I WANT TO RAIL against the Brooklyn Academy of Music for giving us  so little time to see theater that is so worth seeing.
England's insolently modern Cheek by Jowl company performed John Webster's vengeful Jacobean tragedy  "The Duchess of Malfi" for nine days this month at the Majestic Theater.
They're gone now, on the next stop of their international tour, but I am still in the grip of what I saw; reliving it, arguing with it, haunted by it.
The stage was bare of everything except thick, shroudlike curtains that gave  new force to that old expression, "Let us draw the curtain on evil thoughts and  deeds." The actors took their places on a chess-board-like floor when the play began, and they spoke their initial lines (the lines that established the status and temper of each character) staring past one another.
But they were connected; one felt the currents of energy that bound them together.


One Man's Heroic Answer To the Impact of 'Growth'
To the Editor:
The story of Raymond E. McCreary and Paragon Household Products in your Dec.  10 Jersey column represents the best kind of heroic solution to the planet damage threatened by the corporate myth of eternal "growth." I wish it could be  reprinted again and again.


These Figures Spell Good Times, Not Bad
SOCIAL SECURITY will go bankrupt in 2030!
Health care must be cut to save it!
Our older citizens must sacrifice to save our children!
These dire warnings are  the sound bites of the day.
How much politicians and pundits offering the warnings of crisis -- and policies to meet them -- are really motivated by deficit paranoia is not all that clear.
Many seem bound and blinded by an ideology that dictates that government do less and stop giving (the undeserving) the proverbial free lunch.
That free lunches are not necessarily all that bad, and certainly better than no lunch at all, seems to escape them.


Is That Pink Atop the Poinsettia? Or White?
FOR many years, during childhood, it was a treat to drive out to the country  to visit with the egg farmer, as he was known by our family.
Our goal was to get the week's supply of farm-fresh eggs and maybe some of his smoked sausage.
It was always fun, for the farmer knew my father well and it was exciting to pet the noses of his wonderful Jersey dairy herd.
When visits were close to the Christmas season, the farmer, whom I later learned was more formally known as John, would always tell us that it was nearly time to get the customary "pernt-setta" for his wife.
I also found out that her  name was Emily.


Widow Finds a Way to Cope With Ills and Loneliness
Dor Freda G., the two empty seats at the Hanukkah table are a bitter reminder of her husband and son, both killed by a swift and merciless cancer.
The grief was compounded for Mrs.
G. by her own deteriorating health.
Two mild strokes and a severe shoulder fracture left her homebound, suddenly unable to care for herself.
It was not until one of her grandchildren enlisted help for her from the Jewish Association for Services for the Aged that her life resumed some semblance of comfort and normalcy.
The agency now provides Mrs.
G. with daily hot meals, bereavement counseling and a home aide who helps her with everything  from shopping to cleaning.


Dutch Christmas Via the Caribbean
It has been a long time since Dutch was spoken at the Reformed Protestant Dutch Church of Flatbush.
This Christmas season, though, the white-steepled stone church, which gave Church Avenue its name, reverberated once again with the strains of caroling by families who are bringing Dutch heritage back to Brooklyn.
They do not, however, hail from the Netherlands but from the Caribbean islands of Aruba and the Dutch Antilles, which like Brooklyn were colonized by the Dutch in the 17th century.


Controlling The Board Of a Co-op
ONE reason people buy homes is to control their living conditions.
Co-op shareholders usually seek to take over their buildings from the original sponsors as soon as they can.
Sometimes, though, that doesn't happen.
"There are co-ops out there that do not yet have control of their boards even though they're entitled to it," said Herb Rose, a co-op consultant in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
"And there are many advantages to shareholders' having control."


Anna Brady, Samuel Evans
Anna Elizabeth Comerford Brady, an accounts manager at The Atlantic Monthly in New York, was married yesterday to Samuel Spencer Evans, a vice president of  institutional equities at Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, the New York investment  bank.
The Rev.
Hector Munioz performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Cathedral Church in Punta Arenas, Chile.
Mrs.
Evans graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and studied interior design at the Inchbald School of Design in London.
She is a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
William John Brady Jr. of Chestnut Hill, Pa.
The bride's father is a senior judge of the Pennsylvania Municipal Courts in Philadelphia.
He was the head of the executive office for United States Attorneys in the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations.
Her mother, Lois S. B. Brady, is a museum educator for  the Philadelphia School District.


RUDOLPH GIULIANI HAS HIS WAY
New York is a city filled with self-absorbed maniacs: reactionary right-wingers and left-wing loonies.
Ethnically, it is the very definition of melting pot.
It is not a nice vanilla place to govern like, say, Wichita, Kan.
It's a city-state, center of its world, a virtual country constantly on the verge of anarchy, never content to just peacefully exist.
That's why I'm glad to have a megalomaniac like Rudolph Giuliani as Mayor.
Who else with the guts to do it wants the job?
Too bad if some people don't like him.


Arts Endowment Hasn't Lived Up to Promise
To the Editor:
Re "Art and Money" (editorial, Dec. 17):


SUNDAY December 24, 1995;QUESTIONS FOR: Steely Dan


Denver Museum Relates Prehistory of the West
Prehistoric Journey, a new permanent exhibit at the Denver Museum of Natural  History, chronicles three and a half billion years of life on Earth, with emphasis on the western United States.
It incorporates more than 500 fossils and reconstructions of fossil quarry sites, as well as a fossil laboratory where visitors can watch and talk to paleontologists as they work.


Democracy's Trap
America needs to curb its missionary zeal to establish multiparty systems in  every third world country as fast as it can.
Our rote prescription for undeveloped and newly "liberated" nations -- elections within one year, followed by stability -- is more likely to lead to chaos than democracy.
This is not to deny democracy's successes, especially in some Eastern European states.
But we must acknowledge its limitations, at least as a quick fix, in a world torn by exploding populations, diminishing natural resources, struggling governments and ethnic rivalries.
We should shift our foreign development strategy from one of instant gratification to one of mature patience, encouraging a slower, but more realistic, route to democracy.


A Tale of Show Business, Death and Life
THE circumstantial triumph of "42d Street" in 1980 will evermore resonate with the offstage drama that turned a makeshift musical about show business make believe into a mega hit.
The real life story: A show in trouble was rushed onto Broadway for a late summer opening.
After a problematic tryout at the Kennedy Center in Washington, D.C., word was that the whole thing might be called off.
But the artful dodging of publicity, masterminded by the wily David Merrick, had everyone wondering about the secrecy enshrouding a big-time show, then capitalized at $1.7 million.


TERROR ON AN EIGHT-HOUR SHIFT
Bruce Porter's "Terror on an Eight-Hour Shift" (Nov. 26) was spellbinding.
I  admire the courage of Mike Hensley and the other correction officers who must come to grips with the possibility that every day may be their last.
Theirs may  well be one of the world's toughest jobs.
ALLISON SAVAGE Harvey's Lake, Pa.


Exit Strategy
MAJORITY LEADER BOB DOLE contended that President Clinton's timetable predicting that United States troops would be out of Bosnia in about a year was  "not an exit strategy."
That was not his first use of the phrase.
In 1988, when the Dole campaign for the Republican nomination was running out of steam, Peter Goldman of Newsweek wrote, "While Dole went through the motions of carrying on, his mind was on what he had begun to call the 'exit strategy' -- a way to get out with as much leverage and as many options as he could preserve."


Yugoslavia's Disintegration, From All Angles
THE BODIES LIE SCATTERED.
A woman's leather purse is discarded on the road.
The corpses and the bag have equal value in this small town in eastern Bosnia because these Muslim bodies are now no more than objects.
Serb men pass by, loading them onto trucks, one body after another, like sacks of produce.
It is arduous, unappealing work.
They puff; they grimace; they seem just a little uneasy.
But the job must be done.
This is Zvornik in April 1992, at the start of the war in Bosnia.
There were 49,000 Muslims in the town.
Now there are none.
The camera cuts to Vojislav Seselj, an extreme nationalist Serbian politician who led paramilitary forces in Bosnia at the beginning of the war.
Yes, he concedes, the "ethnic cleansing" of Zvornik and other Bosnian towns by Serbian "special commando units" happened.
He talks in a matter-of-fact way, recalling the details.
"Milosevic was in control," he continues, referring to the Serbian  President, Slobodan Milosevic, "and the operation was planned in Belgrade."


From Trees, A Livelihood


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday about violence in Pakistan referred incorrectly to Karachi.
It is not the national capital; Islamabad is.


Bankrupt Arts Center Pins Its Hopes on a New Audience
Having filed for bankruptcy this month, directors of the William Carlos Williams Center in Rutherford are hoping for a fresh, focused start.
The arts center is staving off creditors -- mostly the power company -- with its Chapter  11 bankruptcy declaration, which will also allow the directors to regroup, rethink their mission and try to pull in audiences.
But Chapter 11 protection will be useful only if the arts center determines and implements a focused program, said Richard Theryoung, president of the board.
For more than 10 years, the center's plays, concerts and movies have attracted fewer and fewer people.
The final slide into debt began two years ago  when the center booked a Hungarian dance troupe.
The night of the performance, there was a heavy snowfall.
Thirty-six people turned up to watch the troupe's 126 dancers and musicians.
"A disaster," Mr.
Theryoung said.


Weeding Out Talk Shows
Are screechy daytime talk shows, like a child reaching the end of a tantrum,  about to collapse in a whimpering heap?
Television experts believe that at least a third of the 21 daytime talk shows now airing will be canceled, as early as next month.
Too few viewers are watching.


SUNDAY December 24, 1995: SATURDAY MORNING FEVER;Ticked Off
Fans are very particular about labels.
To a Star Trek lover, the "Trekkie" tag evokes the image of some idiot wearing Spock ears.
A "Trekker," on the other hand, is someone who sports Spock ears with paradoxical detachment while exploring cross-cultural dissonance with dispassionate reserve.
People (of all ages) who live for "The Tick," the increasingly popular Saturday morning cartoon on the Fox Children's Network, are just at the embryonic stage of choosing the right name to embody their affection for the large blue avenger, his sidekick, Arthur, and their battles against villains like Chairface Chippendale.
Here is a list of some proposals now circulating on  the Internet: Tickies . . .
Tickers . . .
Tickles . . .
The Ticklish . . .
Ticklers . . .
Tickettes . . .
Mystic Order of Arachnid Vigilance (the official  fan club) . . .
Fan O'Ticks . . .
Spoonies . . .
Spoonheads (the apparent favorite) . . .
Blood Donors . . .
Arachnophiles . . .
Tremendously Incredible Citizens of Knowledge and Strength.


Terry Gilliam: Going Mainstream (Sort Of)
TERRY GILLIAM, the irrepressible, iconoclastic director who prefers reading Dante to a Joe Eszterhas script and would rather be audited than do brunch in Bel Air, is back in action.
Four years since making his last film, the critically acclaimed "Fisher King," he has directed "12 Monkeys," a futuristic virus thriller starring Bruce  Willis, Brad Pitt and Madeleine Stowe that opens on Wednesday.


High Society Transforms Itself Into Shy Society
WHAT a year it has been for parties on a grand scale!
Three royal weddings, scores of fancy balls, swishing gowns, tottering towers of flowers, bacchanalian buffets and cascades of Champagne.
You weren't invited?
You didn't even know these elegant events took place?
Not surprising.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.


Blaze in India Kills Over 300, Mostly Youths
At least 310 people, more than half of them schoolchildren, were burned or trampled to death today when a tent erected for a school ceremony in a small northern Indian town caught fire, setting off a stampede in a walled courtyard,  the police said.
About 350 others were injured, many in critical condition with extensive burns, a police spokesmen said.


Sparks Fly Over Industry Safety Test
FOR millions of Americans, the Underwriters Laboratories seal is a familiar symbol of safety and quality on products ranging from electric heaters to computers to Christmas tree lights.
But U.L., a nonprofit testing organization, now finds itself sparring with Federal officials in a behind-the-scenes battle over one new product that is raising troubling questions about the organization's methods and its special status as a private sector guardian of consumer safety.
The U.L. seal goes on products that it "lists" as having met its battery of tests.


A Woman Skips Across 3 Centuries, Maintaining Her Ability to Enchant
ONE BY ONE, Leos Janacek's operas are slipping into the repertory of the Metropolitan Opera.
Next up, on Jan. 5, is "The Makropulos Case," in English, with Jessye Norman in the role of the 337-year-old Elina Makropulos.
Actually, Elina is known through most of the opera as Emilia Marty, a celebrated opera singer; her true identity comes as a shock to the other characters when it is finally revealed in Act III.
The reader has every right to wonder, now that the suspense has been spoiled, if there is still any reason  to see the show.


Thou Shalt Not


Man Arrested In Poison Case Kills Himself In Jail Cell
A man charged with possessing enough of one of the deadliest known poisons to kill thousands of people committed suicide in his Arkansas jail cell yesterday morning.
The man, Thomas Lewis Lavy, 54, was arrested by the Federal Bureau of Investigation on Wednesday in a raid on his isolated stone cabin in the remote mountains of northern Arkansas and charged under antiterrorism statutes with possession of 130 grams of ricin, a white powder distilled from castor beans.
The authorities said he had tried to smuggle the powder across the Canadian border from Alaska in 1993.
Canadian authorities confiscated the powder and tests found that it was ricin.


Borrowing Time to Pay Back Student Loans
JEANNETTE GALANIS was not worried freshman year when she started the process  of borrowing $21,000 to attend the University of Colorado.
Nine months after her 1994 graduation, she changed her mind.
She had just received her first bill, for $70, from one lender.
Then she got another bill, for $50, on a different loan.
Within days, two more bills from two more lenders arrived.


Long Island Q&amp;A: Frank N. Ligouri;Working on Tomorrow's Demand for Temporary Help Today
WHEN Frank N. Ligouri talks about the job market, people listen.
Though he is not an economist, he is among the first to feel a change in the  economic climate.
As chief executive of the Olsten Corporation in Melville, a leading provider of temporary workers, he sees many of tomorrow's job demands in his office today.


Candies for Nibbling, Sharing (and Dancing in Heads)
NOW, for those last-minute sugarplums.
They have to be quickly assembled and  irresistible to nibble, suitable, perhaps, for packing to take to an open house  on Christmas Day if not served at home.
Double the recipes and there will be enough for a sweet start to the new year.
"The Candy Cookbook" by Carole Bloom (Chronicle Books, $14.95) has meticulous instructions for indulgences like chocolate truffles, toffee bars, nut brittles and marzipan, plus good advice about purchasing, storing and handling the ingredients.
Though some of the candies need overnight chilling, many can be whipped up at a moment's notice.


Lobbying for Jobs Went Too Far, Police Say
Earlier this month, when a group of men who said they were members of a minority labor organization visited Bailey-Holt House, a residence for people who have AIDS, they had a simple request: jobs.
But the foreman overseeing renovations to the Christopher Street building wasn't hiring.
Instead of taking no for an answer, the group's leader, Anthony Ayler, told the foreman he would be back to "get his way," the police said.
On Dec. 13, Mr.
Ayler returned with an ultimatum: Hire his followers, or "we'll shut you down,"  he reportedly said.
This time, however, the construction worker he approached was Police Lieut.
Robert McKenna of the Sixth Precinct.
"I guess I looked the part," Lieutenant McKenna said.


WANT 28 STEAKS AND A RADIO?
A good follow-up would be to interview some of the irate people whom telemarketers annoy.


On Fulton Street, Heeding Echoes of the Tensions in Harlem
A street of stores and fast-food outlets where most customers are black and most store owners are not.
A history of racially charged boycotts and demonstrations.
A dispute that followed a decision by city officials and store owners to move outdoor vendors from the street.
Those elements -- which fueled the tensions on 125th Street in Harlem that ended in the deadly shooting and arson attack by a displaced black vendor on a Jewish-owned clothing store -- can be found on Fulton Street.
And merchants, vendors and local leaders say they fear the outcome if efforts to resolve potentially incendiary issues fail.


At a Riverdale Co-op, Resident Owners Take Hold
AS a builder, the late Alfred Kaskel never promoted his name, so it never became as familiar to the public as Levitt, Lefrak or Trump.
Instead, he named his company after his daughter, Carol, and Carol Management came to be one of New York City's largest residential builders during the booming 50's and 60's.
It built about 18,000 apartments in the city, in all boroughs except Staten Island, and a few thousand more in the wider metropolitan area.
But after his death in 1968 the company gradually sold these buildings, either by converting them to co-ops or by selling them to companies planning conversions.
Among these was the ambitious Skyview development in northern Riverdale, built in the early 60's.
Skyview consists of three 20-story buildings with 1,300 apartments and indoor parking for 1,050 cars, plus tennis courts and  a freestanding health club with an outdoor pool.
It stands on 32 acres of high ground along Arlington Avenue, and offers residents views up and down the Hudson River.


Still No Clue to Cause of Colombia Air Crash
The central, unsettling mystery surrounding the crash of the American Airlines Boeing 757 near Cali, Colombia, on Wednesday is how an experienced crew, guiding an airplane considered to be one of the safest, could drift off course in a region where airspace is measured almost by the inch.
Above the broad sweep of the Atlantic Ocean, for instance, a plane straying a few miles east or west of its plotted course would not be unusual because ground-based guidance systems are nonexistent.


An Electronic Shepherd to Guide the Sheepishly Lost
IT has been a while, but I will never forget my world-class venture into bubble-headedness.
The reason I dredge it up is a new gadget that Oldsmobile calls the Guidestar satellite navigation system.
Guidestar would have saved me from myself.
In truth, I had help in that long-ago folly from John Russell, another automobile writer who is equally inept when it comes to road signs and directions.
We were running the One Lap of America, an eight-day, 11,000-mile race around the outer edges of the country.
At one point, unsure of our position and knowing our failings, we checked and rechecked the map.
Yup, we were on the  right road.


How to Fight Leaf Blowers: Outlaw All Noisy Devices
To the Editor:
Diane Jahnsen Glaser is 1,000 percent right about leaf blowers; those destroyers of the peace, polluters of the atmosphere, blowers of dirt must go ("The Roar of the Leaves," Soapbox, Nov. 19).
But her solution gets us nowhere.


As Choices Rise, Advice Business Takes Off
BEWILDERED by the dizzying array of mutual funds on the market, people are turning in droves to financial advisers for help in buying funds that could easily be bought directly.
While it might be good news for financial advisers that individual investors  are ever more willing to pay for such advice, it could spell trouble for mutual fund companies that are not linked to big distributors like Charles Schwab &amp; Company.


Fire Retardant Fails to Slow Stairwell Blaze
A wall paint intended to retard fast-moving stairwell fires that have plagued New York City housing projects apparently failed against a flash fire that roared with terrifying speed up the newly treated stairwell of a building in East Harlem on Friday night.
No one was injured in the blaze at 2227 Second Avenue, at East 115th Street,  a 14-story brick building in the Jefferson Houses.
But flames that began in an upholstered chair on the eighth floor of the stairwell raced up six stories with such speed that there was no time for an evacuation.
The flames scorched stairwell walls like a blowtorch and blew out a door at the top with explosive force, officials said.


Miss Grafenecker, Mr. Lacovara
Doreen Dorothy Grafenecker, a daughter of Eleanor and Robert Grafenecker of Bellmore, L.I., was married yesterday to James Christopher Lacovara, a son of Barbara and Dominic Lacovara of East Meadow, L.I.
The Rev.
James Covington, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Plaza in New York.
Ms.
Grafenecker, 31, is keeping her name.
She is a senior mortgage underwriter at Ameritrust National Mortgage Bankers in Lake Success, L.I.
She graduated from Nassau Community College.


Pizza 101: Not a Cooking Class but a Lesson in Life
Some vivid lessons at Wagner Junior High school these days are not from textbooks, but from a real-life dispute between students and a pizzeria on the opposite side of East 76th Street.
Although Wagner's 1,300 students are a natural market for Vincent's Pizzeria  at 215 East 76th, many have switched to other nearby fast-food places.
For years, students and teachers have complained that Vincent's owners treat them rudely, often yelling and cursing.
Wagner's principal, Richard A. Wittekind, said there were several instances of harassment and verbal abuse.


Bosnia Enclave Looks Ahead Warily
Surrounded by Bosnian Serb troops, its populace unable to enter or leave freely and its battered, pockmarked houses without electricity, heat or running  water, this town, in the eyes of many, is the Achilles' heel of the Dayton peace accord.
The small Muslim-held pocket around Gorazde was rescued from an assault by Serbian forces in July after NATO threatened air strikes to defend it.
Now, NATO has vowed to create and defend a narrow 60-mile corridor linking Sarajevo to the eastern enclave to keep it alive.


BENEFITS
Improving Boys' Lives WEDNESDAY -- A dinner at the New York Hilton will benefit the Boys' Club of New  York's education program.
Cocktails at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 677-1108.


Why the Time Might Be Right for a Hotel
The Battery Park City Authority always envisioned a hotel as part of the 92-acre commercial and residential complex it oversees.
Plans for a luxury hotel just north of Battery Park died with the ailing real-estate market in the late 1980's.
But now, tourism is booming, hotel occupancy rates are robust and most experts agree that lower Manhattan, with only three hotels -- the Vista, the Marriott Financial Center and the Millenium Hilton -- can support another.
"Here's an office market the size of Chicago with a hotel stock comparable to Toledo," said Douglas Hercher, who heads the hotel group for Jones Lang Wootton, a real-estate consulting company advising the authority.
Authority officials are soliciting proposals for two possible locations: a site opposite the Holocaust Museum, which is under construction at the south end of Battery Park City, and a site just north of the World Financial Center.
A.J.


An Analyst, a Father, Battles Homosexuality
Dr.
Charles W. Socarides offered the closest thing to hope that many homosexuals had in the 1960's: the prospect of a cure.
Rather than brand them as immoral or regard them as criminal, Dr.
Socarides,  a New York psychoanalyst, told homosexuals that they suffered from an illness whose effects could be reversed.
His practice attracted national attention.


All Wrapped Up For the Winter
Children, bundled up in their best winter clothes, filled the sidewalks of midtown Manhattan on holiday sightseeing and shopping trips.
Glamorous fake fur  coats were popular with little girls, while younger children were secure and snug in their snowsuits.
Others evidently felt even safer on their fathers' shoulders.
On Madison Avenue, children were rewarded with cookies and balloons at the ninth annual "Miracle on Madison Avenue," at which 160 stores donated 20 percent of the day's sales to the Madison Avenue Fund for Children.


Books in Brief: NONFICTION
THE CULTURE OF HOPE A New Birth of the Classical Spirit.
By Frederick Turner.
Free Press, $23.
He claims to be the spokesman for a whole new generation of artists and scholars who believe that "art can, from the strictest traditions and severest order, derive unexpected and profoundly original visions and perspectives." (Needless to say, any resemblances to good old modernism are  purely coincidental.) In fact, Mr.
Turner's "new classical spirit" turns out to  be a half-baked mishmash of art and science with a strong New Age flavor, and he crusades for it with all the lapel-grabbing zest of an autodidact on an intellectual bender.
"Imagine you were wired into the basic structure of Oregon, for instance," he writes.
"As Oregon begins to respond to your purposes, you simultaneously become transformed into something with a hot volcanic spine, with the moisture-loving dim appetite of the Douglas fir, with the feel of the Pacific surf upon your right shoulder, and the soft draining of great rivers across your body." Sounds like a great idea for Newt Gingrich's second novel.
TERRY TEACHOUT


POSTINGS: Construction to Resume on Westchester Office Building;After 5 Years, 'the Beast' Is Awakening
Dubbed "the beast" by nearby residents, an ugly steel skeletal frame of an uncompleted office building has blighted the views of residents in the Hillside  Avenue area near Old Tarrytown Road in Greenburgh, N.Y., for five years.
The developer, SCI Real Estate Development Ltd., a Manhattan-based subsidiary of SCI S.p.A., one of Italy's largest commercial developers, began construction  of the 97,000-square-foot building in Westchester County in 1989 and stopped a year later after a downturn in the office market.


Q and A
European Soccer Q.  My husband and I would like to attend the 1996 European soccer championships in England.
How can we buy tickets? -- Claudia Genna relli, Brooklyn


Books in Brief: FICTION
BE I WHOLE By Gita Brown.
MacMurray &amp; Beck, $16.95.
When Papa Job, a young West Indian living in Detroit in the 1950's, discovers that someone is stealing cans of food from his basement, he hides in the dark to catch the thief -- and then promptly asks her to marry him.
Sizway, the thief, is a tiny, mysterious Haitian woman "the color of blackberries," a so-called black gypsy who can read Papa Job's mind.
"You be a man of flesh and I a woman of spirit," she warns him when he proposes.
"You and me . . . don't mix." Presented in the form of a mystical cautionary tale told by a shadowy pipe-smoking woman, Gita Brown's first novel examines the difficulties that are  presented when opposites attract and worlds collide.
The story follows this unlikely couple as they make their way together over the years, coping with the  pressures of family life and struggling to forge a lasting bond.
Their attempts  to understand each other yield some valuable insights, but the convoluted narrative -- riddled with walk-ons by witches and ghosts -- is often so murky that readers may find themselves wondering just what the narrator is smoking.
Quirky supporting characters appear out of nowhere, only to be promptly abandoned; and Sizway's gift of telepathy suddenly and inexplicably deserts her  after the opening scenes, just when she needs it most.
Every so often, the meandering plot is illuminated by flashes of poetic language, but then, frustratingly, the story is engulfed again in the haze, leaving only a tantalizing hint of the novel's early promise.
SARAH FERGUSON


Case Involving Free Speech And the Internet Is Settled
A dispute about free speech on the Internet has been settled out of court here after a local school district admitted that a high school principal had wrongly reprimanded a student for lampooning his school on the World Wide Web.
The American Civil Liberties Union announced Dec. 14 that it had reached a settlement with the Bellevue School District on behalf of Paul K. Kim, who was a senior when he published his parody last winter on the Internet's World Wide Web.
Though it is not a court precedent, the A.C.L.U. called the settlement the  nation's first strong message that a student has the right to publish on the Internet without fear of retribution from school authorities.


A Band That Satisfies the Urge to Jam
THOMAS J. SWETZ, a Yonkers postal worker, played his saxophone in high school.
It gathered dust for 15 years, until he felt the urge to make music again.
Now he makes mellow sounds several nights a week with players who share the same urge.
Some rubbed shoulders with the Dorsey Brothers or Charlie Mingus.
Others are  amateurs who crave a jam session.
A new gathering place for them is the Music School of Westchester here, where anyone who can read music is welcome on Wednesday nights.


Arafat Speaks To Throngs In Bethlehem
Fulfilling a pledge to be in Bethlehem by Christmas, Yasir Arafat declared today to a jubilant throng on Manger Square, "We pronounce this holy land, this  holy city, the city of the Palestinian Jesus, a liberated city forever, forever, forever!"
Illumined by the last rays of the winter sun atop the Armenian monastery next to the site revered as the cavern where Jesus was born, Mr.
Arafat stretched his hands in a victory salute as about 30,000 Palestinians, Christians and Muslims chanted and cheered.


Suzanne Morris, Matthew Dickman
Suzanne Audra Morris, the daughter of Patricia M. Morris of Riverdale, the Bronx, and Edward B. Morris of Manhattan, was married on Thursday to Matthew Roger Dickman, the son of Carol and Irwin Dickman of Manhattan.
Rabbi Melvin N.  Sirner officiated at the Harmonie Club in Manhattan
Mrs.
Dickman, 28, is a kindergarten teacher at the Ethical Culture School in  Manhattan.
She graduated from Tufts University and received a law degree from St.
John's University.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in elementary education at Hunter College.
Her father is the managing director of Goldstein &amp;  Morris, an accountanting firm in Manhattan.
Her mother is a marketing consultant in Riverdale.


The Strikes That Stole Christmas in France
THE worst French labor unrest in a decade turned this year's Christmas tourist and retail season in Paris into little short of a disaster, according to hoteliers, merchants, restaurateurs and tour operators.
A national railroad strike that lasted more than three weeks and a parallel shutdown of bus and subway service in Paris tied the capital up in surreal knots until the weekend before Christmas.
Public transport was shut down in most other French cities as well.
Some economists fear that the strikes may have pushed France toward a recession next year.


Alone in the Vast Wasteland
IF humans are naturally gregarious animals, some force outside nature must be keeping Americans apart.
But what?
Robert D. Putnam, a government professor at Harvard who earlier explored why  more Americans are bowling alone instead of in leagues, has now investigated what appears to be a growing phenomenon of civic disengagement -- the decline in people's connections with the social and political life of their communities.


THE GUIDE
ART IN SOMERS


Real-Life Street Fable (Moral Not Included)
A FEW minutes after 10 P.M last June 22, humming into the balmy summer air, Kati Meister tripped over a wooden bridge that covered a cable snaking across the sidewalk on East 19th Street.
As her body went up and over, her left foot seemed to "become wedged" under the wood or the cable.
Her old dancer's instinct took over, and she tried to twist in midair to control the impact of the fall.
She "landed rather gracefully," she said, on her right foot, but the left leg felt "wrecked."


Carvers Heading for Ontario and Michigan
Snow sculptors from Hong Kong, Mexico and the Dominican Republic will be among the more than 100 carvers who will converge on four neighboring Ontario and Michigan communities to turn 10-foot cubes of snow into massive artistic forms in the weeklong North South Passage competition, which begins Jan. 16.
The communities participating are Frankenmuth, Mich., and, in Ontario, Sarnia, London and Grand Bend.
Chefs from restaurants and hotels, including the Shangri-La in Hong Kong, will use ice- and butter-sculpturing techniques, as will traditional stone and wood carvers.


An Authentic 'Serenade'
To the Editor:
It is perverse that Alex Ross should dismiss the new London recording of Erich Wolfgang Korngold's "Symphonic Serenade" ["A 'Serious' Composer Lives Down Hollywood Fame," Nov. 26].
As the conductor of that recording, I should like to  point out that it is based on a reading of the composer's own manuscript as well as a private recording of the composer himself playing the work.
The only other  recording of the piece, deemed preferable by Mr.
Ross, uses a spurious text, simplifies the writing for strings and in one case is played twice as slowly as  written.


Why Fix Phones That Aren't Broken?
ALMOST everyone in America talks on the telephone and watches television, and many people do both for hours every day.
Now Congress is on the brink of passing a huge bill to revolutionize those two staples of modern life.
Despite an unexpected dust-up among House Republicans last week, chances are good that Congress will rewrite the ground rules for almost every part of the communications industry: telephones, cable television, broadcasting and even cyberspace.


Sand Is Sand, Right?
IN a year of casino management shake-ups along the Boardwalk, the one that caused the most surprise was William P. Weidner's resignation last month.
The antithesis of a swaggering, high-living casino boss, Mr.
Weidner is a pensive, publicity-shy former professor of hotel management who quietly rose through the ranks to become president and chief operating officer at the Pratt Hotel Corporation, parent company of the Atlantic City Sands.


Speak Freely: Carry a Paintbrush
Struggling artists dream of having their work shown on 57th Street near Fifth Avenue where dozens of galleries and major dealers like Pace and Marlborough are clustered.
The last time Robert Bery exhibited his work in the neighborhood, a year ago, it was on the sidewalk.
The police ordered him to stop and issued a ticket for illegal vending.
Now his art is being shown in the neighborhood again -- only this time it is hanging indoors, at Artopia Gallery at 24 West 57th.


Inappropriate Comparison
To the Editor:
Richard B. Woodward's thoughtful article "A Grandson of a Slave Gets a Second Look" [Nov. 26], on the self-taught African-American artist Robert S. Duncanson, contained an inappropriate reference to reaction to the O. J. Simpson trial.
Mr.
Woodward asks if contemporary interpretations of Duncanson's works of art "try too hard to square 19th-century conventions with the cultural politics of the moment" and answers by identifying those interpretations that are merely speculative.


Airline Seats
To the Editor: Your recent article "Scrambling for Airline Seats" (Practical  Traveler, Nov. 12) has finally clarified that we are not alone in our dissatisfaction with British Airways.
It's clear from Betsy Wade's summary of the various policies that British Airways' is the most confused.
The reality, from our experiences, is even worse.
Not only does their policy create tremendous animosity, but it also endangers the safety of passengers.
On one 1995 flight, because of "at the gate" seat changes, two people who had reserved specific nonsmoking seats found themselves in smoking or one row away.
One of these really angry souls refused to take her seat on takeoff.


Huntington To Eliminate Bus Route In Fiscal Move
IN an effort to save $40,000 Huntington plans to eliminate a route from its town bus service known as HART.
The service, started in 1978, has been serving shoppers, the elderly, teen-agers, those without cars and railroad commuters throughout the sprawling town.
Starting early next year, Huntington Area Rapid Transit will stop the red  line, one of its five routes, because of low ridership.


Visiting Haiti
To the Editor: Having just returned from a delightful five-day vacation in Haiti with my 8-year-old daughter, I was dismayed to find Haiti omitted from the otherwise exhaustive and comprehensive island-by-island Caribbean survey on Nov. 26.
We stayed at one of the many first-rate hotels doing robust business in Haiti, the Kinam Hotel in Petionville.
We had excellent meals at restaurants and enjoyed swims at two of Haiti's marvelous beaches.
On field trips, we discovered flocks of flamingos, oyster catchers and black-necked stilts in the waters surrounding Port-au-Prince and on the western coast.
And we were greeted everywhere with exceptional warmth and good humor.


If You're Thinking of Living In: Middletown Township, N.J.;A Historic Community on Raritan Bay
MIDDLETOWN TOWNSHIP, the most populous municipality in Monmouth County, is rated by the F.B.I. as the second safest community in the nation with a population of 50,000 to 100,000.
Middletown's Police Chief, William Fowlie, says the township's annual rate of "category one" crimes -- rape, murder, larceny, robbery, aggravated assault, vehicle theft, arson and burglary -- is less than 1.7 per 10,000 population and  only slightly higher than in Clayton, N.Y., in the Thousand Islands area, ranked as the safest community of its size.


Workers Detail Claims Against Suspended Officials
As state investigators probe the Roosevelt Island Operating Corporation, several present and former employees have detailed their charges accusing two administrators of waste, theft and the use of employees for personal business.
The administrators, Barry Chafetz, the agency's vice president of operations, and Tom Sloan, director of facilities and grounds, denied the accusations.
The State Division of Housing and Community Renewal has suspended them with pay, pending an inspector general's inquiry,


The Gang's All Royal


Shylock's Dark Side Returns
Alas, poor Shylock, he has been misunderstood.
Did Shakespeare mean the obdurate money lender of "The Merchant of Venice" to be a caricature?
Or did he  intend Shylock to be a tragic hero, as he's mostly been portrayed since the 19th century?
Recently, a darker Shylock has emerged on stage, in movies and in books.
The  actor Rob Leibman portrayed Shylock last year at the Public Theater as a vindictive figure.


RUDOLPH GIULIANI HAS HIS WAY
As a resident of Hell's Kitchen, I was interested to read your description of Giuliani's behavior at a Bedford-Stuyvesant town meeting, as it so completely parallels his actions at a meeting in my own neighborhood, apparently also a low-priority area for him.
One expects a forum like that to provide a few answers -- and I suppose in its way it did.
Take, for instance, the young girl worried about cutbacks at her school.
The Mayor's response was that if she truly hungered for knowledge, she wouldn't need fancy school programs; why, if she were truly dedicated, she'd happily study by candlelight!


Alpine Skiing
To the Editor: I usually find most of your articles very instructive and helpful.
I cannot say the same about the article on French Alpine skiing.
I have been skiing for 69 years, many of these in Val d'Isere, where I have spent considerable amounts of time, and obviously, I quite like the place.
Val d'Isere is considered a world-class resort and one of the great ski areas.
It has hosted the Winter Olympics and World Cup competitions.


The Living End
To the Editor:
Mr.
Ross does a disservice to Korngold's music.
One of the pleasures in life  is to hear a piece of music and be able to identify its composer and title and hum along with it.
Listening to the Korngold soundtrack was always an integral part of the overall enjoyment of a movie.
Today I can walk into a room where the television set is on and know at once that a Warner Brothers movie is playing.
Sir Arthur Sullivan is not remembered for "Ivanhoe," but whistle a part of that inferior "Pinafore," and a smile of recognition creases the face.


Disneyland Paris Posts a Profit
Disneyland Paris has recorded its first profits since its opening in 1992, announcing a net profit of about $23 million for the 1995 fiscal year, against a net loss of $360 million in fiscal 1994.
Last year 10.7 million people visited Disneyland Paris -- actually 20 miles east of Paris -- a 20 percent jump from the previous year.


Brothers See Boards Gaining Appeal
PAUL MOSCARELLO is not quite Clark Kent, but the double life he leads is no less demanding, thanks to the Vew-Do Balance Board, an athletic training device  developed by his brother Bruce.
Every spare moment Paul can muster away from his regular job and family is directed toward managing Balance Designs, the small company the two brothers own in Vermont, which manufactures Vew-Do boards.
Although the Vew-Do board was intended initially to help snowboarders increase their balancing abilities in the off-season, sports conditioners and physical therapists have since adopted the product for their own needs.
To some  extent, performing stunts on the Vew-Do board is becoming even a sport in its own right.


Savings and Loan Bailout Agency Will Not Sue the Clintons
In one of its final acts, the Resolution Trust Corporation has decided not to sue President Clinton or his wife for losses that the Whitewater land venture caused an Arkansas savings and loan association that collapsed six years ago.
The agency's decision was included in a report made public on Wednesday during debate by the full Senate over subpoenas issued by the Senate Whitewater  committee.
The report followed an investigation of nearly two years into the relationship between the failure of the savings and loan, Madison Guaranty, run  by James B. McDougal, and the Whitewater venture, whose principals were Mr.
McDougal, Mr.
Clinton and their wives.


Books in Brief: NONFICTION
WRITING AND BEING By Nadine Gordimer.
Harvard University, $18.95.
Fans of the South African novelist Nadine Gordimer will appreciate her skill as  an essayist and critic in "Writing and Being," which collects the six Charles Eliot Norton lectures she gave at Harvard University in 1994.
More than half of the book is devoted to a lovingly detailed analysis of novels by Naguib Mahfouz of Egypt, Chinua Achebe of Nigeria and Amos Oz of Israel; Ms.
Gordimer maintains that these three, although seemingly disparate, are "at one in being ready to go too far" in their pursuit of truth in their writing, "the final destination of the human spirit beyond national boundaries, natal traditions." Drawn to the political focus of these writers because of her own experience as a writer in apartheid South Africa, Ms.
Gordimer's struggle to understand her place in South Africa as a young white woman and as a writer.
"It was with my stories  and novels," she writes, "my offering of what I was learning about the life within me and around me, that I entered the commonality of my country."
ELIZABETH HANSON


Long Island Vines
Reserve Chardonnay Bidwell Vineyards, Cutchogue, 1993. About $15.


Turning Down the Heat


How to Beat The Odds On Beating The S.&amp; P.
One argument against investing in mutual funds is that not many consistently  beat the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index.
Fewer than a quarter of domestic equity funds have beaten the benchmark over the last 10 years.
So, many investors have thrown up their hands and bought shares in S.&amp; P. 500 index funds.
But buying an index fund is not the only way to go, said Amy C. Arnott, an analyst with Morningstar Inc., the fund research firm in Chicago.
In a recent study, she found 17 large-cap domestic stock funds that have beaten the S.&amp; P. with enough frequency to inspire confidence that they might do so in the future, too.
A $10,000 investment in the group in the fall of 1990 would be worth $24,497 today, compared with $20,203 for the index.


Books in Brief: NONFICTION


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
LOWER EAST SIDE Tour the Lower East Side On Christmas Day


Washington, 1995: Echoes of a 200-Year Debate
IN a hectic, clamorous year such as this one, it is remarkable to find one issue common to so many debates.
But such a theme leaps from the record of 1995, and it is as old as the Republic: the nature of American federalism.
Are we to have a centralized government, or a decentralized one?
The question has a corollary: Is the central government too big?
Speaker Newt Gingrich and his band of self-styled Republican revolutionaries  have cast themselves as the champions of states' rights and limited government.
Give more responsibilities back to the states and the localities, they cry; government closest to the people is best, because they can keep an eye on it.
This flock has taken as its creed the 10th Amendment to the Constitution, adopted in 1791: "The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the states, are reserved to the states respectively, or to the people."


SASS Also Supports Cancer Survivors
We read with great interest the article about the breast cancer support group in Chappaqua ["Ideas and Pain Shared Over a Common Enemy, Breast Cancer," Oct. 29].
As breast cancer survivors, we are always gratified by any efforts to educate more women to the many different aspects of the disease, and we applaud  your commemoration of Breast Cancer Awareness Month (October).
We do want to take this opportunity to tell you about another group that is very similar to the group in Chappaqua.
Our group, which was founded in 1989, has adopted the acronym SASS, for Survive, Act, Support and Share.
We have been doing just that for six years.
We, too, are for women with all stages of breast cancer.
We, too, are an ongoing group; several of our members, including  the two co-facilitators, have been in the group almost since its inception.
We meet at the home of one of our co-facilitators on the second and fourth Wednesday of every month, and we meet 12 months a year.
We operate under the auspices of the Westchester Self-Help Clearinghouse, which is where our two co-facilitators received their original training.


Correction
An article on Oct. 22 about traveling to Tuscany with an Elderhostel group misstated the minimum age for participation in an Elderhostel program.
A reader's letter, received on Dec. 14, points out that it is 55, not 60.


Multiplex Dreams at Battery Park City
When Linda Belfer moved to Battery Park City 13 years ago, most of her neighbors were construction workers, roads were unpaved, and buying a carton of  milk in the neighborhood was a real chore.
"My friends still call me a pioneer," said Ms.
Belfer, a lawyer who founded the tenants' association of her complex, Gateway Plaza.
As Battery Park City's residential population grew to its current 7,000 people, restaurants, a grocery store, a wine shop and a dry cleaner opened.
But  one amenity, a movie theater, has remained elusive.
Now, the Battery Park City Authority is trying again to bring a multiplex theater to the area -- this time  as part of a major hotel that the authority hopes will be built.


Intimate Snapshots From the Underground
IN THE LATE 1970'S AND THE 80'S, when post-modernists let it be known that everyday existence was no longer worth staring at because it had decamped to television and movies, photographers and artists plunged into the cool, remote region of appropriation.
Nothing personal, you understand; no records of people the artists had physically touched, no evidence of places that had stirred their hearts.
Sherrie Levine thumbed through a book and rephotographed Walker Evans's work; Richard Prince rephotographed the Marlboro Man from a glossy magazine; Barbara Kruger wrote messages over trashy ads and images.
Cindy Sherman's ambiguous position as the model for, but not the subject of,  her own photographs -- portraits of feminine stereotypes rather than portraits of herself -- pointed up the impersonality at the core of this style, which could even deflect self-portraiture.
Sherman's subsequent use of medical and pornographic mannequins looks in this light like the next step in a logical progression.


Improving the Schools
The state recently issued report cards to school districts.
What improvements would you suggest for your district?
Coordinate Curriculum Before High School


Try to Remember It's Just a Game
Heat Robert De Niro, Al Pacino, Val Kilmer, Jon Voight Directed by Michael Mann R 172 minutes


The Capitalist;Consultacrats
A FEW MONTHS AGO THE Economist carried an impressive full-page advertisement  for a New York management consulting firm called Towers Perrin and, specifically, its "People Strategy." The ad made no real attempt to explain what that strategy was.
Instead, the Towers Perrin ad offered an intriguing little graph.
Five words -- "surplus," "alignment," "gaps," "performance" and "importance" -- appeared within the graph, and a single line of text beneath it described it as "a new way to look at organization capabilities." That was it.
There was no further explanation.
The reader was left tointerpret the little graph on his own.
Here it is, at left:
A handful of words and a couple of straight lines, you may say.
Not worth troubling over.
But then you do not fully understand the strange world of management consulting.
Consultants earn their living by dreaming up concepts that people who actually do business feel that they cannot live without.
Often these concepts are deceptively simple.
In the60's a Boston consulting firm stood corporate America on its ear with a square divided into quadrants containing tiny pictures of a dog, a cow, a star and a question mark.
Otherwise intelligent people spent a lot of valuable time classifying their businesses as animal, mineral or punctuation.


Jane Morrison, William Donaldson
Jane Westcott Phillips Morrison, a founding partner of the Phillips Oppenheim Group, an executive search firm in New York, was married yesterday to William Henry Donaldson, the former chairman and chief executive of the New York Stock Exchange.
The Very Rev.
James Parks Morton performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Mead Memorial Chapel in Waccabuc, N.Y.
Mrs.
Donaldson was formerly the executive director of admissions and placement at the Yale School of Management in New Haven, and was the dean of admissions at Wesleyan University in Middletown, Conn.
She graduated from the University of Illinois, from which she also received a master's degree in journalism and communications.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.
She is a  daughter of LaVerne and James Phillips of Largo, Fla.


Driving Blind
MY FIANCEE AND I ARE SPEEDing down the parkway.
It's night, and we can't see  much; I feel our car's wafer-thin door panel shudder against my arm.
We pass the time recounting the day's phone calls.
We're getting married in two months and there are plans to think about.
But, just as I always do when I am in this car,  I think mostly that we are terribly unprotected, that anything we hit would obliterate us.
This is much the way we are headed into marriage: at high speed, in the dark, with frail bumpers, yet safe so far.
But we are protected by romance and friendship and, most of all, trust.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Under a 23-Foot Ceiling, A 5-Tier Bar and Lounge NV, a five-tier bar and lounge that its owners hope will pull Wall Street executives north after work to mix with SoHo's artists and musicians, opened officially last week at 289 Spring Street, at Hudson Street.


Pension Tax Ban Passed
The Senate approved legislation late Friday that would prohibit states from taxing the pension income of former residents.
The measure now goes to President Clinton.
Senator Harry Reid, Democrat of Nevada, has campaigned for the ban for five years.
He said states had increasingly sought to raise revenue by taxing the pension income of former residents.


Been There, Ate That
After a binge, there's always a letdown.
In America, ours is beginning right  now.
As the gale force of the holidays builds to a tidal wave, the psyche has already begun to wonder: Is this all there is?
The need to exhaust ourselves is probably a way of dealing with the sadness and relief, hope and fear that accompany all endings and all beginnings.
But whether this is a protective urge or merely a reaction to too much partying, the result is a world-weary reveler not unlike Jonathan Levi's traveler in "A Guide for the Perplexed": "I've been traveling so long now that no land is new,  no ocean fresh. I've seen every flower, every bird, every side of every issue and I have no heart left to lose."


Finding Help In Leaps of Faith
TWELVE-YEAR-OLD Crystal Beyea's life seemed at a standstill four years ago.
"She was extremely shy and suffered a lot from asthma," her mother, Cindy Beyea, said.
But that changed when Crystal read "Make Beliefs," a book that its author, Bill Zimmerman, says is intended to spark the imagination and "help people find  their own magic."


This Week's Trouble Spots to Avoid on the Roads: Along Interstate 80 and Elsewhere in the State
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.


SUNDAY December 24, 1995: TOYLAND II;Truckin' On
Even as newfangled Sky Dancers are flying off the shelves, old-fashioned toy  trucks are still creating traffic jams at Hess gas stations.
Since Christmas 1964, when the oil company offered 50,000 plastic tanker trucks for $1.39 apiece, presumably as gifts for the kids, the annual arrival of a new model at Thanksgiving has taken on the dazzle of a Detroit unveiling.
For many, Hess's standard promotion has become holiday tradition.
But now the kids have to wrestle the trucks from the grown-ups.
Like so many relics of childhood, the vehicles have become valuable: that $1.39 truck may be worth $3,500.
This year's model, $15.99, is a trailer complete with helicopter.
Hess made 1.5 million.
By today's end, they'll be gone.


Sunny and Spirited Culinary Adventure
COLLINS &amp; MAIN has become Sayville's culinary crossroads.
Every evening this  new restaurant is filled with neighbors enjoying the congenial atmosphere and innovative food.
They wave to friends and greet each arrival with cries of welcome.
Every night, too, Michael Anthony Toscano, the chef and owner, makes forays into the dining room, where he chats with regulars and introduces himself to newcomers.
Mr.
Toscano is well known to South Shore diners.
For a decade his Michael Anthony's Creative Cuisine in East Moriches has been an oasis of exciting food.
It is closed for the winter.


Ideas, Not Fluids, Flow In College Exhibitions
A HAPPILY matched pair of shows at the College of New Rochelle's Castle Gallery invites one to drink in the sight of dozens of imaginative vessels.
Most are meant as containers of ideas rather than tangible substances.
"Vessels: On the Edge of Function," occupying two main gallery spaces, features 25 artists for whom utilitarian bowls, baskets, urns and pitchers have  inspired inventive explorations of form and meaning.
On display in a small adjacent room, "The Commemorative Cup" is a collection of 50 pieces by silversmiths invited to interpret the genre of the trophy in contemporary terms.
After its debut here, the cup show will go on a national tour.


Books in Brief: FICTION
DAUGHTERS OF SONG By Paula Huston.
Random House, $23.
Sylvia, a 20-year-old piano prodigy at a Baltimore conservatory, tends to gaze out the window of her practice room in search of some perspective -- on the city, her life and Beethoven's Opus 111, a sonata whose complexity eludes her youthful virtuosity.
Unfortunately, Paula Huston's first novel, "Daughters of Song," doesn't do much to help her out.
Instead of a firm hand, the author offers an omniscient point of view -- we are inside the minds of fellow students, teachers, even one of the neighborhood's many homeless drifters -- and so we wind up both everywhere and nowhere.
As Sylvia separates from her parents, learns her professional limitations and experiments with sex, Ms.
Huston fails to keep enough distance between the narrative and the naive young woman at its center.
The use of musical metaphor is promising, as is some of the writing (coming home from a concert, Sylvia finds the long tunnel in a train station "clamorous with graffiti").
But Sylvia, with her halo of hair and her shy innocence, is more heroine than protagonist, someone whose coming of age might be more successful in the pages of young-adult fiction.
DEBORAH STEAD


When Melody Creates Disharmony
THE Russian composer Sergei Prokofiev never gave a subtitle to his Second Piano Concerto, but the pianist Garrick Ohlsson concedes that some passages in the final movement could well be called "A Neighbor's Nightmare."
"There are some very difficult loud passages and jumps, with both hands crossing over each other," Mr.
Ohlsson said, "percussive, aggressive, harsh phrases that must be practiced dozens if not hundreds of times so that in the adrenaline-filled panic of a concert you can keep your cool and hit most of the  right notes. I certainly wouldn't want to live next to anyone practicing that."


Candies for Nibbling, Sharing (and Dancing in Heads)
NOW, for those last-minute sugarplums.
They have to be quickly assembled and  irresistible to nibble, suitable, perhaps, for packing to take to an open house  on Christmas Day if not served at home.
Double the recipes and there will be enough for a sweet start to the new year.
"The Candy Cookbook" by Carole Bloom (Chronicle Books, $14.95) has meticulous instructions for indulgences like chocolate truffles, toffee bars, nut brittles and marzipan, plus good advice about purchasing, storing and handling the ingredients.
Though some of the candies need overnight chilling, many can be whipped up at a moment's notice.


THE RADICAL CENTER OR THE MODERATE MIDDLE?
A major premise of Michael Lind's article "The Radical Center or the Moderate Middle?" (Dec. 3) is that a political party can't appeal to both.
I disagree.
I  say the party that commits to solving our No. 1 economic problem, falling real wages, will win over both groups.
People vote their pocketbooks, and falling wages are hurting most Americans.


Corrections
An answer in the Q&amp;A column on Dec. 10, about the financial obligations of brokers and sellers, misstated the point at which a broker's commission is payable under New York law.
Unless otherwise agreed in writing, commission is due when the broker produces a purchaser "ready, willing and able" to buy in accordance with the seller's terms, not at the closing.


A Touch of Litchfield in White House Card
THE Blue Room of the White House is the inspiration for the Christmas card sent out this year by Bill Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton, and an artist who lives in Litchfield, Thomas W. McKnight, is the creator of the work.
Mr.
McKnight made a rendering of the Blue Room that includes not only the family's stockings hanging from the mantle but also an imaginary view of Litchfield.


Speaking Of Credentials
To the Editor:
In his essay on film scores, Edward Rothstein calls Carl Dreyer's "Passion of Joan of Arc" a "little known" movie ["Film Music Returns to Its Roots," Nov. 19].
Yet this 1928 silent production finished fourth in the voting for "the best film of all time" at the World's Fair in Brussels in 1958; it has appeared on the "Sight and Sound" polls in 1952, 1972 and 1992 as one of the 10 films most favored by critics and directors around the world.
And last month the Vatican marked the 100th anniversary of cinema by citing it as one of 45 films having "special artistic and religious merit."


Support Is Waning for Haiti's U.S.-Trained Police
The first contingent of Haiti's new National Police marched proudly into Cite Soleil in June to cheers from residents of the seaside slum on the outskirts of  the Haitian capital.
But by the end of November, angry and disgusted citizens had driven out the 24-man police unit under a hail of rocks and burned and looted their station and trucks.
The rampage erupted on Nov. 23 when an off-duty policeman shot at a bus in a  dispute with the driver and accidentally killed a 6-year-old girl.


2 Companies Pay Huge Election Law Fine
In the largest criminal penalties ever imposed for violations of the Federal  Election Campaign Act, Korean Airlines and Hyundai Motor America agreed this week to pay $850,000 for making illegal campaign contributions to Representative Jay C. Kim, a Republican from Orange County and the first member of Congress of  Korean descent.
In a related action, a Federal grand jury in Los Angeles indicted Paul Koh, Hyundai Motor's controller, on charges of making false statements.
According to  the prosecutors, Mr.
Koh told investigators that he made a $1,000 contribution to Mr.
Kim's campaign, but the money actually came from the company.
If convicted, Mr.
Koh faces up to five years in prison and a $250,000 fine.


Polish President Sworn In
Aleksander Kwasniewski was sworn in today as the President of Poland, and faced immediate political problems over allegations that his Prime Minister has  spied for Russia.
Mr.
Kwasniewski, a former Communist, defeated President Lech Walesa, the former Solidarity leader, in last month's election.


No Place to Be Somebody
ANOTHER breakfast is over at the Atlantic Belmont boarding home, and residents are roaming the halls, blinking in the harsh December light.
In one room, the smokers are creating a haze that will thicken as the day wears on.
An  elderly man hunches over a table, dipping a tea bag again and again.
A younger man paces on the porch, muttering about the cold.


It's Humans Vs. Turtles: Who Loses?
In the last 30 years, developers have transformed the lush lands near Alley Pond Park into a bustling commercial center and residential community, filling the wetlands and flattening hilltops to build boulevards, a golf course and houses.
But the commercial success carried with it an ecological price.
The latest victims are the Snapping and Eastern Painted turtles that lived in the park's Oakland Lake.


Noemi Garnica, Austin Stewart 2d
Noemi Garnica, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Abdon Garnica of Wasco, Calif., was married on Monday to Austin Eugene Stewart 2d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Marshall Stewart of Fairfield, Conn.
The Rev.
Bartolome Ausmende performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at La Catedral del Buen Pastor in San Sebastian, Spain.
Mrs.
Stewart, 31, is a city planner for Sun Valley, Idaho.
She graduated from Pacific Union College in St.
Helena, Calif.
Her father is a botanist in Wasco.


RUDOLPH GIULIANI HAS HIS WAY
Self-doubt and moral uncertainty got us Jimmy Carter, Bill Clinton and David  Dinkins -- all good men paralyzed by the risk of unpopularity that comes with making tough decisions.
You want to see less of Giuliani's moral passion?
Look to them.
Crown Heights, the Korean-grocery riots, squeegee men -- these were frightening, and wrong.
Giuliani is doing exactly what he was elected to do.
RON COLEMAN Clifton, N.J.


Neighbors Fear Swinging Swine And Singles Bars
At Hogs &amp; Heifers, a high-spirited -- some say rowdy -- country-western bar in the meat packing district, boisterous young crowds sometimes overflow to the  curb.
The inside is decorated with dozens of bras donated by uninhibited female  patrons, including Drew Barrymore, some of whom have danced atop the bar.
Still, such activity does not make the bar a standout in the neighborhood, with its late-night melange of butchers, steakhouses, gay bars, S-and-M clubs, and transvestite and transsexual streetwalkers.
But now, the bar wants to open an Upper East Side outpost, Hogs &amp; Heifers East, at 1843 First Avenue near 93d Street, and some neighbors are as riled as stuck pigs.
Two committees of Community Board 8 have voted overwhelmingly -- 10  to 0 and 24 to 1 -- to recommend the denial of the license application pending before the State Liquor Authority.
A decision is expected in several weeks.


New Competition Cutting Telephone Rates
IN an increasingly competitive marketing war, telephone companies are aggressively recruiting customers on Long Island.
For two months Nynex has been sending information with its bills about two new regional calling plans.
The 6.7 million residential customers in New York are eligible for both plans, which offer discounts on directly dialed calls within a regional calling area but outside a local calling area.


Corrections
A brief article in the Playing in the Neighborhood column last Sunday about an exhibition of wreaths at the Parks Department's Arsenal Gallery, at 830 Fifth Avenue, misstated the cross street.
It is 64th Street, not 104th.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 3 about the changing character of Hoboken misstated a policy of Our Lady of Grace School.
The school says that although it has students of a number of religious backgrounds, it does not officially celebrate  the holidays of its Hindu students.


Streetscapes: Colonnade Row: 428-34 Lafayette Street;Corinthian Columns That Have Seen Better Days
THE Landmark now known as Colonnade Row is like a shabby old antique that someone sawed in half and left out in the rain for the garbage truck.
But the Sanitation Department does not pick up anything so large as the houses at 428, 430, 432 and 434 Lafayette Street, built in 1833 to make one of the noblest vistas in the city.
The current owner of Nos. 428 and 430 says he plans to clean and restore the buildings, but it is not clear if that will really happen -- which might be just as well.
Seth Geer, a contractor from Albany, built the nine houses at 418-434 Lafayette Place, the former name, as something far beyond the typical speculative row house group.
Each 26-room house was 27 feet wide, with central heating, hot and cold running water, a bathing room and an indoor toilet.
According to research by Regina Kellerman, an architectural historian, Mr.
Geer  also won city permission for 15-foot-deep front yards, which was granted because the Common Council said the houses "will be highly ornamental to our city."


Paul C. Bratone, Laura J. Bird
Laura Jean Bird, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Bird of Rumson, N.J., was married there on Friday to Paul Clement Bratone, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Bratone of Pelham Manor, N.Y.
The Rev.
Ophelia Keller performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
George's-by-the-River Church.
Mrs.
Bratone, 26, is the director of special events for the American Indian College Fund and is also program associate at La Napoule Art Foundation, an art  education organization,, both in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father owns Financial Services Software, a computer company in Little Silver, N.J.
Her mother, Jandy Bird, is a teacher of gifted and talented  children at the Conover Road Elementary School in Colts Neck, N.J.


Candies for Nibbling, Sharing (and Dancing in Heads)
NOW, for those last-minute sugarplums.
They have to be quickly assembled and  irresistible to nibble, suitable, perhaps, for packing to take to an open house  on Christmas Day if not served at home.
Double the recipes and there will be enough for a sweet start to the new year.
"The Candy Cookbook" by Carole Bloom (Chronicle Books, $14.95) has meticulous instructions for indulgences like chocolate truffles, toffee bars, nut brittles and marzipan, plus good advice about purchasing, storing and handling the ingredients.
Though some of the candies need overnight chilling, many can be whipped up at a moment's notice.


Fires Ease at Deadly Illinois Train Wreck
The threat of a toxic chemical release eased today at a three-train wreck and fire, and most of the people who were evacuated from their homes were allowed to return.
The crash, on Friday night, killed two train workers, and a third was missing and presumed dead, the authorities said.
Another worker was slightly injured.


SEVEN WARNINGS: A special report.;She Suffered in Plain Sight But Alarms Were Ignored
Inside the chaotic emergency room at Bellevue Hospital, Frances Cave stared at the gaunt, listless figure of Elisa Izquierdo and knew that time was running  out.
It was April 7, and Ms.
Cave, a social worker with a nonprofit agency called  Project Chance, had been watching the 6-year-old sink deeper into distress month by month.
Ms.
Cave and others at Project Chance were not sure why it was happening, and they did not then suspect that the girl's mother, Awilda Lopez, was abusing her.


Michael Mann: Hot Again With 'L.A. Vice'
IT WAS ALMOST AS IF BEN HUR had agreed to sit down and have coffee with Spartacus.
Al Pacino and Robert De Niro were not only going to act in the same movie (which they had done only once before, in "The Godfather, Part II") but the two titans would act together in two scenes.
For Michael Mann, the writer and director of the movie, "Heat," choosing the  right setting for their first meeting was key.


IN THE MUSLIM CITY OF BETHLEHEM
THE RAIN FALLS ON BETHLEHEM under a light gray morning sky, as fleets of tourist buses creep up the dusty slope leading to Manger Square.
The area is crowded with people, pushcarts and parked vehicles, and the buses must thread their way between rows of taxis before finding a place where they can unload passengers.
The last bus, far older than the rest, looks as if only a miracle could have got its weather-beaten carcass up the hill to Bethlehem.
Its pilgrims look weather-beaten, too, and as they mass on the street waiting for their guide, who is arguing with a guide from another tourist company, to usher them to the holy sites, they look uneasily across Manger Square.
All of them are wearing the glazed, startled look of people who are at once awed, tired and disappointed.
The Bethlehem they have found looks nothing like the town the son  of God might want to be born in.
But that's the whole point.
Everything here is  meant to test your faith.
The pilgrims, mostly women, will soon recover from the shock, but as they take in the unfamiliar place, with its light rain and glistening pavement teeming with boys who scurry about Manger Square brandishing open and mostly broken umbrellas for the tourists, they cannot believe that this may be the holiest moment in their lives.
This, the most un-Christmaslike spot in Christendom, is what they will take with them and remember.
Many will come to celebrate Christmas this year, as so many pilgrims do, but the festivities will  have a different tenor: barring some last-minute hitch, this is the first time in 28 years that Bethlehem will celebrate Christmas without an Israeli presence.


Money Laundering, New and Improved
ATIP for last-minute Christmas shoppers: For the best price on Johnnie Walker Black Label, do your buying in Colombia.
It's cheaper there than in Scotland, steps from the distillery.


Europeans Introduce Rules for Ferry Safety
More than a year after the loss of the ferry Estonia and about 900 of its passengers in the Baltic Sea, the International Maritime Organization decided not to adopt stringent new design regulations to improve ferry safety.
But at a meeting in London late last month, the agency, which regulates international shipping, did institute some ferry safety measures, and agreed to  let any country that wanted to impose stricter standards on ferries using its ports to do so.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Oldsmobile LSS;Helping Olds Find Its Way
AN impatient toot yanked my eyes from the dash and focused my attention on the traffic light, green for how long I didn't know.
And that's the problem with being a gadget lover, especially at the wheel.
If you're like me, you sometimes  forget to drive.
In this case, though, I forgave myself.
Instead of watching the light, I'd been staring at the screen of Oldsmobile's new satellite navigation system, mounted in a 1996 LSS, and that magic map just might be the best thing since television or the Internet.


Afrocentric in the Mainstream
IN this season of holiday buying, shoppers with a taste for the Afrocentric are discovering, to their surprise, a place in one of America's retail icons.
Wedged into the first floor of Macy's Herald Square is Blackberry, 500 square feet filled with hundreds of art objects and gifts hewn, sewn or otherwise drawn from African inspirations.
Of course, there are African trading beads, kente and mud cloths, and ceremonial artifacts of a life far removed from New York's noise.
But E. Diane White, the founder and co-owner of the boutique that leases  space from Macy's, wants the store to become more than just another Afrocentric  gift shop.


Sentosa Island
To the Editor: My husband and I were in Singapore when Jennifer Farley's article "Singapore's Getaway" appeared on Nov. 12.
Having just visited Sentosa Island, I enjoyed comparing the author's experiences with my own.
Fortunately for us, there were no long lines and no waiting on any of the various modes of transportation nor at any of the attractions.
I would like to offer one addition to the article.
Fort Siloso, on the south-westerly tip of the island, is most interesting.
Built more than 100 years ago to protect Keppel Harbor, it now contains life-size wax figures, military artifacts, furniture, equipment and artillery.
Two audio-visual presentations trace the fort's history from 1885 to 1942 when the British surrendered Singapore and the fort to the Japanese.
The barracks, cookhouse, guardhouse and  military fortifications are enhanced by audio presentations.
Video war games and an assault course for climbing are provided for children.


A Common Bond: Fear of Each Other
FROM a distance, the sign in the window of the modest Fiat Uno resembled those found in many an American city, telling crooks there is no radio within to steal.
But this one bore a different warning, tailored to a city where kidnappings have stripped the psyche to the most basic of obsessions.
"Attention," it read, "I am not a businessman."
Almost daily since a wave of kidnappings began in October, newspapers have been carrying front-page stories updating the drama of disappearances, ransoms,  escapes and executions that have come to dominate the public imagination.
On luckier days, husbands with beards grown in captivity are reunited with wives whose eyes are still raw from tears.
Sometimes, their arms are raised to the sky like prizefighters; sometimes they flash a weak V, so that nobody is really sure whether they are claiming victory or begging for peace.


QUEENS UPDATE
*
HUNTERS POINT The Queens West development plan cleared a significant hurdle last week when the Federal Government agreed to $85.6 million in mortgage insurance for the first of 19 proposed buildings in the 74-acre waterfront project.


16 Burned Bodies Found in France; Cult Tie Suspected
The burned bodies of 16 people thought to be connected with a doomsday cult involved in a mass murder-suicide last year were found today in a hilltop forest in southeastern France.
The dead, 13 adults and 3 small children, were found in a circle around the remains of a campfire, laid out on the bare ground in a sunburst pattern.
The police said some of them had been shot.


Carol Rawlings and Jim Miller
CAROL RAWLINGS, 34, is an English teacher at St.
Anne's School in Brooklyn Heights.
In some ways, she resembles a character in a Willa Cather novel -- she's a bright, literary woman who loves to sing and hike.
She grew up in Shaker Heights, Ohio, the daughter of a Presbyterian minister.
She seems like the sort  of person who might have met her husband while Christmas caroling or in a weekly reading group.
Instead, she met Jim Miller on the subway at about 10 P.M. on Sept. 23, 1994.


NEWS SUMMARY
International
2-10


Thigpen Drops Crown On Packers' Heads
Packers 24, Steelers 19


In America;Children In Danger
In the lawsuit the youngsters are called Bill and Victoria.
Bill is 14 years  old, mentally retarded, and suffers from a mild form of cerebral palsy.
He is a  very young-looking 14.
His sister, Victoria, is 10.
They will have a delightful  Christmas, spending it with the woman who has cared for them for the past 10 years, a foster parent that they call Grandma.
The children were placed in foster care in the fall of 1985, when Victoria was only 4 months old, because they had been neglected and abused by their natural parents.
The woman they call Grandma, a Bronx resident with a family of  her own, has given them a warm, happy and stable home life.
She would like to adopt them.
The children love her deeply and would like to be adopted.


On Leaving Congress
To the Editor:
I find it hard to muster much sympathy for Warren B. Rudman (Op-Ed, Dec. 21)  and his 12 departing Senate colleagues who complain (most recently on "60 Minutes") that their jobs aren't fun anymore.


Essay;And on Earth, Freedom
Peace on Earth" cannot be achieved until the other part of the Christmas message comes to pass: "good will toward men."
I read that last phrase -- with the translation of "men" dutifully updated to "one another" -- in its broadest modern sense, to mean "an embrace of the yearning of the human spirit for freedom."


A Rare Kind of Christmas
Irving Berlin, with the help of Bing Crosby, did much to embed the notion that the perfect Christmas is accompanied by snow.
So once again New Yorkers can add the white vistas of Central Park and the powdered Palisades to their prodigious list of reasons to feel superior to Angelenos.
A quick look at weather history shows, however, that one of the more fanciful blessings ever delivered is "May all your Christmases be white."
In fact, it would have been possible to live a healthy lifetime in New York City this century without seeing one.
The U.S.
Weather Service defines a white Christmas as one with at least an inch of snow on the ground.
Going back as far  as their records -- to 1870 -- there have been only eight.


Media: PRESS;A New Jersey daily defies conventional wisdom with a costly self-improvement program.
SEVERAL Newark politicians were only too happy to complain the other day about the new aggressiveness of the dominant New Jersey newspaper, The Star-Ledger.
They were downright vicious, in fact.
But that was only after they insisted on anonymity.


Editorial Notebook;Campaign Dreaming
The high point of Fernando Ferrer's infant mayoral campaign occurred last week, when Rudy Giuliani said that if the Yankees left the Bronx, it would be Mr.
Ferrer's fault.
Like all borough presidents, the Bronx Democrat labors under a burden of anonymity.
But now the Mayor has identified him to the world as George Steinbrenner's archenemy.
The news could not have been better, unless Mr.
Giuliani accused Mr.
Ferrer of beating up on Newt Gingrich.
"I can't believe what the guy did for me," an ebullient Mr.
Ferrer was telling his friends.
Manhattan Borough President Ruth Messinger, another all-but-announced Giuliani opponent, had to admit that she had no similar claim  to fame.
The Mayor has never attempted to pin a coming municipal disaster on her.
"He said I couldn't read, and on another occasion he said I couldn't do math," she reflected.
"But I haven't been blamed for an entire event."


Far-Flung Troops To Hear Clinton
Surrounded by the families of troops serving in Bosnia, President Clinton taped a Christmas Eve message yesterday telling United States military personnel that the nation is proud of their mission of peace.
"There is too much at stake today in Bosnia for our nation to sit on the sidelines," the President said in the address to troops in Bosnia, Croatia, Hungary, Italy and the Adriatic Sea, and those still preparing to deploy.
"And that's why we've turned to you, our men and women in uniform."


Henson's Son Builds on Muppets Tradition
Brian Henson remembers growing up "playing with boxes full of eyeballs and things like that."
But then, "a Muppet workshop is a great place for a kid to be," he added.


Russia General Sees A Top Bosnian Serb
A meeting between a Russian general and Gen.
Ratko Mladic, the commander of the Bosnian Serb army who has been indicted for war crimes, occurred on Thursday without the knowledge or approval of NATO, an alliance spokesman said.
Capt.
Mark Van Dyke, a NATO spokesman here, said that if the alliance's forces in Bosnia encountered people suspected of war crimes, they would be arrested.


'86 Series Rings Arrive at Last
Although he got a quarter of a share -- $21,563 -- after the Mets won the 1986 World Series, relief pitcher RANDY MYERS didn't get a ring.
That's because  the Mets decided on a cutoff point for players who were not with the club for all of that season.
Now, thanks to General Manager JOE McILVAINE, one of the principal targets of Myers's nine-year campaign, the Baltimore Orioles' left-hander recently got his  memento.


For G.I.'s in Bosnia, Small Patch of Peace on Earth
The military does not like surprises and, aside from the firecracker some local child set off near the runway after the jet taxied in, the arrival here of 17 soldiers from the Second Brigade went off without a hitch.
But there was one thing they were not prepared for this Christmas Eve, their  first day in Bosnia with the NATO peace-enforcement mission: the weather was beautiful.


In Serbian Town, Wary Welcome for Troops
In the four days since it took over from the United Nations peacekeeping force, NATO has brought about visible changes in this region of Bosnia, where the American forces coming to enforce the peace agreement will operate.
Military checkpoints have been removed, mines have been cleared, roads have been opened across front lines and NATO soldiers have moved unopposed into Serb-controlled villages.
Today there was an exchange of 200 Muslim and Serbian  prisoners of war, on a bridge 10 miles east of here.
It was the first prisoner exchange under the Dayton accords and one of the largest in at least two years,  the International Committee of the Red Cross said.


Metro Digest
NEW YORK CITY


Journey Begins Via Subway;A Young Pianist Makes His Way Underground
The experts say that David Allakhverdov is not quite ready for Carnegie Hall, but that was not the verdict of the subway commuters passing through Grand Central Terminal on the way to the shuttle last week.
They thought the little boy with the gentle features, somber expression and dark, girlish hair playing the fevered Chopin impromptu on the electric piano was a miraculous talent, a genius, "a little Mozart," as one woman was heard to  whisper to herself as David tossed his mane, Bernstein-like.


Corrections
A brief report in Business Day on Wednesday about Legg Mason Inc.'s acquisition of an asset management business misstated the amount of assets the firm currently controls.
It is $30 billion, not $30 million.


Man Dies in House Fire
A man died in a raging fire in Jersey City, his body found on the second floor of a burning three-story house last night.
The fire broke out at 325 Claremont Avenue shortly after 8 P.M. and spread to a neighboring three-story house at 323 Claremont Avenue, said Steven McGill, the public information officer for the Fire Department.
An electrical wire fell on one firefighter, who suffered an electrical shock and was under observation at Jersey City Medical Center, Mr.
McGill said.
The name of the man who died could not be verified by fire officials last night.
Another resident suffered smoke inhalation and was being treated at the Medical  Center.


Public Housing Project in North Dallas Spurs Lawsuit and Charges ofRacism
A plan to build a low-income housing project in a predominantly white neighborhood, part of a seven-year effort to rid public housing here of what a court called "vestiges of racism," has led to a lawsuit by neighbors and countercharges that more than a vestige of racism remains.


Radio Stocks Rise as Limits On Owners Ebb
Investors pushed up the stocks of the largest radio companies last week as a  House-Senate conference patched together a fragile agreement to loosen ownership restrictions in local markets and end limits on the number of stations a company can own nationwide.
While the complex telecommunications bill that embodies the radio provisions  is now bogged down over other issues, many lawmakers have said they still expect it to pass.
The bill is likely to ignite a five-year surge of radio acquisitions and rising prices for the nation's 10,000 stations, and to turn some large and middle-tier radio businesses into growth stocks.


Taking In the Sites;A Christmas Trip Through Cyberspace
For decades, children scribbled letters to Santa Claus. Now they send E-mail.
"I have been behaving really well this year," Amelia wrote in an electronic message to Santa.
"I have no certain presents in mind, though. Except for maybe  my own computer."


Angry Words From a Modell
PAT MODELL, wife of the Browns owner ART MODELL, says she can never forgive her husband's critics and says he has never lied.


Coming Soon to Computers Everywhere, a World's Fair
It's hard to say no to Carl Malamud.
The 36-year-old Washington-based economist has successfully pushed, prodded,  wheedled and occasionally even begged powerful corporate executives, Clinton Administration officials and foreign leaders to support his crusade to transform the Internet computer network into a combination of a global Main Street and digital Library of Alexandria.


Bronx Democrats End Yearlong Feud to Ease a Possible Mayoral Bid
The two men stood together for the first time in more than a year, embracing  each other like two long-lost brothers.
Pledging to work together again, they then sipped a glass of Palo Viejo Rum, an old Puerto Rican favorite, in a symbolic toast to leaving their animosities behind.
The scene was a holiday party given by Representative Jose E. Serrano at the  Bronx Museum last week.
Before stunned onlookers, Mr.
Serrano warmly greeted his most prominent guest, Roberto Ramirez, the State Assemblyman who is also the Democratic Party leader in the Bronx.
The two had been engaged in a bitter yearlong feud that splintered the borough's Hispanic political leaders and left  the Democratic Party in the Bronx in turmoil.


Deal Planned to Sell Maker of Newsprint
Donohue Inc. said over the weekend that it had agreed to buy the Quno Corporation, a newsprint maker, for $1.1 billion (Canadian), or $809.9 million (United States) in cash and stock.
The acquisition by Donohue, which produces newsprint, lumber and pulp, would  create the third-biggest newsprint maker in North America, with about $1.37 billion (Canadian) in sales, based on 1994 revenue.


A Poet's Memories of Welsh Christmases Past
In what has become an annual ritual around our place, a favorite half-hour is always set aside on Christmas Eve or Christmas Day to play an old, scratched vinyl recording of Dylan Thomas reading his "Child's Christmas in Wales."
For those who don't know the recording, and even for those who do, the Willow Cabin Theater Company has mounted a delightful production of a stage adaptation of the story.


AIDS Drugs Surface On Black Market
Police officers in Enfield, Conn., raided the home of a suspected drug dealer looking for crack, cocaine and cash.
But instead they found AZT and Bactrim, two drugs used to fight AIDS.
While the practice of selling anti-AIDS drugs on the black market is not widespread, Frank Vilardi, of Hartford's Living Center, said some people have been known to sell the medications to make extra money.


Christmas in Bethlehem: Arafat at Midnight Mass
The night was certainly not silent and it was not always calm as Bethlehem marked its first Christmas under Palestinian control with thunderous fireworks,  choirs, bagpipes, dances and laser lights.
While the revelry flowed over Manger Square, Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestinian Authority, took his place in the front pew of St.
Catherine's Roman Catholic Church, part of the larger complex including the Orthodox Church  of the Nativity, for the traditional Midnight Mass in his role as the new leader of Bethlehem and the Palestinians of the West Bank.


Islamic Party Wins Turkish Election, Edging Out Secularists
The Welfare Party, an Islamic group, won weekend general elections in Turkey  by a slim margin, the state-run TRT-1 television station said today.
With 96 percent of ballot boxes counted, unofficial returns showed the Welfare Party with 21.13 percent of the votes, just ahead of the main opposition Motherland Party, with 19.66 percent, and Prime Minister Tansu Ciller's True Path Party, with 19.37 percent, the station said.


Britain Rejects Welsh Opera's Plea for Financing
The dream of a spectacular new opera house for Wales has run aground on a bitter dispute involving modern architecture, rugby, upper-class snobbery and accusations of anti-Welsh bias.
The dispute reached a climax on Friday when the Government's Millennium Commission, which distributes proceeds from Britain's hugely lucrative national  lottery for projects to ring in the 21st century, turned down a request for aid  in building the $130 million Cardiff Bay Opera House in Wales.


RETAILERS REPORT A SHOPPING SEASON WORTH FORGETTING
Hardened shoppers, perpetual sales and a snowstorm that blanketed the Northeast during the crucial final week of Christmas shopping combined to give retailers their worst holiday season in years, analysts, economists and other retailing experts said yesterday.
"This is the worst Christmas since we have been keeping track of the month of December," said Richard N. Baum of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, which has monitored specialty retail sales monthly since 1988.


Taxi! Taxi? Plan May Stop Cherished Rite
A ritual of New York daily life, the simple act of stepping into the street to hail a cab, is about to change under a plan that would make taxis in midtown  Manhattan behave more like buses.
To ease traffic congestion between 30th and 60th Streets, next month the Giuliani administration will designate specially marked taxi stops as the only places for cabbies to pick up and drop off passengers from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. on  weekdays.


Former Brown Is Shot at Home
BOB GAIN, the former Browns defensive tackle, was shot and wounded in a domestic argument Saturday night in his suburban Cleveland home, the police said.
Gain, 66, was in critical condition yesterday at Metro Health Medical Center, said RUTH TOMKINS, a nursing supervisor.
Police said a woman was taken into custody but no charges were filed.
The woman's name was not released.


Crowded Jails Spur New Look at Punishment
As chaplain here at the Philadelphia Industrial Correctional Center, Father John Bonavitacola lives the biblical injunction to visit those in prisons.
He is convinced, like the early Christians, that there are better alternatives to incarceration for nonviolent offenders than sitting in a jail cell.
"We need to get some sanity back in the system," Father John said.
"Slow down mandatory sentencing and put some of these people into well-monitored community-based programs where these inmates work, earn money to take care of their families and provide restitution for their actions."


Army Unit Releases Wife of Gingrich Aide
The wife of the press secretary to Speaker Newt Gingrich, Capt.
Lynda C. Davis of the Army Reserve, has been released from active duty a few days after being called up for the Bosnia peacekeeping mission.
Captain Davis, 46, who is married to Tony Blankley, Mr.
Gingrich's chief spokesman, said she had been released from active duty for medical reasons and returned home from Fort Benning, Ga., on Saturday night.


Jose Alberto Naranjo, A Close Castro Aide, 66
Jose Alberto Naranjo, a close aide of President Fidel Castro, has died of a heart attack, the newsaper Juventud Rebelde reported today.
He was 66.
Mr.
Naranjo was a member of the Communist Party Central Committee and had previously served in jobs including Mayor of Havana and head of the Interior Ministry and the Food and Industry Ministry.


U.S. and China Sign Accord on Flights
The United States and China have signed an aviation agreement in Beijing that will let American and Chinese airlines fly nonstop between the countries, the United States Department of Transportation said this weekend.
The agreement also lets the Federal Express Corporation, the package delivery company, increase its number of flights a week to China to four from two.


At a Teen-Age Girl's 'Sweet 15th' Party, Two Are Shot Dead in a ParishHall
Alma Miranda, a 15-year-old middle school student, was enjoying her coming out party, her crimson-and-lace dress swirling to dance music, when a half-dozen gun blasts ripped the air early yesterday morning, sending her and several hundred guests scrambling for the exits of a church hall in Manhattan.
When the police arrived less than 15 minutes later, about 1:35 A.M., two young men lay dead on the floor beneath the pink-and-white crepe paper and balloons decorating the basement banquet hall of St.
Paul the Apostle Roman Catholic Church on Columbus Avenue, said Capt.
Kenneth McCarthy of the Detective Borough Manhattan.


Bridge;Alan Truscott
It can be argued that the English Civil War would not have occurred if the sensible older brother of the foolish Charles I had not been removed by death.
Similarly, high rank among the kings and queens of the pasteboard world is sometimes determined by small circumstances.
Six months ago, Kerri Sanborn of Stony Point, N.Y., had no plans to compete in the 1995 world team championships, and did not take part in the trials to select the United States teams.
But a winner of the women's team trials dropped out and she was a replacement.
The team finished second in the Venice Cup contest in Beijing in October, and as a result she is now the world's top-ranked woman player.


The Last Vietnamese Boat People
More than 20 years after the end of the Vietnam war, some 40,000 Vietnamese still languish in holding camps across Southeast Asia, insisting that they are legitimate refugees even after interviewers from the United Nations and local governments have determined that they are not.
These Vietnamese are the wretched remnant of some million and a half Vietnamese who braved death from storms, starvation and pirates to flee their oppressive, impoverished and war-ravaged homeland in small boats during the 1970's and 1980's.
Most were resettled in the West, the overwhelming majority of them in the United States.


From Glee to Gloomy: Bears' Season Is Over
For about five minutes this afternoon, the Chicago Bears felt as if they had  accomplished something.
They won last week to keep their playoff hopes alive and entered the game against Philadelphia at Soldier Field needing a victory and an Atlanta loss to secure a playoff berth.


AIDS Baboon Experiment Is Bad Science
To the Editor:
No one has hope for the survival of Jeff Getty, the AIDS patient who received the baboon bone marrow transplant (front page, Dec. 15): not the patient himself, not his doctors, not the scientists involved, and certainly not his physician.
Why, then, was the procedure performed?


Abroad at Home;Fear Of Freedom
We think of the United States as a country devoted to freedom of speech, and  to an impressive extent it is.
But even here the urge to censor lurks in people  who should know better.
So we have been reminded, depressingly, in the month running up to Christmas.
First there was the decision by the Library of Congress to postpone -- or, it may turn out, to cancel -- an exhibition entitled "Sigmund Freud: Conflict and Culture." The decision followed protests by people who disapprove of Freud and his ideas.


Stadiums' Last Contests Involve Their Fates
There is a building boom of sorts in professional sports, as peripatetic owners move their teams to new stadiums or new cities.


The Wrong-Way Giants
In a hotel lounge, sitting in shorts and a T-shirt, Herschel Walker looked relaxed.
But he was clearly bothered -- by his lack of playing time, and by insinuations from Giants players and others that he had often blown some of his  blocking assignments and run errant receiving routes.
This was the last week of November in Phoenix, the second game of the season  against the Arizona Cardinals.
Walker had grumbled about playing time for much of the season.
More complaints would follow.
Although he asked to be made more a part of the offense, it didn't happen.


For Those Returning to Tradition, An Industry Preserves the Saints
It was the week before Christmas, and at the Coreglia Studios in North Bergen, N.J., the saints -- in 12-inch, 18-inch, 24-inch and 32-inch varieties -- were marching out.
So were the L.O.G.'s (Ladies of Grace), the S.H.J.'s (Sacred Hearts of Jesuses), the I.O.P.'s (Infants of Prague), the S.H.M.'s (Sacred Hearts of Mary) and the boxed J.M.J.'s (Jesus-Mary-Joseph) Nativity sets.
"We got grottos, we got angels, we've got just about every saint there is," Walter Baldaccini said, standing in his world of plaster specks that looked like a glorious indoor blizzard.


Hark! That Other Bach Returns To Wreak Havoc on 57th Street
Can it be 30 years since Peter Schickele began confronting the public with the sounds of P. D. Q. Bach?
It does seem quite a wile (if not a grand deception).
Relentlessly he has kept on, unearthing works by this least likely of J. S. Bach's offspring -- a schleptet here, a pervertimento there -- about 100 pieces so far.
With anniversary concerts looming at Carnegie Hall on Wednesday, Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M., the bearded professor was asked for an accounting.


Capitalists in China, Hand Over Fist
Tomorrow night's two-hour visit to what the producers title "The Wild East" concentrates on the new capitalists who are running amok in Communist China.
For this very small but growing group of entrepreneurs and operators -- someone calls them former Red Guards in Armani suits -- life seems to be fun and games and moneymaking.
The wisecrack going around Beijing is that the Forbidden City has been turned into the for-business city.
Mao Zedong, still an icon, must be spinning wherever the spirits of Chinese Marxists spin.
It's a somewhat unfocused tour, venturing here and there through time and space as if the producer, Peter Kaufman, were having difficulty filling up his own time and space.
The program is most pointed when Mr.
Kaufman's Chinese acquaintances tell of the persecution of the educated class during the Cultural  Revolution and speculate gloomily on the consequences of the capitalist revolution.


Bank Said to Violate U.S. Securities Law
The Bank of Boston Corporation violated securities laws in 1989 when it failed to warn investors of pending losses caused by problem real estate loans,  an administrative law judge has ruled.
The judge, Brenda P. Murray, criticized the bank and its former chief executive, Ira Stepanian, for failing to tell investors in quarterly disclosure  statements with the Securities and Exchange Commission that its real estate loan portfolio was deteriorating.
Ms.
Murray ordered Bank of Boston to obey the law,  and no financial penalties were imposed.


Japanese in America Looking Beyond Past to Shape Future
When Kathleen Kamatani married Robert DeMeulemeester this fall, their friends were somewhat startled when the Kamatani family yelled out the traditional Japanese cheer of "Banzai!" or "May you live 10,000 years!" Some of them had scarcely realized that Ms.
Kamatani, who met her husband at the Columbia University Business School, was Japanese-American.
This made her mother, Fuji Kamatani, somewhat wistful since she had once sent her daughter to Japanese school in the hopes of imparting something lasting.
But she was fully accepting of the marriage.
All three of her daughters have married white men; intermarriage, she said, is simply a fact of life in Japanese-American culture, which has the highest intermarriage rate of any ethnic group in the country.


Protests Hurt Wine's Sales
International anger over French nuclear testing in the South Pacific cut deeply into sales of Beaujolais nouveau this year, a wine trade association reported today.
Eighteen percent less of the trendy young wine was sold during this year's primary marketing period, compared with the same period in 1994, the National Interprofessional Wine Office said.


Chemical Fumes Injure 3
Three people were taken to a hospital after being exposed to chemical fumes in a Manhattan hotel yesterday, officials said.
Capt.
Jeffrey Armstrong of the Emergency Medical Service said the odors were  the result of "someone mixing ammonia and bleach in a bottle in the basement."


U.S. Experts Studying Recorders From Cali Crash
Transportation safety experts in Washington have begun analyzing information  from the flight-data and cockpit voice recorders recovered in the wreckage of the American Airlines jetliner that crashed in the mountains of Colombia last week with a loss of 160 lives, Federal officials said yesterday.
Michael Benson, a spokesman for the National Transportation Safety Board, said information found in the recorders would be turned over to the Colombian Government, which is in charge of the investigation.
All information, he said, will be released by Colombian officials.


Patents;Tennis anyone? A designer thinks he has an answer to vibrations that may cause elbow problems.
BECAUSE they are both lightweight and strong, graphite tennis racquets have in the last decade eclipsed those made of wood or aluminum.
But the graphite frames tend to vibrate more than those of other materials and therefore, some think, aggravate such afflictions as tennis elbow.
Brett P. Bothwell, an architectural designer in Manhattan who sometimes creates graphite furniture and also works as a tennis pro, said he had invented  a way to reduce a racquet's vibration by using air pressure to tighten its strings.


Corrections
The Advertising column last Monday, about an interactive computer venture between NBC and the National Football League involving Super Bowl XXX, misindentified the parent company of Interactive Media Sales.
It is Interactive  Marketing Inc., not Interactive Media Inc.


Christmas Day
Today is Christmas.


'Megan's Law' Indictments
Four men have been indicted for failing to register on time as sex offenders, as required by "Megan's Law," the A.P. reported.
The four men, who were arrested in November, have been free on bail and have since registered, said Robert Luther, acting prosecutor for Cumberland County.
The indictments, issued last week, were believed to be the first since the law was passed in 1994.
The law requires that a community be notified of the presence of a convicted sex offender.
As of Dec. 15, there were 3,259 convicted  sex offenders statewide who had registered with local police agencies, the Attorney General's office said.


No Headline
We got grottos, we got angels, we've got just about every saint there is." WALTER BALDACCINI, at Coreglia Studios in North Bergen, N.J. [1:2.]


REMEMBER THE NEEDIEST!


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Wednesday about the Kmart Corporation's agreement with creditors misstated the title of Martin E. Welch 3d.
He is the company's chief financial officer and senior vice president, not vice president for merchandise.


Tenors Singing Like Countertenors
If the members of the Ensemble for Early Music were less talented and personable, there would be less reason to grumble about their enjoyable holiday  program, which had its first performance on Friday evening at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine. (Additional performances are scheduled for Jan. 6 and 7.)
The program was nicely varied within groups: "Medieval England," "Medieval France" and "14th-Century Italy" before intermission, "15th-Century English Carols," "King Henry VIII's Song Book" and "16th-Century Europe" in the second half.


Bustling, Buying and Baking. And Then a Peaceful Holiday
Enveloped in the cinnamon-scented heat of the Better Crust Bakery kitchen in  Harlem, Jerome Ephraim had whipped up so many holiday sweet-potato pies in two weeks of 12-hour days that as Christmas Eve descended yesterday, he was almost afraid to stop.
"That's when the tiredness comes on me," he said. "So I just work and work and work."


A Smithsonian Museum Will Reopen for a Week
The Smithsonian Institution is giving the public a holiday present via a private trust fund: The National Museum of American History will reopen on Tuesday.
The museum will pay for about 28 employees to return to work for one week using money from the museum's private trust fund and making them temporarily "trust employees."


At This Kind of Party, Sleeping Guests Are Good
There are a few rules of decorum common to almost any concert, whether classical or punk rock: audience members should not talk too loudly, should not  be caught sleeping and should not walk onstage and hover around the musicians while they are playing.
But when a performance is part of a party, these basic rules are discarded.
Instead of the audience's being required to respect the performers, the performers must respect the sanctity of the audience's evening.
A concert must be interwoven inextricably into a party, beginning and ending without rupturing mood or continuity.
This was the case on Friday night when Straylight performed at Soundlab in Chinatown, a weekly club night with a focus on experimental dance music, and when Air Liquide performed at Home, a weekly rave at Vinyl in TriBeCa.
All the rules of concert decorum were broken at these parties, with audience members continuing their conversations, peering over the musicians' shoulders and dozing off either on hammocks and beanbags at Soundlab or on the stage itself at Vinyl.
These were signs of good performances: if the music was bad, people would have just retrieved their coats and left, especially since Straylight's show didn't start until midnight and Air Liquide's until 4 A.M.


Christmas Tree Is Taken
A Bridgeport man was charged with stealing a freshly cut Christmas tree from  the grounds of the Shoreline Star dog track on Saturday, the police said.
The man, Alvin Gonzalez, was charged with third-degree criminal mischief and  is scheduled to be arraigned on Jan. 2 in Superior Court, the police said.


Homicide Toll Rises to 59
Two violent deaths over the weekend brought Camden's record-setting homicide  total up to 59 for the year, The Associated Press reported.
The police found the body of Carlos Cano, 31, of Camden, inside a car on the side of the road early Saturday.
He had been shot several times, officials said.
Two hours later, a homeless man, David Niederhauser, 63, was found dead of multiple stab wounds.
State Attorney General Deborah Poritz agreed earlier this month to dispatch  state troopers to the beleaguered city.


Former Amex Member Makes Guilty Plea
A former member of the American Stock Exchange has pleaded guilty to a charge that he schemed to defraud investors of about $3.9 million from July 1993 through May 1995, prosecutors said last week.


Murder Is Suspected in Cult Deaths in France
Investigators opened a murder investigation today into the deaths of 16 members of a doomsday cult amid suspicions that they were shot, drugged or asphyxiated before their bodies were burned.
Three young girls were among those shot to death in the remote Alpine forest, Prosecutor Jean-Francois Lorans said.


Woman Works Toward a Career and Reunites With Daughter
Christmas will be sweet this year for Faith Bowman and her 8-year-old daughter, Catey.
They may be poor, but they are living together, and that is more than they can say about last year.
Since they couldn't afford a Christmas tree, they have painted one on the kitchen wall, taping up colored paper ornaments and a shining yellow star.
They have saved a little money for food, so dinner tonight will be ham, with sides of cornbread, collard greens and candied sweet potatoes made from "Sister  Pamela's Soul Food Cookbook," a 25-cent find at a used book sale.


Digital Studios: It's the Economy, Stupid;George Lucas Sees Technology as a Wondrous Tool and a Cost-Cutter
When George Lucas began the movie industry's love affair with computer technology on his first "Star Wars" adventure in 1977, Hollywood seized on the notion that computers, like the Force, would eventually make just about anything possible.
Now, after a series of major technological improvements, the fully digital studio has finally arrived.
But for Mr.
Lucas and other technology experts, the  new equipment is still not being used to its full potential: bringing visual wizardry to the silver screen while reducing Hollywood's bloated budgets.


How Web Links Keep a Far-Flung Family Together
The family Christmas letter is still popular, for better or worse, and the telephone remains the most popular way to wish faraway relatives a happy holiday season.
A growing number of families are even staying in touch by voice messaging, pagers and electronic mail.
The Trueman family has gone them one better.


In Secret, de Klerk Extended Secrecy on Papers
Only a few days before he was to hand power over to South Africa's first democratically elected Government last year, the departing President, F. W. de Klerk, made a secret bid to keep the apartheid Government's Cabinet documents under wraps for at least 40 years.
The country's archiving laws already stipulated a 30-year embargo on such documents.
But Government officials have discovered that on April 21, 1994, Mr.  de Klerk slapped an extra 10 years onto the existing restrictions, keeping Cabinet minutes from public scrutiny until the year 2034.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Neediest Cases article yesterday about a homebound woman helped by the Jewish Association for Services for the Aged referred incorrectly to a child who died of cancer.
The child was the woman's daughter, not her son.


Panel Weighs Investigations
The fate of the State Commission on Investigations might be determined this week, as members of a committee studying the agency hold their final meeting.
The independent commission was created 27 years ago to investigate organized crime and official corruption.
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman and Attorney General  Poritz have questioned whether the commission duplicates investigations conducted by other state and Federal agencies.
The Committee to Review the S.C.I. could recommend that the Legislature eliminate the commission or limit its power.


Official Suggested Removal Of Old Paint in Stairwells
A high-ranking Fire Department official said four months ago that layers of old paint thought to have contributed to a rash of stairwell fires in housing projects should be removed -- a recommendation the city rejected in favor of covering it with a fire-retardant coating.
Fire Commissioner Howard Safir acknowledged yesterday that removing the old paint might turn out to be necessary, but he argued that it was too soon to say, and that removal would be a more expensive and time-consuming answer to the problem than applying a new coat.


Don't Blame Schools for Budget Pinch
To the Editor:
Re "Books, Not Bureaucrats" (Op-Ed, Dec. 18), by Lieut.
Gov.
Betsy McCaughey  Ross of New York:


A Victory Indeed
To the Editor:
The Victory Theater is a major step forward in rehabilitating a part of New York City's past that will provide a welcome addition to its cultural life.


Military Puts New Emphasis on Safety
While public concern is focused on the safety of the 20,000 American troops cautiously moving into Bosnia, the Pentagon is taking steps to prevent the more  than 1,000 deaths the peacetime military suffers each year from car crashes, sickness, suicide and murder.
Far more American troops have died in training accidents than in combat every year since the Vietnam War, underscoring the dangers inherent in the high-technology, all-volunteer military even in peacetime, commanders say.


F.A.A., Publicizing New Rules, Passes on Paper to Choose Disks
Usually, the Federal Aviation Administration issues rules by the pound, filling shelves in law offices and libraries all over America with weighty tomes printed in tiny agate type.
Recently it switched: In releasing what was described as the most comprehensive aviation rulemaking in more than 25 years, it handed out floppy disks.
And nothing else.
The rulemaking covered new standards for commuter airplanes, a proposal for new limits on how many hours a pilot can be on duty and a justification for forcing airline pilots to retire at the age of 60.
It came to 1.4 megabytes, on  two floppies.
"The printing costs would sink us," said Drucie Andersen, a spokeswoman for the  agency, explaining the decision.
A printed publication of the regulation would have been 1,000 pages long.


Russia Takes Chechen City
Russian troops said today that they had captured the second-biggest town in the separatist region of Chechnya after a week of fighting that marked an abrupt end to a shaky six-month cease-fire.


Don't Blame Schools for Budget Pinch;A Private Book Fund
To the Editor:
Re "Books, Not Bureaucrats" (Op-Ed, Dec. 18): The private sector has taken the initiative in addressing the dearth of books in the New York City public school system.


Norwegian Skier Reaches South Pole in 44 Days
A 32-year-old Norwegian trying to make the first solo, unsupported ski trip across Antarctica arrived at the South Pole on Friday after a trek of 44 days and 782 miles -- a faster time than any predecessor.
But the skier, Borge Ousland, reported by radio to his sponsors in Oslo that  he would not be able to make the first unsupported transcontinental trip.
Mr.
Ousland said that in the course of his exhausting trek from the Weddell Sea up to the polar plateau and beyond, he had been forced to dump more than 90 pounds  of food from his initial load of 375 pounds of food and supplies.


New York Police Sergeants Deserve Higher Pay
To the Editor:
Re your Dec. 21 editorial on the bill that would require the New York City Police Department to promote certain sergeants and lieutenants:


Doctors Try to Master Their Fate Through M.B.A.'s
Doctors who hope to heal their profession, or at least their portfolios, are  thronging graduate business schools, a few of which have begun pampering doctors and catering to their chaotic schedules.
The most elaborate of the programs begins Jan. 7 at the University of California at Irvine, where the charter class of 60 has an average annual income of $230,000.
One student made $1.5 million last year.
The class, which will meet for one long weekend a month at a palm-lined hotel on the coast of Orange County, costs $48,000 for two years (laptop computer included).


Forget Rudolph. Just Beam It Up.
Forget poetry and lore.
Students at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology have calculated that Santa Claus needs more than eight tiny reindeer.
The students based their calculation on the premise that Santa had 31 hours to deliver toys and goodies to 91.8 million Christian households -- 15 percent of all homes in the world -- spread across all 24 time zones.
That works out to  822.6 households per second.


In Pen Stroke and Portrait, A Striving Made Palpable
Here are the mistakes, the emendations, the changes that make a poem great.
Here is W. H. Auden repeatedly unable to spell "accommodate," and Coleridge changing the tense of "The Rime of the Ancient Mariner" from present to past, somehow making it more immediate.
Here is poetry made physical.
Poets drunk, dying, addicted to drugs.
Here is the tiny writing of the timid, the brash strokes of the arrogant.
"The Hand of the Poet: Original Manuscripts by 100 Masters," is a two-part exhibition of 400 rare poetry manuscripts and artifacts in the Berg Exhibition Room of the New York Public Library.
Some have rarely been seen publicly, among  them the priceless "Westmoreland Manuscript" of 1625, the final authority for John Donne's "Holy Sonnets": "I am a little world made cunningly/ Of elements, and an Angelike spright."


Miami Is on Its Way to the Playoffs, Courtesy of Denver
John Elway led the rally and Jason Elam kicked the game-winning field goal as they teamed up to give Denver a victory.
More important in the American Conference playoff picture, they gave Oakland a loss and Miami the last wild-card spot.
Elam's 37-yard field goal with 48 seconds left gave Denver a 31-28 victory in Oakland.
The Dolphins also won, 41-22, in St.
Louis, but in the convoluted world of playoff scenarios, their result didn't matter once Seattle had lost earlier in the day.


Never Too Late to Honor Oviraptor
The once maligned dinosaur known as the Oviraptor is looking more and more appealing these days.
When scientists from the American Museum of Natural History first discovered a specimen of this small dinosaur in the Gobi Desert of Mongolia in the 1920's, they assumed the worst.
Its skeleton was found on a nest of eggs believed to belong to another species of dinosaur, suggesting that it had been killed and buried in sand in the very act of stealing some eggs.
The skimpy circumstantial evidence was enough to brand the hapless dinosaur with the name Oviraptor, Latin for "egg-seizer."
But last year new findings and analyses from a giant dinosaur graveyard in the Gobi suggested that the Oviraptor, which resembles a small ostrich with a tail, had gotten a bum rap.
The eggs in question were actually the Oviraptor's own.


Japanese Stocks Higher
Stocks rose here early today as an increase in the dollar against the yen in early trading in Asia improved the outlook for Japanese exporters' earnings.
Expectations for lower interest rates helped lift the shares of financial institutions.
The benchmark Nikkei index of 225 issues rose 50.12 points, or three-tenths of 1 percent, to 19,794.54.
On Friday, the Nikkei rose 91.17 points.


In the Nick Of Time, Falcons Go To Playoffs
The clock was winding down and they held the slimmest lead possible.
Now the  Atlanta Falcons were pacing their sideline, wringing their hands, hugging each other after each San Francisco 49ers incompletion -- and fretting and frowning after each 49ers catch.
Now there were 31 seconds left and the 49ers faced fourth-and-14.
There went  the Steve Young pass.
There went safety Kevin Ross, sneaking in front of it.
And that did it.


It's Very Hard to Keep A Good Knick Down
Patrick Ewing enjoys games like the one he had Saturday night, when the ball  comes to him early and often.
For the first time this season, he reached 40 points as the Knicks overcame the Toronto Raptors, 103-91.
It was a vintage performance for Ewing -- 40 points, 9 rebounds and 15-for-19 shooting.
And it was almost expected, coming off a subpar performance Friday night, when Ewing was outplayed by Shaquille O'Neal in New York's dreadful 111-90 loss.


BUSINESS DIGEST
A Weak Retail Season, And Dubious Prospects Hardened shoppers, early discounting and a snowstorm that blanketed the Northeast in the crucial final week of Christmas shopping combined to give retailers their worst holiday seasons in years, analysts, economists and other retail experts said.
And things won't get better for retailers, many experts said, until more go out of business, reducing the competition.


Reservists Sent to Germany
More than 300 United States Army reservists will be spending today far from home.
The 331 reservists left from McGuire Air Force Base yesterday for United States bases in Germany to replace soldiers who have been sent to Bosnia as part of NATO's peacekeeping mission, the A.P. reported.
The reservists had been training for their mission in recent weeks at nearby Fort Dix.
Last week's snowstorms and harsh winds provided ideal conditions for teaching the soldiers cold-weather survival skills, Army officials said.
More than 1,000 soldiers from as many as 23 Army National Guard and Reserve units nationwide are expected to drill at Fort Dix before being sent to Germany and Bosnia.
TERRY PRISTIN


INSIDE
Death Toll Climbs in India


Metro Matters;What to Give The Movers And Shakers
IN the spirit of the season, Metro Matters herewith lists its 1995 Christmas and Hanukkah gifts for New York's notables, in near-alphabetical order:
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, author of "Power, Pasta and Politics": a better memory for Volume 2.


Off-Duty Detective Shot
An off-duty New York City detective was shot in the left thigh last night during an attempted robbery in South Jamaica, Queens, the police said.
Two men accosted Officer Garfield Boyce as he walked on Linden Boulevard, and shot him, the police said.
They then fled.


Corrections
Obituaries yesterday about the actress Butterfly McQueen and Lillian Teit Zabar, a founder of Zabar's gourmet delicatessen, misstated the day of their deaths in some copies.
Both died on Friday, not Saturday.


Technology: CONNECTIONS;Miss Manners has been keeping an eye on cyberspace, and she is not amused.
THE imagery of surf now seems permanently attached to the Internet, but Judith Martin, who writes the syndicated column Miss Manners, has suggested that one might hark back to the world of 19th-century ships to evoke the social dynamics of cyberspace.
On such a vessel, a group of strangers would book passage and become part of  a seaborne world isolated from ordinary society and all its social baggage.
Young rakes would often feel free to invent distinguished lineages and alluring  titles.
And young ladies, Ms.
Martin says, "used to be warned, when beginning a  journey, to be suspicious of shipboard introductions."


Tokyo Journal;In Japan, Christmas Merrymaking Is for Lovers
Surrounded by Christmas decorations and holiday cheer, Tomomi Kimura paused outside a department store and balefully explained that she was in a terrible mood.
"I'm very jealous," she said, glaring at her older sister, who has the temerity to have a boyfriend.
Miss Kimura's problem is that she is 21 and unattached, and there is no worse time to be alone and Japanese than Christmas.


Mattel Plans to Sell Its Own Brand of Software
Even as tiny tots look for lost Barbie shoes and misplaced pieces to the new  Hot Wheels sets from Santa, Mattel Inc. is already hard at work on electronic versions of these toys for next Christmas.
Mattel, the world's largest toy company, has formed a Mattel Media division to develop and sell multimedia products and software based on its toy brands, which include Barbie, Hot Wheels, Cabbage Patch Dolls and Polly Pocket miniature collectibles.
Among the products planned for the new line will be a software program to let kids make clothes for their Barbies.


Gates to Split 2 Communities
Residents of Asbury Park and the Ocean Grove section of Neptune Township will ring in the New Year with gates separating them.
The gates on the walkways over  Wesley Lake, which are to be locked from nightfall until dawn, will be completed in a few days, officials from both municipalities said last week.
Ocean Grove residents proposed the gates as a means of preventing crime.
But Asbury Park officials said the plan stemmed from racism and fear of Asbury Park's black and Hispanic residents, who make up 65 percent of the city's population of 17,000.


Markets Closed
All financial markets, government offices and banks in the United States are  closed today in observance of Christmas.
Most markets overseas are also closed.
In Europe, many markets will remain closed tomorrow.


Boy's Mother Is Charged With Abuse
The mother of a 3-year-old boy who drank up her supply of methadone was arraigned yesterday on charges she abused the child by beating and burning him.
The mother, Judith Frade, 34, was arrested Saturday after she brought her unconscious son to the emergency room of St.
Barnabas Hospital in the Bronx and  told doctors that the boy had accidentally drunk her supply of methadone, said Officer Arek Tarih, a police spokesman.
After the boy's stomach was pumped, Officer Tarih said, doctors saw that he had black eyes, burn marks on his buttocks and arms and "numerous scars from past assaults."


New Orleans's Hopes Rise As Crime Rate Decreases
Life is still hard in the Desire housing project, but at least death no longer comes quite so easy.
Deborah Davis, a mother of four sons who has lived 40 of her 41 years in the  massive old red brick project, stepped from her door last week and saw that a small crowd of her neighbors had gathered outside one of the project apartments.
There had been a killing, and the people were gathered to talk and pray about it.


Getting to Know Scribe As More Than a Street
Eugene Scribe was possibly the most successful, prolific and influential playwright in France when he died in 1861 at the age of 70.
Alone and in collaboration, he had written 300 to 400 plays and the librettos for operas by Verdi, Bellini, Donizetti and Meyerbeer, among others.
He also pioneered the kind of tightly plotted play often called well made -- not always in praise.
In spite of the fame and influence he enjoyed in his own day, Scribe is virtually unknown among contemporary Americans.
The exceptions: opera lovers who pay attention to librettists and tourists who recognize the name as the street where the American Express office is situated in Paris.


Dulcet 'Nutcracker' Children
The New York City Ballet sent fresh troops in to dance "The Nutcracker" on Friday afternoon at the New York State Theater.
The results were charming and even exciting.
George Balanchine's production of the holiday classic needs not only a good principal cast, which it had on Friday, but also inspired solo and dramatic performers and children who are both accomplished dancers and natural.
Sandra Garcia and Adam Weinert brought an extra touch of spirited sweetness to the lead children's roles of Marie and the Nutcracker Prince, with Avi Scher a lovable little hellion as Fritz, Marie's naughty younger brother.
And it was heartening  to see that this year none of the boys in the opening party scene wore berets.
That means that the School of American Ballet, where the children train, has a full complement of males and the girls do not have to tuck their hair up and pretend.


G. Chester, 73, Dies; Was an Executive For TV Game Shows
Giraud Chester, an author and television executive responsible for shows that include "The Price is Right," "Family Feud" and "What's My Line?" died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 73.
The cause was congestive heart disease, his family said.


Devils Edged Again
Frustrated by a 2-1 loss to the Florida Panthers on Saturday night, defenseman Ken Daneyko wondered whether the team needs to depart from its conservative approach to create more offense.
The loss was the Devils eighth by  one goal this season, a league high.
"Our defense might have to start taking a few more chances," he said.


Israel Places New Limits On Its Banks
The Israeli Government approved sweeping changes today requiring the country's powerful banks to sell substantial parts of their assets, a Treasury spokesman said.
The move has far-reaching implications for the concentration of economic power in Israel as well as for the planned privatization of the banking sector.


2 Slain at Parish Hall
Two people were shot dead yesterday when a party to mark a girl's 15th birthday erupted in gunfire in the basement of a midtown Manhattan church.
Officials at the church said they will increase scrutiny of events there because of the violence.
Article, page 43.


Giants Pack Up And Await Verdicts
When the Giants' offensive linemen came to work last week, some of their Christmas presents had arrived early.
Quarterback Dave Brown had given his linemen custom-made designer suits worth about $2,000 each.
The starting linemen got three such suits; the backups received one.
Don't worry about the price.
Brown can afford it.
He is an unrestricted free  agent at the end of the season and just a fraction of the signing bonus of the nice fat contract he will receive will cover the $50,000 or so he paid for the suits.
Not to mention the $1.4 million he earned this past season.


The Jets' Worst Year Finally Counts Down to Zero
The numbers don't explain, they merely confirm.
The Jets cannot be explained  with mere statistics.
But the numbers make this year's Jets officially the worst Jets.
And the worst record in team history -- 3-13 -- is also the worst record in the National Football League this expansion season, so the Jets will get the top pick in the  college draft.


Tracking Facts in Jerusalem's History
JERUSALEM An Archeological Biography By Hershel Shanks Illustrated. 256 pages.
Random House. $45.


Sports of The Times;A Most Fitting Conclusion
THE local football season came to a merciful halt yesterday before another blizzard could strike the metropolitan area.
Thus nothing of consequence was thrown at Giants Stadium, by the fans and, naturally, the Jets.
Charles Barkley, it turns out, was dead wrong.
Athletes can be role models.
The 28,885 attending fans watched Boomer Esiason and Bubby Brister throw the football for a combined 84 yards and 3 interceptions in a numbing 12-0 defeat to New Orleans and decided to keep their hands snugly inside their pockets.
Not worth the risk of embarrassing oneself.


Shakespeare Resists The Culture Vetters
To the Editor:
Prof.
James Shapiro, author of a new book about Shakespeare and Jews, says in "It's No More Mr. Nice Guy for Shylock (or Shakespeare)" (Arts pages, Dec. 19) that "To see Shylock in a sympathetic light is not true to the spirit of Shakespeare's culture." The problem is that it is somehow true to the spirit of  Shakespeare's play.


As Fire's Toll Exceeds 400, Indians Seek Bodies of Kin
The death toll rose to more than 400 today in the aftermath of a fire that swept through a school ceremony in the northern Indian town of Mandi Dabwali, and the toll is expected to rise as a growing number of severely burned survivors die in hospitals.
More than half of the dead were children, mostly younger than 10.
Reports from the town, 185 miles northwest of New Delhi, spoke of grim scenes as families searched for relatives among charred bodies laid out in white shrouds on a hospital lawn.


Fire at the Philadelphia Zoo Kills 23 Primates
Smoke from a fire at the nation's oldest zoo early today killed 23 gorillas,  orangutans, gibbons and lemurs, all endangered species, officials said.
A security guard at the Philadelphia Zoo reported the fire in the World of Primates building shortly before 1 A.M.
The fire was confined to the ceiling in a 30-by-30-foot section of the one-story brick building, the fire commissioner, Harold Hairston, said.


De Beers Talks Reset
Talks in Moscow this week on renewing an exclusive diamond-supply contract between De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd. and Russia were adjourned until January, a company spokesman said today.
De Beers had expressed concern about sales of Russian diamonds that bypass the deal with the company.
The current five-year contract was scheduled to run out at the end of this month.
Pending the renewal of talks in early January, the two sides agreed to extend their current sales agreement for one month, until Feb. 1, the spokesman said.


F.D.A. Accepts Use of Product In Breast Exams
A plastic pad for use in breast self-examination by women was approved by the Food and Drug Administration on Friday, but not as the only way to search for lumps.
The product, consisting of a silicon-filled flexible circular plastic envelope 10 inches in diameter, is designed to reduce friction while women examine their own breasts.
The manufacturer, Inventive Products Inc. of Decatur, Ill., makes no claim that the pad will increase detection of lumps.


Nigerian Journal Seized
Security agents raided the homes of the two leading editors of Tell, a popular newsmagazine, today and confiscated the latest edition before it was set to go on sale with a cover article critical of Nigeria's military ruler, Gen.
Sani Abacha.
The magazine's editor in chief, Nosa Igiebor, was taken from his home to State Security Service headquarters.


Don't Blame Schools for Budget Pinch;Plight of the City
To the Editor:
Lieut.
Gov.
Betsy McCaughey Ross (Op-Ed, Dec. 18) makes statistical comparisons that present a distorted picture of educational financing in New York City from 1980-1993.


Rangers Sign Witt for One Year
Pitcher BOBBY WITT signed a one-year contract with the Texas Rangers yesterday with an option for 1997.
Witt, 31, who pitched for the Rangers from 1986-92, returned to Texas last season in a trade with the Florida Marlins.
He posted a 3-4 record with a 4.55 earned run average in 10 starts.
Witt has a career record of 96-107 with a 4.52 e.r.a. in 179 games.
He is the third pitcher to sign with Texas this off season, following reliever MIKE HENNEMAN and starter KEN HILL. (AP)


Count Clarke Moore A Son of Columbia
To the Editor:
I lifted a glass of eggnog upon reading about the New-York Historical Society exhibit devoted to Clement Clarke Moore (news article, Dec. 20).


New Harlem Supermarket Draws a Mix of Shoppers
Charlotte Trafton and Dorothy Hall were driving down the Henry Hudson Parkway from their home in the Bronx on Saturday when they saw cars lined up at the 125th Street exit.
"We said, 'Where are all these people going?' " Mrs.
Trafton said.
"But then  we saw the sign, so we stopped in ourselves."


G.I. Bridge to Bosnia Is Unbuilt And the Muddy River Is Rising
When the commander of United States forces in Bosnia, Gen.
William L. Nash, visited the muddy river site here today where the Americans are to build the pontoon bridge that will carry American troops into Bosnia, it was, he said, "just to make sure we're reading from the same sheet of music."
It is not at all clear that they are, and even more uncertain is when the American troops will begin crossing the Sava River, which marks the border between Croatia and Bosnia.


Sometimes an Artful Cigar Is Just an Artful Cigar
THE SCANDAL OF PLEASURE Art in an Age of Fundamentalism By Wendy Steiner 251 pages.
The University of Chicago Press. $24.95.


A Warhol Director On What Is Sordid, Then and on MTV
Of the many peculiar characters who drifted in and out of Andy Warhol's Factory, the film maker Paul Morrissey may deserve the grand prize as the oddest specimen of all.
As the auteur responsible for such films as "Flesh," "Trash" and "Heat," he did more than anyone to create the image of the Warhol world as a nonstop festival of sleaze, drugs and moral squalor.
Yet Mr.
Morrissey can sound like a rock-ribbed Republican.
"I tuned into a show on MTV the other day that was all about young people discussing their sex lives," he said in a recent interview in his apartment on the Upper East Side.
"It was so sordid. Really nasty."


Train Accident in Spain


Turkish Premier Resigns After Losing Election to Islamic Party
Prime Minister Tansu Ciller of Turkey, defeated by an Islamic party in Sunday's general elections, resigned today and made overtures to a conservative  rival to keep the Islamic party out of power.
A spokesman for President Suleyman Demirel said Mrs.
Ciller had resigned, along with her Cabinet, but would stay in office until a new government was formed.


Evidence Shows Jets Were Doomed From the Start
With all the strategic overhauling, with all of Coach Rich Kotite's attitude  adjustments, with all the free-agent moves, the Jets were left faceless and unarmed for attack this season.
Their prospects crashed largely because the Jets did not bring in one every-down impact player on offense, and they compounded that failure by greatly overestimating what they had.


Giraud Chester, 73, Executive for TV Game Shows
Giraud Chester, an author and television executive responsible for shows that include "The Price Is Right," "Family Feud" and "What's My Line?" died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 73.
The cause was congestive heart disease, his family said.


Video Artists Meet Today's Software
Convinced that the relationship between art and technology is at a new turning point, the organizers of the third Lyons Biennial of Contemporary Art have chosen art and the moving image as the theme for this year's show.
They want to pay homage to the achievements of video art, but also to gauge how artists are responding to the latest generation of computer software.
The organizers, Thierry Raspail, Thierry Prat and Georges Rey, insist that their main interest is art and not technology.
How are artists faring, they ask, in a world bombarded by images created by advertising, movies, television and now computers?
Have artists managed to impose their own language on media that are now accessible to everyone?


BUSINESS DIGEST
Second Phone Lines A Sign of the Times In the days when keeping up with the Joneses required a high-capacity station wagon, not a high-speed modem, having a second telephone line at home was a luxury, necessary only if a family had several teen-agers.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;The Promises of Gambling
As the 20th anniversary of the vote to legalize gambling in New Jersey approaches, the gambling industry's promise that the casinos' wealthy would enrich the whole community is finally becoming a reality.
It has taken longer than anyone expected, and the city is hardly a utopia, but there are now many jobs for high school graduates and thousands of new units of moderate-priced housing, as well as a new supermarket, an airport and a minor league baseball team.
A new convention center is under construction, along with a big non-casino hotel aimed at attracting tourists who want to do more than gamble. [Page A1.]


B. E. Witkin, Legal Scholar And Author, 91
Bernard E. Witkin, a legal scholar who for some 60 years condensed and explained everything a lawyer or judge could want to know about California law,  died on Saturday at his home in Berkeley, Calif.
He was 91.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Caseworker Screening Urged
Assemblyman William J. Pascrell Jr., Democrat of Paterson, is continuing to press for changes in the State Division of Youth and Family Services.
Mr.
Pascrell said last week that he planned to introduce a bill when the new legislative session began that would allow the state to conduct random drug tests of caseworkers.
The Assemblyman said the bill was inspired by an arrest of an agency caseworker accused of selling crack cocaine to a minor.
Earlier, Mr.
Pascrell criticized the agency's confidentiality regulations.


14 Slain in South Africa
At least 14 people were killed in South Africa today in a raid by Inkatha Freedom Party supporters against the rival African National Congress, police said.
Several hundred Inkatha supporters attacked a settlement in the KwaZulu-Natal province, burning more than 80 homes, the police said.


Fire Destroys Swine and Decades of Research
A fire that killed 700 pigs at a University of Wisconsin laboratory has brought to an abrupt halt years of research with implications for human ailments like heart disease and arthritis.
Three herds of carefully bred research animals that were also used in studies of organ transplants, nutrition and bone development were lost when the fire, which occurred on Wednesday, swept the Swine Research Center on a 2,000-acre farm, 20 miles north of the university's main campus in Madison.


CHRONICLE
One month ago, HUGH LOCKE, a public affairs officer with the United Nations Environment Program, knew nothing about renovating an office to make it environmentally sound.
Today, he knows what paint and wall coverings to use, what carpeting can be recycled when it wears out, where to find fabric made from recycled soda bottles, and what kind of wood to put on floors and desktops in the office.
His crash course began, he said, when Joanne Fox-Przeworski, director of the  North American office, "told me earlier this year that we had to renovate because more staff people were coming here. I suggested we do it on environmental lines."


Taxi Union Leaders Criticize Plan for Stands in Midtown
Leaders of New York City's only taxi driver's union said yesterday that the Giuliani administration's plan to create taxi stands in midtown Manhattan could  cut cabbies' earnings, snarl traffic and inconvenience passengers.
To reduce traffic congestion, city officials plan to create taxi stands next  month between 30th and 60th Streets.
They would operate like bus stops and be the only places that cabbies could legally pick up or discharge passengers between 10 A.M. and 4 P.M. on business days.


Big Bang Hits the Johannesburg Stock Exchange
Probably no bourse in the world is quite as naked about money worship as the  Johannesburg Stock Exchange.
Where others have a bell or a clock, it has two huge, bejeweled chalices modeled on those in the temple of Moneta, where Rome's  money was stamped.
Between them is a wall of stained-glass windows representing  mining, transportation and the other industries that make this the richest country in Africa.
Soon all this medievalism will be gone, though, replaced by the 21st-century  version of the same cathedral: an exchange in a mainframe presiding over a far-flung congregation of computers.


RECORD COST CITED TO FIX OR REBUILD NATION'S SCHOOLS
Around the country, the nation's schoolchildren are attending schools that are falling apart, or are being jammed into classrooms that are sorely overcrowded.
Often, they are trying to use new technology in old buildings not equipped to handle it.
The result, according to a number of reports by educators and Government agencies, is a need for record spending to renovate old schools and build new ones at a time when voters are increasingly leery of any public expenditures and particularly skeptical about the public schools.


Warm Gatherings, Some in Spirit, On a Crisp Holiday;On Lower East Side: Instead of a Movie
Why, one asks Seth Kamil of Big Onion Walking Tours, do you schedule your Jewish Lower East Side tour on Christmas Day?
"Why not?" Mr. Kamil replies.


CHRONICLE
MILTON HANDLER, a nationally recognized scholar and antitrust lawyer who is still working at the age of 92, announced last week that he is giving $1.15 million to Columbia Law School to support research on ways to improve the law.
Advancement of the law is something with which Mr.
Handler, who taught at the law school for 45 years, is familiar.


Moderates Quit When Going Gets Tough
To the Editor:
Warren B. Rudman (Op-Ed, Dec. 21) attempts to put the best face on the swelling exodus of veteran centrist legislators from Congress.


Attention Kmart Watchers;Floyd Hall Says He Really Will Save the Ailing Chain
The toughest task, it seems, for the man with the toughest job in American retailing is selling himself.
Floyd Hall, who was installed in June as chief executive of the embattled Kmart Corporation, has had anything but a honeymoon on Wall Street.
Analysts wonder how committed he can be to his job if he refuses to put down roots here,  where Kmart is based, and jets off instead to Montclair, N.J., on weekends to be with his family.
They also question his judgment in taking a nine-day junket with other retail executives this fall through the Far East, Cuba and Russia while things at Kmart were falling apart.


Hosey Stays in Boston
The Boston Red Sox have come to terms with DWAYNE HOSEY, a trading deadline waiver claim who became their starting center fielder during the playoffs.


Chiefs Re-sign Szott
The Kansas City Chiefs have signed left guard DAVE SZOTT to a five-year contract, virtually insuring that one of the National Football League's best offensive lines will remain intact for at least another season.
Right guard WILL SHIELDS is the only starter on the line not under contract  for next season, and the Chiefs will have the right to match any offer he might  receive as a free agent.
(AP)


Illness Interrupts Pope's Christmas Message


Yale Doesn't Exploit Its Graduate Students
To the Editor:
Contrary to "Teaching as Penance" (letter, Dec. 19), graduate students in the faculty of arts and sciences in the overwhelming number of cases do not pay tuition at Yale.
Their admission to the graduate school comes not only with a guaranteed tuition fellowship but with a range of stipendiary assistance that can be supplemented through teaching and other forms of research assistantships.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising - ADDENDA;Accounts
*
State of Pennsylvania, Harrisburg, to Ketchum Communications, Pittsburgh, to handle marketing communications for the state's economic development initiatives, including advertising, public relations and data base marketing.
Those duties had been handled by Blattner/Brunner Inc., Pittsburgh.
Billings have not been determined. *
Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Co., Montvale, N.J., owned by Tengelmann A.G.,  to TN Media, Chicago, a unit of True North Communications, to handle media planning and buying on the Eight O'Clock coffee account, with billings estimated at $5 million to $10 million.
Those duties had been handled by F &amp; D Advertising, Westbury, L.I.


Creatures of the Deep Find Their Way to the Table
DWELLING in darkness, little known or understood, the animals of the deep sea are traditionally thought of as mysterious or monstrous.
But that is changing.
Increasingly, commercial fishermen are scouring the global deep to catch them by the ton.
Creatures of the abyss, frequently grotesque by human standards, are being carefully prepared and marketed to hide their murky origins when sold in stores and restaurants.
Scientists worry that the rush for deep-sea food is beginning to upset the delicate ecology of some of the sunless regions that cover more than half the planet, threatening to tip the evolutionary balance.
But chefs and fishermen are eager to probe the new frontier.
Deep harvesting, they say, can be prudent and the results quite tasty.


GUARDSMEN FIGHT CUTS BY PENTAGON
On any given weekend, 5,000 citizen-soldiers from the Pennsylvania Army National Guard's 28th Infantry Division assemble at this sprawling base to fly Cobra attack helicopters, fire M-1 tanks and train for a war that many Army officials say they will never fight.
Because of that, the Defense Department wants to eliminate roughly half of 110,000 Army National Guard combat troops, which includes the 28th Division, and save hundreds of millions of dollars in such training and equipment.
The remaining National Guardsmen would be trained to drive trucks or manage supplies, support skills that are lacking in the active-duty Army.


By Design;Holiday R &amp; R
The wastebasket is brimming with discarded red, green and white paper; the leftovers are in the fridge.
You want nothing more than to curl up on the sofa with an unchallenging book and a cup of chamomile tea.
And you don't do it in a  T-shirt.
To revive after the holidays requires slipping into something warm, luxurious and appropriate for impromptu entertaining.
At Gianni Versace Men -- and perfect for women, too -- is a long black quilted silk smoking jacket with a tasseled belt for $1,215.
Tse, at 827 Madison Avenue (69th Street), has an ivory sleeveless V-neck shift in ankle-length cashmere for $505 and, in a variety of colors, a dressing gown, $880; pull-on pants, $425, and camisole, $165.


Toyota to Ease Seniority In Grooming of Managers
The Toyota Motor Corporation plans to make it easier for young staff members  to rise to junior management positions, foreshadowing a possible change in the way it chooses senior executives.
The changes, announced today as part of a reorganization, come four months after the company appointed a new president in an effort to deal with a falling  share of the domestic motor-vehicle market and the effect of the strong Japanese yen on sales overseas.


Will Alcoholic Mice Teach Scientists About Human Behavior?
THE old question about mice and humans was whether a gene that gave mice cancer would cause the disease in people.
Now the question is whether genes that make mice drink alcohol until they fall over dead will also lead to alcoholism in humans.
Despite the explosive implications of the research, a number of scientists are now using mice as models for the genetic roots of human behavior.
They are actively searching for inbred strains of mice with behaviors like a love of alcohol or an instinctual violent streak.
They are isolating collections of mouse genes that cause those behaviors.
Then, they say, they will look for similar genes in humans.
Finally, they will ask whether people who have those genes also have predispositions to the behavior being studied.


In Winning Positions: Cardinals and Orioles
If off-season aggressiveness could be converted into championships and awards, the St.
Louis Cardinals and the Baltimore Orioles would meet in the World Series next October and their general managers would be the executives of  the year.
Walt Jocketty, beginning his second year as the Cardinals' general manager, and Pat Gillick, in his first weeks out of retirement, have dazzled their colleagues with impressive, lightning-like maneuvers.


Atlanta Victory Has Ripple Effect
Few games were of as much interest throughout the National Football League this season as Atlanta's upset victory against the San Francisco 49ers on Sunday.
Not only did it have an impact on several teams in the playoff race, it affected this spring's draft.
And in the aftermath, there remained a question of what kind of shape Falcons quarterback Jeff George would be in for next Sunday's wild-card game at Green Bay.


Brazil to Investigate Evangelical Church's Funds
Brazilian prosecutors said today that they would investigate allegations that a powerful evangelical church used drug money and tax fraud to accumulate wealth, but the allegations did not deter worshipers from donating at Christmas  services.
Through donations from an estimated 3.5 million followers in 34 countries, the church, called the Universal Kingdom of God, has accumulated news media and  other business interests in Brazil since breaking away from the Pentecostal Church in 1977.


Prospect of Losing Golan Heights Saddens Settlers and Skiers Alike
There has not been much snow so far this year, certainly not enough to ski, but the slopes and the lifts of Mount Hermon were full over the Hanukkah break.
"We try to get up here as often as possible now," explained a woman with a distinctly American accent, chatting with soldiers on reserve duty at a mountain checkpoint while her children pelted each other with snowballs.
"You never know when it might be the last time."


The Magic Gets Small Measure Of Revenge
The spotlights were flashing and the Orlando Arena crowd was roaring during introductions, just as it was the last time.
The fans waved signs once again for a national television audience.
One said, "Nothing beats Christmas Magic."


Bible Now Shares Hotel Rooms With Some Other Good Books
It used to be that hotel guests could count on finding at least three things  in their rooms: a bed, a bathroom and a Gideon Bible.
These days, the Bibles are more common than ever, but they no longer have the field to themselves.
In a growing number of hotels, the Bible now finds itself keeping company with the Book of Mormon, the Teaching of Buddha and, in rarer cases, with Science and Health by Mary Baker Eddy, the founder of Christian Science, or The Way to Happiness, a publication of the Church of Scientology.


California Is Backing Off Mandate for Electric Car
California is backing away from a requirement that within two years 2 percent of all cars sold in the state be electrically powered.
The move raises questions about similar mandates in New York and Massachusetts, both of which had pledged  to follow California's lead.
The California Air Resources Board asked its staff on Thursday to prepare a rule that would suspend the requirement that auto makers market tens of thousands of electric vehicles in the state by the turn of the century.
The board proposed to drop the 2 percent requirement in the early years of the program and instead to increase production gradually to 10 percent "zero emission vehicles" by 2003, when all car companies that sell more than 3,000 vehicles a year statewide must comply with the regulation.


CHRONICLE
When FREDDY FENDER returned home from Christmas Eve church services, he found firefighters mopping up from a fire that filled his house with smoke.
A police officer on patrol in the singer's neighborhood in Corpus Christi, Tex., had spotted the smoke and had alerted firefighters, who were able to save  the house, The Associated Press reported.


Doctor-Assisted Suicide Can't Work in Real Life;Caregivers' Support
To the Editor:
It is unfortunate that George Delury was unaware of the Well Spouse Foundation during the years he cared for his wife.
We offer support to spouses of the chronically ill or disabled in cities across the country.


Dress Code Blocked for Atlanta Cabdrivers
This city, which is busily sprucing up for the 1996 Summer Olympics, has been dealt a setback in its efforts to refurbish its cabdrivers sartorially.
A Federal court in a ruling late last week said the city's proposed dress code for taxi drivers, which was to have gone into effect on Jan. 1, was too loosely written for the court to conclude that it had any "rational basis" in furthering the city's goal of a safe and efficient taxi industry.


Metro Digest
NEW YORK CITY


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Senate Vote on Youth Chief
The State Senate is to vote next week on whether to confirm an Austin, Tex.,  man to head the state's new Juvenile Justice Commission.
The nomination of Paul  Donnelly, who is currently executive director of the South Texas Substance Abuse Recovery Service, was approved by the Senate Judiciary Committee last week.
In an interview last week, Mr.
Donnelly said that the commission, which is to oversee a package of new juvenile justice laws, would emphasize prevention as well as punishment.
"This is a case of paying now for prevention or paying more  later for punishment," he said.


Fever Forces Pope to Miss Basilica Mass
Fever and nausea forced Pope John Paul II to miss Christmas High Mass in St.
Peter's Basilica today and to interrupt his annual Christmas message.
It was the first time since his election to the papacy in 1978 that John Paul had not attended Christmas Mass in St.
Peter's, and Vatican officials said he had canceled plans to visit his vacation residence on Tuesday.
But they emphasized that the 75-year-old Pope was not seriously ill and had been suffering from influenza.


Shrimp Boat Linked to Plot To Overthrow Cuban Leader
Three Cubans who the authorities say were plotting the overthrow of the Castro Government may have planned to invade Cuba using a shrimp boat they bought in Mississippi.
The three, Rene Cruz Jr., 47; his father, Rene Cruz Sr., 68, and Rafael Garcia, 45, were arrested by Federal agents in Los Angeles on Dec. 16 and charged with conspiracy to violate the Neutrality Act by plotting to start a revolution in Cuba, the Federal Bureau of Investigation said.
They could face up to eight years in prison if convicted.


A Chilled City Warms to a Holiday
All last week's snow lay round about, less than crisp and even.
Along Fifth Avenue in Manhattan and in the crowded parishes of Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, children bound up in velveteen and Thinsulate emerged from great church doors on their way to Christmas dinner and the moist embrace of relatives.
In Jackson Heights, Queens, immigrants squeezed into long-distance calling shops and phoned and faxed their loved ones.
The stores were closed, but the sidewalks were as crowded as they had been with shoppers a few days before.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising - ADDENDA;@Home Account To Highway One
Home Network in Mountain View, Calif., a new Internet access company, has selected Highway One Communications in San Francisco to handle its advertising and marketing account.
The billings were estimated at more than $4 million.
Highway One, an independent affiliate of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, was  awarded the account after a two-month review that began with more than 10 agencies and was narrowed to Highway One and 2 other finalists: CKS Partners in  Cupertino, Calif., a unit of the CKS Group, and Hal Riney &amp; Partners in San Francisco. @Home is a joint venture of Tele-Communications Inc. and Kleiner Perkins Caufield &amp; Byers.


G.I., Phone Home


After Causing Worry in the East, A Germ Has Surfaced in the West
An antibiotic-resistant germ that killed a number of people in East Coast hospitals appears to be gaining a foothold around California and has caused at least one death.
The bacterium, vancomycin resistant enterococcus, or V.R.E., is a once-benign organism that exists to a certain extent in virtually everyone's gastrointestinal tract.
Normally it does no harm.


Sports of The Times;The Athlete As False Victim
AFTER Iron Mike Tyson had dispatched Buster Mathis Jr. in 8 minutes 32 seconds of their recent bout in Philadelphia, Tyson explained his strategy.
He had used flailing left hooks to get Mathis into position.
"I sort of lullabied him," Tyson said.
"What did I knock him out with, a right hand? It's a setup. It's just like society. It's a setup."
If the crack about society was a joke, it was a bitter one.
And an odd one as well.
It also points up the curious ability of some of our sports stars to blame others when they should be shouldering responsibility for their actions.


THE PROMISE OF GAMBLING: A special report.;After 20 Years, Atlantic City Starts to Reap Casinos' Benefits
Ask Michelle Barnes what her future would look like without the casinos here  and she cannot even imagine.
"I don't know," she said. "I guess I would be working at, McDonald's?"


Big Russian Privatization Is Called Off
Russia's biggest privatization deal involving a foreign company stalled today when a Government agency said that an Italian telecommunications company had pulled out of an agreement reached in November.
The Russian Privatization Center said in a press release that Stet, the Italian state-controlled telecommunications company, had declined to buy a 25 percent stake in the Svyazinvest telecommunications company.


Reynolds Stake In Tanzania
R.
J.
Reynolds Tobacco International has bought a $55 million stake in the Tanzania Cigarette Company, a leading cigarette maker in Africa.
Reynolds said last week that the deal was the largest private sector investment in Tanzania since the country's independence in 1961.


Hellish Guests in Kinky Spats in 'Four Rooms'
Since it's not possible to hide a brand-new movie under a rock, Miramax did the next best thing with "Four Rooms," trying to give it a review-proof opening  on Christmas Day.
That amounts to an act of mercy, since the less said about this career-denting fiasco, the better.
Preview audiences don't often look as seasick as the crowd filing out of Thursday night's screening.
Why?
Well, "Four Rooms" is a long-awaited omnibus film with segments directed by four talented young film makers who were free to indulge their wildest notions about what might go on in hotel rooms on New Year's Eve.
Indulge they did.
They piled on time-killing chat, strained attempts at kinkiness and enough  celebrity cameos to give "Four Rooms" the illusion of star power.
The cast does  include some good actors.
But you wouldn't want to see any of these people in a  traffic accident, and you won't want to see them here.


Make Up Our Mind, Justice O'Connor
When citizens in ancient Greece want to know the will of the Gods, they sent  emissaries to the temple at Delphi, where the oracle Pythia sat on a tripod making ambiguous pronouncements calculated to obscure the future and to confuse  the Greeks.
When citizens (and legislators) in America want to know how to conduct themselves in accordance with the Constitution, they must send emissaries to consult another Delphic oracle.
She is Justic Sandra Day O'Connor, and she casts her tie-breaking votes on the Supreme Court by employing a mystic jurisprudence  of personal revelation.


Mourners of Fire Victims in India Protest Hospital as Inadequate
A crowd of some 5,000 mourners for people killed in a fire at a school ceremony here blocked the police today from hauling away bodies for cremation.
The crowd threatened to tear down a wall of Mandi Dabwali's Civil Hospital, which they said was not equipped well enough, and to burn the bodies where they lay inside.


A Perfect Time for a Station Break
As 1995 ends, here are some reconstituted highlights from my notebooks:
THE HAPPY MONOPOLIST: Dick Ebersol, NBC Sports president, snares TV rights to five consecutive Olympics, from 2000 to 2008, by using years of Olympic connections and $3.5 billion from General Electric's petty-cash drawer.
MY BEST PAL, BUD SELIG: Ebersol stomped out of The Baseball Network in June, trashed Selig, the acting commissioner, then bought baseball's TV rights for five years at $400 million in November.
"Abashed? Me?" said Ebersol.


Lima Journal;Peru's Pride That Refreshes: Kola of a Local Color
On a recent AeroPeru flight from Buenos Aires to Lima, a Peruvian passenger became snippy when a flight attendant told him that the airline had run out of Inca Kola but that there was plenty of Coca-Cola and Sprite.
"Drink something other than Inca Kola -- that's sacrilege you are suggesting," Jaime Ramirez said jokingly.
"That's like an Argentine eating beef  from Bolivia, or a Brazilian wearing Bermuda shorts to the beach."


Cowboys Clinch Home-Field Advantage
Barry Switzer is off the hook for Fourth-and-One Gate.
His Cowboys tore open their present tonight -- the Arizona Cardinals -- and,  with a 37-13 victory, clinched home-field advantage throughout the playoffs.
Cardinal quarterback Dave Krieg kept throwing to wide-open Cowboys (by accident), Dallas quarterback Troy Aikman kept throwing to a wide-open Kevin Williams (on purpose), and it only stayed close because Aikman caught Krieg's disease.


ResultsPlus
N.B.A.


From Island Fantasy to Successful Line
Since it's the holiday season, it might be nice to skip the hard-news stories, the business woes, the fashion foibles.
Instead, let's indulge in what  might almost be a Christmas fable, if it wasn't true.
It begins just before New Year 1994, about two years ago today, on the island of St.
Lucia.
Some friends had gathered on that Caribbean island to celebrate under the full moon: Gloria Baume, the senior market editor of Vogue; Eduardo Mantelli, a photographer; Fulvia Farolfi, a makeup artist, and Gianni Giulianelli and Maddalena Gracis, graphic designers.
They befriended a young woman who was traveling alone and who had just had her heart broken when her dream of starting her own fashion house had been deferred by two potential white knights.


Tool Orders Fall, New Hint Of a Slowdown
Orders for American-made machine tools fell in November, the first drop in two months, an industry trade group said yesterday, in a report that suggested further weakness in manufacturing.
Last month's orders totaled $317.15 million, down more than 35 percent from October and 26 percent from November 1994, according to a monthly report by the  Association for Manufacturing Technology.


SCIENTIST AT WORK: John Henry Holland;Searching for Simple Rules Of Complexity
HE'S the man who taught computers how to have sex.
And now, for an encore, he's working on a theory to explain the complexity of life and its myriad manifestations on planet earth.
In so doing, John Henry Holland poses metaphorical questions that he likes to ponder while taking his morning shower or during hours spent alone in his office.
How is an economic system like an immune system?
How is an anthill like  the brain?
How is evolution like learning?


Daiwa to Sell Boston Hotel
Patriot American Hospitality Inc. has agreed to buy the historic Tremont House Hotel in Boston from Daiwa Bank of Japan for $16 million.
The Dallas-based hotel real estate investment trust said it expected to complete the deal next month.


Newfound Foes Of AIDS Virus Can Be Culprits In Other Diseases
When AIDS researchers discovered a new natural defense against the human immunodeficiency virus this month, they stumbled on a paradox.
On the one hand, they had found substances secreted by white blood cells that seemed to stop the AIDS virus in its tracks.
On the other hand, as a cadre of immunologists could tell them, these substances, called chemokines, are closely  linked to a wide variety of serious diseases in which the immune system is the culprit, either causing the disease -- as in arthritis or lupus -- or in reacting to an infection so strongly that the reaction itself causes serious damage.


Sharpton Is Buoyant In a Storm
As the Rev.
Al Sharpton strode through Harlem toward Sylvia's restaurant and  a meeting with the boxing promoter Don King last week, the greetings of passers-by followed him down Lenox Avenue.
"Hey, Reverend Al, you going to kill Giuliani?" one man shouted, in a joking  reference to the latest confrontation between Mr.
Sharpton and the Mayor.
Mr.
Sharpton waved silently and walked on.


Weah Is Europe's Best
The Liberian-born forward GEORGE WEAH was voted European player of the year yesterday, winning the Golden Ball in balloting conducted among writers by the magazine France Football.
Weah, 29, has led AC Milan to first place in the Italian League this season.
(AP)


Harlem Can't Afford to Lose Retail Businesses
To the Editor:
Re Bob Herbert's Dec. 18 column on the racist tragedy in Harlem: Mr.
Herbert  observes that the attitudes and tactics of the protesters are identical to those of the white racist terrorists they profess to despise.
He might have added that by trying to force out a white business, they were actually promoting "apartheid."


A Fleeting Frosty Moment


Correction
An article and a front page photograph yesterday about new taxi stops in midtown Manhattan offered apparently conflicting information.
The article correctly stated that the taxi stops, to be created next month, would be in use  from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
It did not mention that the city had already set up two experimental stops, in use from 7 A.M. to 1 P.M.
The photograph showed one of the experimental stops.


Patterns
Fashion Goes on Line


Stars Set for Millrose
DONOVAN BAILEY and BRUNY SURIN of Canada will head the 60-meter dash field at the Chemical Bank Millrose Games at Madison Square Garden on Feb. 2.
Also competing will be JON DRUMMOND, HENRY NEAL and TIM HARDEN of the United States and MICHAEL GREEN of Jamaica.
Bailey, 28, a native of Jamaica, is the 1995 world outdoor 100-meter champion.
The Haitian-born Surin, also 28, was runner-up to Bailey in the 100 meters and is the 1993 and 1995 world indoor 60-meter champion.


The G.I. Families in Germany Soldier On
Almost everything was right for the Camardelle family's Christmas celebration this year.
Colored lights blinked, wrapping paper littered the floor, children's laughter filled the air and the aroma of a roasting turkey wafted through the apartment.
But though Hazel Camardelle and her two daughters tried not to dwell on it, a very important part of their Christmas was missing.
The girls' father, Staff Sgt.
Jay Camardelle, shipped out to Bosnia last week.


Jobless Rate in Japan Reached A Record of 3.4% in November
Japan's jobless rate jumped to a record 3.4 percent in November, the Management and Coordination Agency said, the highest since it began collecting unemployment figures in 1953.
The number of unemployed rose 17.8 percent on the year, to 3.3 million, the agency said.
The nationwide labor force shrank three-tenths of 1 percent in November from a year earlier, to 64.39 million.


West Says Slovakia Falls Short of Democracy
When Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany delivered a speech about Europe's future this month, he called for enlargement of the European Union and suggested three candidates: Hungary, Poland and the Czech Republic.
Mr. Kohl's list was notable for a conspicuous omission.


Jazz Marches On
New York City has always been a Mecca for jazz, with more creative music per  square foot than anywhere else on the globe.
To name a seminal few, Ornette Coleman, Thelonious Monk, Charlie Parker, John Coltrane and Betty Carter have all flourished here, making vital contributions to a uniquely American art form  -- one that is every bit as important as film, dance or opera.
Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts recognized this four years ago, when it created its jazz department and announced that the new division would eventually become a full partner at the center, joining the Metropolitan Opera, the New York Philharmonic, the New York City Ballet and the Film Society.
Beginning this July, Lincoln Center will make good on its promise, promoting the jazz division to a full partnership, with an expanded schedule of offerings and  its own board of directors.
This is an important development in the cultural life of New York -- and the first time in almost three decades that Lincoln Center has created a new constituent, the last being the Film Society, established in 1969.


Mason Will Stay at Kansas
Glen Mason, who last week agreed to become Georgia's football coach after eight seasons at Kansas, is staying with the Jayhawks, after all.
Mason told his players he would stay before today's Aloha Bowl, a 51-30 victory by Kansas over U.C.L.A.


Bombardier and Lufthansa
The transportation-equipment maker Bombardier Inc. has received a $45 million order for two Canadair regional jets from Lufthansa.
The order expands on previous orders under which Lufthansa has taken delivery of 20 of the 50-passenger jets from Bombardier, most recently last week.
The new order brings to nine the number of Bombardier jets on order by Lufthansa.


Q&amp;A
Son of Bakelite


World News Briefs;Leak Forces Shutdown Of Japanese Reactor
Operators shut a nuclear reactor in Japan to control a water leak today, less than a month after another reactor was turned off because of a dangerous coolant leak.
The water leak did not involve the core of the reactor at the Onagawa plant,  200 miles north of Tokyo, and there was no danger that radiation might escape, officials said.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this  week.
Reports marked with an asterisk have been delayed by the partial shutdown  of the Federal Government.


Romance Without Froth In a Holiday Tradition
Without choruses from Handel's "Messiah," alternately cheery and devotional carols, frothy selections by the Strausses or indeed any overtly seasonal programming, the annual Christmastime concerts by the New York String Orchestra  have become one of the musical world's brightest and sturdiest holiday traditions.
On the surface, they offer an hour and a half of mainstream repertory, played with finesse.
But these concerts, performed by students 15 to 22 years old, are  really about the continuity of a tradition of music making: specifically, the hearty Romantic style of the orchestra's founder, the violinist Alexander Schneider.


For a Day, the Cash Registers Fall Silent


Russian Communists Didn't Need Nostalgia
To the Editor:
Re "Homesick for Communism" (Editorial Notebook article, Dec. 21):


World News Briefs;Results Are Announced For Russian Elections
Results of last week's parliamentary election were announced by Russia's Central Electoral Commission today, indicating that the Communist Party will control 158 of 450 seats in the lower house of Parliament.
Half the seats in that body are elected by single-seat constituencies.
The other 225 are elected according to party lists with a minimum five percent of the vote needed to win seats.
The exact allocation of party list seats will be announced later.
According to the estimates released today, the Communists would have 158 seats, including 58 elected in single-seat constituencies, in the lower house, or Duma.
Ultra-nationalists in the Liberal Democratic Party would have 51 seats, with only one from a single-seat vote.


An Ailing Benitez Gets Government Support
In 1976, WILFRED BENITEZ, then a teen-age boxing phenomenon with fancy footwork and a can't-miss future, became the youngest man to win a world title.
But 19 years later and ailing, the former three-time champion is in Puerto Rico, depending on a government grant and his family for survival.
Last week, Gov.
PEDRO ROSSELLO signed into a law a benefits package for Puerto Rican boxers, which would pay Benitez $600 a month for life.


The Upheaval in South Korea
An extraordinary political drama is unfolding in South Korea.
Top Government  and corporate leaders of the 1980's are being hauled before courts and charged with crimes ranging from bribery to insurrection.
Conviction, at least in theory, could lead to long years of imprisonment and even execution.
The architects of this upheaval do not come from some long-suppressed party or minority, but from the Korean governing class itself.
The party in power today descends directly from the military-backed leaders who ruled through the 1980's.
President Kim Young Sam, though once an opponent of the military regime, was nominated and elected with the support of many of those his Government now prosecutes.


Tokyo Stocks Rise Again
Stocks rose again here today, trading at the highest levels of the year.
At the close of trading, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 129.31 points, or more than six-tenths of 1 percent, to 19,904.72.
On Monday, when markets were closed in much of the world for the Christmas holiday, the Nikkei rose 30.99 points.


Packwood's Slow Exit
To the Editor:
Re "Packwood Gets Extra Time in His Senate Office" (news article, Dec. 21):


Advertising
IT'S time again to ask 20 questions about advertising, marketing and the media.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;3 More Presidential Hopefuls
Many voters may not realize it, but Steve Forbes is hardly the only New Jersey resident who is running for president.
John Staradumsky of Maple Shade, Jouett Arney of Jersey City and Lawrence J. Lang, whose campaign committee has a Red Bank address, have also registered as candidates with the Federal Election Commission in Washington.
Fortunately for them -- since their records show they haven't raised any money -- it costs nothing to file.
Mr.
Staradumsky, a former truck driver who now works in telemarketing, told the A.P. he was running because "the two-party  system is archaic and has to go." The other two candidates could not be reached.


Multiple Family Phone Lines, A Post-Postwar U.S. Trend
For Guy Phillips, life with a single telephone line finally became untenable  eight months ago.
Mr.
Phillips, the host of a radio-talk show in St.
Louis, said he could no longer chat on the phone at home without the constant interruptions of calls for his wife or three children.
He was also tying up the line for two hours a day, sending and receiving electronic mail on his computer.


Doctor-Assisted Suicide Can't Work in Real Life;Doctors Are Human
To the Editor:
Re "Countdown to a Suicide" (editorial, Dec. 20):


Pataki Is to Meet With Iroquois Chiefs
Gov.
George E. Pataki plans to meet early next year with the chiefs of the Iroquois Confederacy, a Pataki aide and Indian officials said.
The meeting would be the first between the Governor, a Republican, and leaders of the six Indian nations, who face a host of unresolved issues, including gambling casinos and land claims.


Whistle-Blower Suit Says OTB Punished Executive
For 24 years, Richard R. Dangler steadily scaled the executive ladder at the  city's Offtrack Betting Corporation, reaching its third-highest post last year as senior vice president for operations.
Then in August, he was dismissed from his $103,948-a-year job and thrown out of the agency.
Now, Mr.
Dangler contends in a lawsuit that he was dismissed because city investigators betrayed him to his bosses as a whistle-blower after he reported possible wrongdoing by corporation officials.


Issue for Dole Isn't Courage, but Convictions
What catches the eye in Bob Dole's otherwise generic Presidential campaign headquarters here is a huge black-and-white photograph of the candidate as a fresh-faced G.I., his visored dress hat set at a jaunty 1940's "can-do" angle.
At first, the picture seems a throwback to an era that the campaign might prefer to ignore, a poignant reminder that Senator Dole, at 72, whom Kansans have been sending to Washington since 1961, is now old enough to be the father of some of his rivals, and that his campaign is the last Presidential outing for the generation of World War II.


A Rocky Mountain High: Twin Polar Bears
Careful stewards of 99 years of tradition, Denver Zoo officials saw no need last spring to innovate with a videotape promoting their newborn polar bear twins, Klondike and Snow.
"We had never marketed an animal before," the zoo's marketing director, Angela P. Baier, recalled of her first effort to sell a video when the cubs were one-pound fur balls.
"Initially, I was turned down.


Warm Gatherings, Some in Spirit, On a Crisp Holiday
There was nothing particularly solitary or silent about the bright, cold Christmas morning in New York.
After a period of intimate fumbling with Scotch tape and prayer, city families moved their celebrations to the sidewalks, searching for a moment of the spirit within the social promenade.
Along Fifth Avenue in Manhattan and in the crowded parishes of Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, and Norwood, the Bronx, children bound up in velveteen and Thinsulate emerged from great church doors yesterday on their way to the moist embrace of relatives.
The stores were closed, but the sidewalks were as crowded  as a few days before.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising - ADDENDA;Company To Resign An AT&amp;T Account
Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas in New York, owned by the Interpublic Group of Companies, plans to resign the account of AT&amp;T Wireless of New York and New Jersey, a unit of the AT&amp;T Corporation, after three years.
Billings were estimated at $5 million.
The resignation comes as AT&amp;T Wireless seeks to consolidate its national and  local advertising accounts, which are now handled by more than 20 agencies.
Those combined billings were estimated at more than $15 million.
Robert Ratliffe, a spokesman for AT&amp;T Wireless in Kirkland, Wash., said that the company wanted "a single agency with offices in key cities where we are currently doing business or where we will be doing business in the near future." AT&amp;T Wireless now operates in 105 cities, including Dallas and New York, and plans to expand to 21 more cities, including Atlanta, Chicago and Detroit.


Ex-Official Is Repaid In Iran-Contra Case
Donald T. Regan, who was chief of staff for President Ronald Reagan for two years, has been awarded nearly $42,000 for legal fees and expenses he incurred during an investigation of the Iran-contra arms-for-hostages affair.
A Federal appeals court said on Friday that the Government should pay Mr.
Regan $41,883.79 because he was an unindicted subject of a seven-year investigation by Lawrence E. Walsh, an independent counsel.
Mr.
Regan had sought more than $64,000.


Warm Gatherings, Some in Spirit, On a Crisp Holiday;At the Plaza Hotel: A Feast, But . . .
When Terry Martin's mother died three years ago, so did his family's annual Christmas excursion from New York to northern California, where his mother would prepare a homey holiday dinner for three dozen relatives.
And so Mr.
Martin and his wife, Marion, embarked on a new tradition closer to home: the $60-a-plate Christmas brunch at the Plaza Hotel, a garish, hardly intimate, buffet for 1,200.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;The Internet Aids in a Search
A Seattle woman is using the Internet to help a Chatham family search for a 23-year-old hiker who disappeared in Turkey in mid-September, The Associated Press reported yesterday.


Heroin Route Via Africa A New Worry
The Drug Enforcement Administration has agreed to help South African authorities choke off a new drug pipeline in their country created by Nigerian narcotics traffickers who want to make South Africa a transit point for Asian heroin destined for the United States.
Thomas Constantine, the agency's administrator, said he will visit South Africa in January to discuss the cooperation, which was requested by the Government of President Nelson Mandela.


Forget Those Skis, Get Out the Fly Rod
You are sick of the weather, and you want to be out on the water.
But your ski-bum mate is screaming for Tahoe or Truckee or Timbuktu, for all you know.
You're a dedicated fly-fisher.
You don't want those ski slopes and lift lines.
The last thing you want strapped on your feet are a couple of slippery toothpicks.
Forget that neon jumpsuit too.
You want that old flannel shirt and a pair of chest waders that won't leak.


Reagan Building Named
A huge new Federal building in downtown Washington will be named after former President Ronald Reagan.
The Ronald Reagan Building and International Trade Center, at 1.9 million square feet, will be the second-largest Federal building in the capital.
Only the Pentagon will be bigger.
President Clinton signed an act on Friday naming the structure.


A Tough Coach, a Towering Figure
Spike Lee, film director, is turning to television.
This may or may not have  something to do with the lackluster box-office showings of his recent films.
No  matter.
Television can use all the special talent it can get.
Tonight at 10, Mr.
Lee contributes a lively and pointed essay to the HBO quarterly magazine "Real Sports With Bryant Gumbel."
Mr.
Gumbel, appearing on HBO by courtesy of a special clause in his contract  with NBC's "Today" show, introduces the segments, put together by various producers, with his familiar aplomb.
The "Spike Lee Presents" portion, titled "Coach," is a profile of John Thompson, Georgetown University's head basketball  coach for 23 years.
Mr.
Lee is a basketball fan, as is apparent, sometimes painfully, from his courtside performances at New York Knicks games in recent years.


INSIDE
Two Die in Brooklyn Fire


William H. D. Cotrell Jr., Disney Executive, 89
William H. D. Cotrell Jr., who helped create Disneyland, died here on Friday  at the St.
Joseph Hospital Medical Center.
He was 89.
Mr.
Cotrell was a close adviser to Walt Disney.
He headed the division of the Disney company that designed and built Disneyland, which opened in Anaheim, Calif., in 1955.


Market Place
PLOP, plop.
Fizz, fizz.
No doubt many investors holding stocks of brokerage houses are reaching for their Alka-Seltzer.
After surging to heady heights through the first three quarters of the year,  shares of securities firms, adjusted for splits, are now trading at close to the same prices they commanded at the end of September 1993, the peak of the previous cycle.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13


Mercer's Assault Charge
The former Olympic heavyweight champion RAY MERCER has been charged with assaulting his girlfriend.
Mercer was charged with hitting KIM MELVIN, 25, in the head after the police in Fayetteville, N.C., were called at about 3:30 A.M.
Sunday to the home that Mercer and Melvin share.
Mercer, 34, was scheduled to go before a magistrate this morning for a bond hearing on the misdemeanor charge.
(AP)


Mr. Hollings Saves the Phone Bill
House and Senate conferees seemed ready to negotiate a damaging telecommunications compromise until Senator Ernest Hollings of South Carolina, the chief Senate negotiator, altered that destiny last week.
Wielding the threat of a filibuster and a deft legislative hand, he rescued the best parts of flawed House and Senate bills passed earlier, added some good new ideas and threw out most of the rot.
His draft bill could spark innovation and set off consumer-friendly competition among television, cable and telephone companies.
Its biggest flaw is a heavy-handed and probably unconstitutional effort to ban "indecent material" from the Internet.


Chess
Failing to show up for the big game is the stuff of nightmares.
But Viswanathan Anand unluckily tangled up the dream world and the everyday world in the semifinal round of the Intel Quickplay Grand Prix in Paris, Nov. 9 to 12.
It cost the Indian grandmaster dearly.
He was supposed to play his two games with Gary Kasparov at 1:30 P.M.
But he  somehow muddled that into 3:30 P.M., and when he showed up at that hour for the first game, he learned he had been forfeited.
So he had to play the second game of the two-game knockout knowing he could not afford a draw.
And Kasparov's clever defense offered only a choice between losing or drawing.


Elderly Couple Die in a Fire In Brooklyn
For four days, with ice clinging to their window sills and no heat in their apartment, an elderly couple in Sunset Park, Brooklyn, resorted to a space heater to survive the winter chill.
Early yesterday, fire officials said, that Hobson's choice killed them.
Florian Teraskiewicz, 75, and his wife, Irene, 69, died when a three-alarm fire raged through their apartment, burning their bodies so badly that at first, firefighters said, it was impossible to tell their age or sex, much less  who they were.
Inspectors said the blaze began about 2 A.M. with a faulty wire in the electrically powered oil-filled heater that the couple were using to ward off the raw cold.


Restrain the Bicyclists
To the Editor:
Re "For Pedestrians, New York's Mean Streets Just Got Friendlier" (letter, Dec. 19):


Connecticut Shows Welfare's Dark Future
To the Editor:
Re "Welfare in the Real World" (Op-Ed, Dec. 20):


No Headline
Everyone runs on an education platform.
We have Education Presidents and Education Governors and Education Dog Catchers, but the dollars never match the  rhetoric."
SENATOR CAROL MOSELEY-BRAUN, Democrat of Illinois. [A1:6]


World News Briefs;North Korean Leader Calls Foes 'Traitors'
The North Korean leader, Kim Jong II, denounced economic and democratic reformers as traitors in a statement today.
North Korea's dilapidated economy and chronic food shortage were worsened during the summer by flooding.


World News Briefs;Senior Burmese Official Denounces Ex-Prisoner
A senior Government official has accused the Burmese opposition leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, of trying to break the country apart at the behest of unidentified foreigners.
In a speech published today, the military intelligence chief, Lieut.
Gen.
Khin Nyunt, accused Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi of trying to disrupt a convention drawing up guidelines for a new constitution.


Treasury Auction Today
Because of the Christmas holiday yesterday, the Treasury's weekly auction of  three- and six-month bills was rescheduled for today.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 4.88 percent and a six-month bill was 5.03  percent.


Covering All Sides in the Balkan War
For most Americans, signals of the erosion of Yugoslavia in the late 1980's and early 1990's were far-off rumblings, if that; coverage was sparse, and the unfamiliar names of places and players had too many consonants.
Not until television carried the pictures of destruction did the war become real, with the tube's pundits scrambling for explanations, going back to World War II or World  War I or medieval times for some understanding of the viciousness on display.
Even today, as American troops move into Bosnia, the events leading directly  to the worst European war in half a century remain confusing, which is the reason for "Yugoslavia: The Death of a Nation," tonight at 10 o'clock on the Discovery Channel.
Relying on a remarkable array of interviews with officials and politicians on all sides of a many-sided conflict and on often startling video coverage not seen before in America, the cogent five-hour BBC documentary  sorts out the personalities, the maneuverings, the emotions that swept an unhappy land to its present, still dangerous condition.
The series has some of the ingredients of an Eric Ambler thriller.


On My Mind;Smite The Gate Closers
Take in the stranger, care for him.
The major religions of the world all teach that.
At the time of holidays -- holy days -- that might be worth thinking about.


Exploring Computing With Book and Video
MANY souls who never thought they would buy a home computer, or who repressed the nasty notion, have now bought one or are at least giving serious consideration to the idea.
A computer is becoming a desirable appliance or entertainment unit, somewhere between a deck of cards and a 35-inch television set.
One can plunge in heedlessly or do a little homework first.
A sensible videotape, good both before and after a purchase, is "Video Guide for Understanding and Buying a Personal Computer." It takes the viewer through five  steps: computer basics, external hardware components, internal hardware components, software concepts and purchasing decisions.
The trip is conducted by attractively nonprofessional presenters.
Jargon and acronyms are dealt with, as  they have to be.
It is much easier to understand just what RAM is when you see words on the screen, hear a spoken explanation and even see the actual chips inside the computer.
It is also heartening to hear, as one explainer says about  binary numbers, that "it is not very important that you understand this fully."


Solid Start on Child Abuse Reform
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's decision to hire 200 more child welfare caseworkers  is a welcome first step toward better protection of New York City's abused and neglected children.
What could prove equally useful is the hiring of a management consultant for a long-term study of the Child Welfare Administration  and ways to redesign it.
The death of Elisa Izquierdo served as tragic proof that this agency is in bad shape.
It makes sense for any reform plan to start with the caseworkers, whose job is to investigate allegations of abuse or neglect and follow them up.
The city budget had originally called for 200 new "protective" caseworkers, bringing the  total to 900.
The new hires had been deferred for budgetary reasons but Elisa's  death prompted the Mayor to move ahead quickly.


Gasoline Prices Rise
Gasoline prices increased by an average of 1.6 cents a gallon in the last two weeks, mainly because of rising prices of crude oil and the higher cost of anti-smog additives, an industry newsletter reported.
The average price of gasoline at self-service and full-service pumps, including all grades and taxes, was $1.169 a gallon, according to the Lundberg Survey of 10,000 stations nationwide for the period that ended on Friday.


Spurrier's Perfect World Awaits Nebraska
The coach was leaving Athens, Ga., which is about as uncomfortable a place as any true Gator could imagine.
If Steve Spurrier is anything, he is a true Gator, even if the playing experience that led to a Heisman Trophy started in a Tennessee high school and some of his most important lessons as a head coach took place at Duke University.
The passion surrounding Florida's unprecedented perfect season has begun to create the illusion that the two decades between Spurrier's 1966 Heisman year at Florida and his return as its coach was really only a brief, mostly unpleasant,  interlude.


A Queens Cabdriver Gets a Marrow Donor
A Queens cabdriver's last hope for life arrived Christmas Eve.
The driver, Mauris Astefanous, has leukemia and must undergo a bone-marrow transplant to have any chance of surviving.
His sister, Wedad, who is a perfect bone-marrow match, flew into New York early Sunday from Egypt, after obtaining a visa that she was initially denied, to donate marrow for a transplant.
Mr.
Astefanous, who immigrated from Egypt 17 years ago, is being treated for  acute myelogenous leukemia at North Shore University Hospital-Cornell University Medical College in Manhasset, L.I.
Hospital officials said that Mr.
Astefanous and his family would spend the Christmas holiday in private and then hold a news conference with doctors tomorrow to discuss the transplant.


The Spirit Of a Little Girl Haunts a Day
CHRISTMAS died weeks ago in apartment 20A at 75 Pike Street, in the lower Manhattan projects known as the Rutgers Houses.
It didn't stand a chance.
How could it after Elisa Izquierdo lost her life there -- brutally, the authorities  say, and at the hand of the person she should have been able to trust the most:  her mother?
There is, however, a ghost of Christmas present at apartment 20A.
Fittingly for this city, it is a graffiti writer.


Dean Martin, Pop Crooner And Comic Actor, Dies at 78
Dean Martin, the sleepy-voiced pop crooner and movie actor who with Jerry Lewis formed one of the most popular comedy teams in movie history, died yesterday at his home in Beverly Hills, Calif.
He was 78.
The cause was acute respiratory failure, said Mort Viner, his longtime agent  and friend.


Death Toll in Battles in Chechnya Put at 600
The top Russian commander in Chechnya said today that about 600 people, half  of them civilians, had been killed in a week of fighting with rebels in Chechnya's second-largest city.
Russian troops have kept the city, Gudermes, sealed off since Saturday, preventing civilians from fleeing the fighting and relief workers from entering  the city.
The figures are considerably higher than earlier estimates and confirm suspicions of heavy casualties in during the Russian effort to recapture the city from the rebels.


Time Warner Ends Cable Deal
Time Warner Cable has decided to withdraw from a venture set up last year to  operate cable television across Taiwan.
The time-consuming process of applying for licenses prompted the decision to  pull out, said Kevin Nolan, vice president of Taihua International Enterprises,  the joint venture between Time Warner Cable, a unit of Time Warner Inc., and two Taiwan business groups.


Of Free Lunch and Digital Nonsense
THERE are few free lunches in the world of computers, though sometimes it may seem otherwise.
Compression software, for example, can squeeze the information on a hard drive into as little as one half the usual space, but the price is a bit of speed and a bit of added risk to one's data.
The aggressive marketing for a program called Softram 95 (Syncronys Inc., about $30) seems to offer not only a free lunch, but also wine, dessert, brandy  and cigars.
"Imagine: 4MB becomes 8MB," the box reads.
"You become doubly productive." The productivity claim is obvious puffery, but what about the assertion that "Softram's Patent Pending RAM compression technology takes your Windows memory and at least doubles it," or that the program can "instantly speed up Windows?"


Unlikely Allies Demand Spinoff At RJR Nabisco
Each year, groups with a strong social conscience or pressing policy agenda ask the stockholders of giant corporations to vote on resolutions calling for everything from equal-employment opportunities in Northern Ireland to the preservation of endangered species.
And each year, dozens of such resolutions are treated with perfunctory courtesy and then soundly defeated: The average entry gathers only 8 percent of shareholder votes.
But this season, the moral concerns of a group of religious shareholders have inadvertently conspired with the profit-seeking interests of powerful dissident  shareholders to put RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation, an $8.6 billion consumer-products company, on the defensive.


Don't Tell the Designer: 'Such Lovely Costumes!'
As a costume designer, Jane Greenwood stresses "the subtle undercurrents" rather than what is "noticeably splashy." "When you see a play," she said, "You  shouldn't be aware that you're seeing costumes."
For her, the characters are "people in clothes," whether she is designing elegant gowns for a period piece like "The Heiress" or choosing the Chanel pants suit worn by Zoe Caldwell as Maria Callas in Terrence McNally's "Master Class."  Authenticity is paramount.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Driver Wounded in His Car
A 46-year-old Newark man spent Christmas Day at University Hospital after being shot three times from a moving car, the police said.
The man, Abdul Bashir, tried to make a left turn to get away from three men in a black Acura who were following him yesterday, the A.P. reported.
Mr.
Bashir was wounded twice in the arm and once in the leg before the Acura sped away, said Detective Daniel Collins, a spokesman for the Newark police.
The police had no motive for the shooting.


No Respite in Fight for Medicaid Money
New York's Republican delegation is fighting a rear-guard action in Congress, trying to win a few extra dollars for its Medicaid subsidy, already the highest  of any state.
As the President and Congressional Republican leaders recessed until after Christmas, New York Republicans were focusing on winning a portion of upward of  $70 billion that may be added to the amount Washington would send to the states  to cover health and nursing home care for the poor under a seven-year budget balancing plan.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising - ADDENDA;Weightman Group Gets Sun Account
The Sun Company has consolidated advertising for its Sunoco gasolines, motor  oils and service stations at the Weightman Group in Philadelphia, which has handled the motor-oils part of the account for the last 18 months.
Billings were estimated at $10 million to $12 million.
Bud Davis, a spokesman for Sun in Philadelphia, said that Weightman was awarded the consolidated account after a four-month review in which there were four participants.
He identified two of them as Weightman and Angotti, Thomas, Hedge in New York, which has handled advertising for the company's Sunoco gasolines.
Other parts of the account, including advertising for A+ Mini Markets, had been handled by various creative and media agencies.


702 Register to Run For Palestinian Seats
Seven hundred people have registered as candidates for council seats in the first Palestinian national elections, but only two -- Yasir Arafat and the leader of a charity group -- will run for the top executive position, the director of the Central Elections Committee said today.
Mahmoud Abbas, the director of the committee, said that by Sunday, the last day for candidate registration, "Only two people had registered for presidential elections and 700 for the council."


Warm Gatherings, Some in Spirit, On a Crisp Holiday;In a Queens Shop: Tidings From Afar
On Roosevelt Avenue in Jackson Heights, Queens, dozens of immigrants spent hours inside plastic telephone booths at Teleparranda yesterday, sending their Christmas tidings across fiberoptic lines to families half a world away.
Without telephones of their own, they celebrated inside long-distance calling shops, squeezing into booths to huddle over the receivers that connected them with their homelands, even if for only a few, costly minutes.
Like Raul Berro of Colombia, most live and work in New York to support families still in their native countries.


Volcano in Aleutians Spews Plume of Ash
A volcano at the eastern end of the Aleutian Islands spewed an ash plume 35,000 feet high over the weekend, but scientists do not expect further eruptions.
Mount Shishaldin, a 9,372-foot-tall volcano on Unimak Island, about 675 miles southwest of Anchorage, sent a small plume into the atmosphere about 6:30 P.M. on Saturday.


Missed Chances in Harlem Blaze;Owners, Tenants, the Police and Politicians Had Roles
Malcolm Barksdale arrived at his office in Harlem the morning of Dec. 6 prepared to meet with the Rev.
Al Sharpton and persuade him to call off the bitter protests over the eviction of a black-owned record store by a white-owned clothing store in a building on 125th Street.
As the building's manager on behalf of a predominantly black church, Mr.
Barksdale was feeling increasing anger from the protesters, who were jeering and calling him a "traitor" for not intervening on the side of the record store.


Warm Gatherings, Some in Spirit, On a Crisp Holiday;In a Brooklyn Home: Gifts and Gratitude
Asia Gaddy, 3, trudged into the living room, her three little braids sticking straight up with sleep.
Somewhat frightened by the small miracle that had transformed her living room, she walked slowly, hesitantly, toward her new plastic kitchen, her new plastic ironing board and her new plastic vacuum.
Her brother, Omari, 9, ran into the room and dove straight into the biggest package -- "The Big Book of the Human Body" -- officially kicking off Christmas  morning in the McCleary-Gaddy household.
It was 8:16 A.M. in Bedford-Stuyvesant.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Thousands See Re-enactment
About 8,000 people gathered yesterday on both the Pennsylvania and New Jersey sides of the Delaware River to watch 120 Revolutionary War buffs dressed in colonial costumes re-enact George Washington's 1776 crossing in four 40-foot-long wooden boats.
The mock soldiers made the trip in 20 minutes -- eight hours and 40 minutes  less than it took Washington to conduct his historic crossing.
But Washington was accompanied by 2,400 soldiers, 200 horses and 18 cannons and had to contend  with an ice storm.
TERRY PRISTIN


Priest Dies in Crash
A priest on his way home from saying midnight Mass was killed after he apparently fell asleep at the wheel and struck a guard rail early this morning,  the police said.
The priest, the Rev.
Michael A. McHale, 42, was chaplain at the Rochester Institute of Technology.
He had previously been parish priest at St.
Stephen's Roman Catholic Church in Geneva, outside Rochester, and was returning from that  church when the accident occurred about 2:50 A.M. on Route 414 in Hornby, in Steuben County.


Doctor-Assisted Suicide Can't Work in Real Life
To the Editor:
"Countdown to a Suicide" (editorial, Dec. 20), in which you use the diary of  George Delury, who helped his wife commit suicide, to justify your call for legalizing doctor-assisted death, reveals the "don't confuse me with the facts"  mentality of many promoters of euthanasia.


Change in Census Survey Definition Could Halve the Number of U.S.Farms
The nation could lose nearly half its farms before the year 2000 -- on paper  at least.
Because Congress cut its budget, the Census Bureau has made plans to survey far fewer farms when it draws its next detailed profile of American agriculture, in 1997.


Fire-Retardant Stairwell Paint Is Now 3 for 4
Yet another fire was set in the stairwell of a New York City public housing project yesterday, but this time, officials said, a new fire-retardant paint worked and the fire did not spread.
The fire, in the Lillian Wald Houses in the East Village, was the fourth stairwell blaze since a fire retardant was applied in the city's projects, and the third time the new coating has done its job, Robert Leonard, a Fire Department spokesman, said.


Raising Children (Raising Glasses?)
A WOMAN once told her daughter that she should choose her first lover carefully, because years later, wherever she was, she would always remember him, with extraordinary clarity.
The same could be said for the first drink.
It, too, can be a rite of passage, and years later, most people can recall where they were when they had that first taste, how old they were and the precise flavor.
It may have been the sweetness of a Manischewitz wine at a family seder, the bubbly tartness of champagne on a New Year's Eve or the cold bitterness of a beer, drunk at a football game, far from a parent's eyes.


Cult Horror Maims Prominent French Family
A 27-year-old man identified by the French authorities today as one of 16 people found dead last weekend after an apparent cult rite had said he feared for his life after a similar massacre a year ago.
The man, Patrick Vuarnet, one of three sons of the former French Olympic ski  champion and ski entrepreneur Jean Vuarnet, said after the murder-suicide of 53  members of the Order of the Solar Temple in Switzerland and Canada in October 1994 that he and his mother had both been members of the apocalyptic cult.


BellSouth Seeks to Ease Curbs on Profit
State regulators in South Carolina are about to decide whether to remove the  profit restraints on the BellSouth Corporation.
In return, the phone company said it would not raise rates for homes or small businesses until 1998.
BellSouth said it needed the freedom from regulation to help it prepare for competition.
Consumer advocates, however, say the utility could earn higher-than-normal profits for some time before it faced true competition for its 1.2 million South Carolina customers.


Lawyer Says Accused Killer Remembers Nothing After Refusal of HisSneaker Order
Just over a week ago, Michael Vernon walked into the Little Chester Shoes store near the Bronx Zoo and asked to try on a pair of size 13 1/2 Nike sneaker  boots, his lawyer said yesterday.
But, the lawyer said, a clerk told the 22-year-old Mr.
Vernon that the store did not have that sneaker in his size.
"He just couldn't understand that," Mr.
Vernon's lawyer, Ira Brown, said yesterday in an interview.
"He thought size 13 1/2 was a common size. He asked a store clerk if he would order them, and the clerk refused. And that is all he can remember. He has blocked out everything that came next."


Wine Talk
THE Bordeaux wine country was in a sorry state in 1945.
Years of neglect in the Depression of the 1930's, followed by five years of war, almost destroyed it.
The war had been particularly onerous.
The Bordeaux region was in occupied territory.
Many of the most famous chateaus were confiscated by the Germans.
Vineyards went unattended; cellars were shut down and ignored.
Returning wine makers despaired of ever making good wine again.


Eating Well
JAMES J. SHEA, who lost 24 pounds during the fall, is a member of the Secret  Service who happened to draw Santa duty for all the White House Christmas parties this year.
In the 10 days just before Christmas, he put five of those pounds back on.
Standing in front of the Christmas tree in the Blue Room, remembering the mounds of goodies he had been confronting for days, he consoled himself with thoughts of the new year, when it will be "back to weights and aerobics."


Study Says Weight Loss Beats Exercise to Lower Heart Risks
Losing weight may be more effective than aerobic exercise in helping obese men reduce their risk of heart disease, a new study has found.
The study, conducted over nine months among 170 middle-aged and older men, found that a 10 percent reduction in weight was more likely than an exercise program to improve blood pressure readings, cholesterol levels and the body's ability to process blood sugar, all of which influence coronary risk.


Budget Leader In House Fears Crisis on Debt
As the Clinton Administration prepares another wave of fiscal maneuvers to avoid national default during the budget impasse, the chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee warned today that the Administration was courting a "Constitutional and legal crisis" by usurping Congress's right to control the national debt.
The accusation by Representative Bill Archer, Republican of Texas, came as the partial shutdown of the Government entered its second full week, with no prospect that Federal workers would be back at their jobs until after the new year.


William Woodman, 63, a Director in Chicago and on Broadway
William Woodman, a theater director and a former artistic director of the Goodman Theater in Chicago, died on Dec. 19 in Manhattan.
He was 63 and lived in New York City.
He collapsed while having dinner in a restaurant and died of cardiac arrest,  said his former wife, Liz Woodman.


Kotite Says Front Office Is Sound, but Offense Could Use Shaking Up
There will be no change in the decision makers or the basic approach that resulted in the Jets' 3-13 season, Coach Rich Kotite said today in reflecting on the poorest campaign in club history.
But he did say the club had a whale of a problem in one area.


COMPANY NEWS
LESCO INC., Rocky River, Ohio, a lawn product company, has agreed to acquire  Pro-Lawn, the lawn-care products division of Agway Inc., Syracuse, N.Y., a farm  products company.
The terms were not disclosed.


The Islamic Challenge in Turkey
Few countries are as strategically important to American interests around the world as Turkey.
During the cold war, Washington valued its large army and long  land frontier with the Soviet Union.
After the Soviet collapse, Turkey's pro-Western leaders have promoted it as a bastion of secular democracy in the Muslim Middle East, a strategic counterweight to Iran.
But Turkey, which is a NATO member and aspires to be a member of the European Union, has never quite lived up to its ambitions, or Washington's.
Turkey has waged a brutal war against its Kurdish minority and its human rights record is abysmal.
Now its secular character is under siege.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt


A Portrait of Dedication


Retail Sales Rose Before Christmas, but Season Disappointing
Retail sales rose in the week before Christmas, but much less than in recent  years.
The Johnson Redbook Service said yesterday that sales in the fourth week of December rose 3.8 percent from the corresponding week last year.
That was far below the 10 percent to 29 percent increases for those weeks the past three years.


BUDGET RENT A CAR LAYS OFF 500 EMPLOYEES
The Budget Rent a Car Corporation said yesterday that it had laid off 20 percent of its salaried work force, or about 500 employees, in the last 7 to 10  days in an effort to cut costs.
The layoffs, which included consolidating and eliminating some positions, were part of an "overall effort to flatten the organization and streamline decision making," said Kimberly Mulcahy, director of corporate communications, confirming a report in The Wall Street Journal yesterday.
Budget, which is owned by the Beech Holdings Corporation, has about 8,500 employees, including about 2,200 salaried workers, Ms.
Mulcahy said.
The Ford Motor Company owns about 20 percent of Beech's preferred stock.
Budget, based in Lisle, Ill., is the third-largest car rental company in the world with  3,200 outlets.


Stocks Climb In Unusually Light Trading
On the day after Christmas, the stock market climbed in unusually light trading, and analysts were left with little to analyze.


ARRIS PHARMACEUTICAL COMPLETES PURCHASE OF KHEPRI
The Arris Pharmaceutical Corporation said yesterday that it had completed its acquisition of closely held Khepri Pharmaceutical Inc. in a stock transaction valued at about $30.2 million.
Arris, a drug maker based in South San Francisco, said it would pay 1.4 million common shares now and make a second payment of 530,000 shares, subject to adjustment, on Dec. 30, 1996.
Another 350,000 Arris shares are reserved for options, warrants and exchange rights.
Shares of Arris rose $1.375, to $14.625, in Nasdaq trading.
Arris said it would take a fourth-quarter charge of $20.5 million to complete the previously announced deal.


World News Briefs;Pakistan Accuses Afghan in Bombing
The police accused an Afghan today of planting the car bomb that killed 31 people in a busy marketplace in Peshawar last week.
The police said the suspect, Abdul Matin, was working for the Afghan Government.


Czechs Use Laws to Exclude Gypsies From Gaining Citizenship and Voting
Nearly three years ago, Verona Slobodnikova suddenly felt like a foreigner in her own country.
A well-thumbed red Czechoslovak identity card, with its faded black-and-white photo, no longer gave her the rights accorded to citizens because the country split in two at the start of 1993.
"I can't go to a doctor and get it paid for by the state like I used to," said Mrs.
Slobodnikova, who was born in Slovakia but has lived in Prague since childhood.
"I can't apply for a job. They ask you in the first meeting at the job center for your citizenship papers."


Tax Checkoff for a Battleship
Starting in 1997, state residents will be able to check a box on their state  income-tax form if they want to help give the battleship New Jersey a permanent  berth at Liberty State Park.


Corporate Names Continue to Change
Corporate mergers and acquisitions in 1995 led to another year of increased corporate name changes, according to an annual survey.
The 26th annual name-change survey by Anspach Grossman Portugal, a corporate-identity consulting company in New York that is owned by the WPP Group, found 1,153 name changes this year, up 3.5 percent from 1,114 in 1994.


Oliver Stone's Paranoia Is as Old as the U.S.
To the Editor:
Re "Oliver's World" (Editorial Notebook, Dec. 24): I applaud Howell Raines's  attempt to point out the overt paranoia in Oliver Stone's films "JFK" and "Nixon." He is correct to criticize the naive conspiracy theories involving the  Central Intelligence Agency and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and he is especially insightful on the "inner psychology" behind the films, revealing John F. Kennedy as the fallen hero of both.


Phillip Areeda, Considered Top Authority on Antitrust Law, Dies at 65
Phillip Areeda, a Harvard Law School professor who was considered the country's foremost specialist on antitrust legislation and was writing the eleventh volume of his life work, "Antitrust Law," at his death, died on Sunday  in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 65.
Doctors at the Stillman Infirmary at Harvard said he had been under treatment for leukemia.


World News Briefs;South Korean Is Jailed In Store's Collapse
The owner of a department store in Seoul that collapsed in June, killing more than 500 people, was sentenced to 10 1/2 years in jail today, Yonhap news agency reported.
Lee Joon, 73, owner of the Sampoong department store, was found guilty of criminal negligence.
His son, Han Sang, 42, the store's president, was sentenced to seven years in jail, Yonhap said.


Give Haiti Credit For Changing Itself;Aristide's Precedent
Re "Democracy's Trap" (Op-Ed, Dec. 24):
Despite Robert D. Kaplan's claim to the contrary, the decision by President Jean-Bertrand Aristide of Haiti not to run for a second term had nothing to do with United States pressure and everything to do with its 1987 Constitution, which prohibits consecutive presidential terms.


Deng's Economic Drive Leaves Vast Regions of China Behind
Chen Xianhe is not a revolutionary.
He is just a down-on-his-luck peasant whose wife has run away to escape the poverty here and whose only cow fell off a cliff in May and died.
But Mr.
Chen, 30, and many of his neighbors in this remote and desperately poor region of southwestern China, speak a language of disaffection that is worrying China's Communist Party leaders.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball


U.S. Admiral in Bosnia Sees A Crucial Time for NATO
Adm.
Leighton W. Smith Jr. had been on the job for only 28 hours when he relayed the orders in April 1994 to stage NATO's first bombing raid in the alliance's 45-year history.
Those air strikes against Bosnian Serb targets near Gorazde, after Serbian forces had ignored a United Nations ultimatum to pull back from the besieged Bosnian Government enclave, were a forceful debut for Admiral Smith as the commander of NATO forces in Southern Europe.


Giants Will Confiscate Season Tickets
The Giants said yesterday they would purge themselves of up to 75 season-ticket holders whose seats were used as perches to launch icy missiles onto the Giants Stadium field during Saturday's season-ending loss to San Diego.
"We don't want this to be a police state, but we also don't want this to be a home for rowdiness," said Wellington Mara, the Giants' co-owner.
"Something has to be done. People buy tickets and have every right to feel safe."


Nebraska Taps Phillips to Start vs. Florida
Lawrence Phillips, the troubled running back who has not started for No. 1 Nebraska in more than three months, will start against No. 2 Florida in the Fiesta Bowl for the national championship next Tuesday night.
Coach Tom Osborne said today that Phillips simply played better than the freshman Ahman Green in two recent scrimmages and the regular-season finale against Oklahoma.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Japan Changes Regulation Of the Nation's Banks


A 1st Season to Remember: Rhodes is Coach of the Year
The Philadelphia Eagles made RAY RHODES's first season as a National Football League coach something special, taking him to the playoffs and 1995 Coach of the Year honors.
Rhodes, defensive coordinator for the Super Bowl champion 49ers last year, took a disjointed Eagles team that lost its final seven games in 1994 and turned it into a 10-6 playoff squad.
That earned him 24 votes from a nationwide panel of sports writers and broadcasters in balloting by The Associated Press.
He edged DOM CAPERS of Carolina (7-9), the most successful expansion team in N.F.L. history, and MARTY SCHOTTENHEIMER of Kansas City (13-3), who had 21 apiece.


Smits and Pacers Deal Bulls Their Third Loss of the Season
Pacers 103, Bulls 97 The Chicago Bulls came up one victory short of the longest winning streak in franchise history, losing to the Indiana Pacers by 103-97 last night for their first defeat in 14 games.


Enron Goes to Africa Seeking Gas and Customers
Beneath the rolling grasslands of southern Mozambique lies a huge reserve of  natural gas, which if piped to neighboring South Africa, could bring $100 million a year in hard currency to Mozambique, the poorest country in the world.
And last month, an aggressive American gas company, the Enron Corporation of  Houston, triumphed over several competitors and signed an agreement with the Mozambique Government to develop the field.


All but One Victim Of Crash of U.S. Jet In Colombia Is Found
Rescue workers have recovered all but one body from the wreckage of an American Airlines jet that crashed in southwestern Colombia last week, killing 160 of the 164 people aboard, a Peruvian Army official said today.
Col.
Justo Eliseo Pena, who is helping to supervise the rescue operation, said that the missing body, believed to be that of a German citizen, might be trapped under a section of the Boeing 757's fuselage that workers planned to move.


In Gramm's Own Words
As a member of the Senate, I represent my state.
If the Senate in its lack of wisdom voted to build a cheese factory on the moon, I would fight to see that the company that designed it was a Texas architectural firm, I would want the milk to come from Texas cows and I would even propose that we build a celestial  distribution system in College Station, Tex." -- Interview with The Los Angeles  Times, Oct. 3, 1995
"I stood up and said, 'The Clinton health care bill is going to pass over my cold, dead political body.' I am happy today to say that my political body is alive. The President's health care bill is deader than Elvis. And Elvis may be back, but the President's health care bill will not be back." -- Presidential announcement speech, Feb. 24, 1995.


Nikkei Surges, Breaking 20,000 Again
Japan's main stock market index broke through the key 20,000 barrier in early trading today, attaining a level not seen in 14 months.
In the morning, the Nikkei index of 225 issues traded as high as 20,002.89 before slipping back a bit.
It recovered at the end of the day, closing up 107.04 points, or half of 1 percent, at 20,011.76.


Whitbread to Bid For Forte Operations
Whitbread P.L.C. has agreed to offer L1 billion ($1.54 billion) for the restaurant operations of Forte P.L.C., which is fighting a hostile bid from the  Granada Group, British newspapers reported yesterday.
One report said that Forte and Whitbread, a British brewing and leisure company, had reached agreement in principle on the restaurant sale and that advisers worked on the deal during the Christmas holiday.
Another report said that a deal had been confirmed by Forte insiders, who said a bid would be made within two weeks for the company's roadside restaurants and motorway service stations in Britain and France.
As part of its defense against the L3.3 billion ($5.1 billion) hostile Granada bid, Forte has already begun to divest itself of some of its hotel interests, and has said it is ready  to consider offers for its restaurant business.
A deal would significantly cut Forte's L1.3 billion ($2 billion) debt and possibly allow the company to pay a special dividend to retain shareholder loyalty. (Reuters)


U.S. and Haiti Discuss Extended Troop Stay
President Clinton's top security adviser met today with the President-elect of Haiti, who has said that he might ask the United Nations to prolong the stay  of its troops in Haiti.
The national security adviser, Anthony Lake, and Gen.
John Shalikashvili, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, met separately with President Jean-Bertrand Aristide and with the President-elect, Rene Preval, a close ally of Mr.
Aristide's who will take office on Feb. 7.


A Long March to Capitalism
Not long ago, Tsingtao Brewery looked unbeatable.
With a high quality product, a well established name, a booming beer market and ambitious plans to quadruple production in five years, Tsingtao seemed perfectly positioned to ride China's locomotive-like economic growth.
In 1993, when the Government allowed China's top companies to list shares on Hong Kong's  stock exchange, Tsingtao was chosen to go first, and its stock was one of the hottest issues of the year.


DELSAN INDUSTRIES ACQUIRED BY OWENS-CORNING
The Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corporation said yesterday that it had acquired Delsan Industries Inc., a privately owned maker of vinyl windows, patio doors and accessories.
The financial terms were not disclosed.
Delsan, based in St.
Louis, had sales of $10 million for the fiscal year that ended March 31.
Owens-Corning, a maker of glass fiber materials and other products based in Toledo, Ohio, said the acquisition was part of an effort to broaden its window-product line.
Shares of Owens-Corning fell 87.5 cents, to $44.375, on the New York Stock Exchange.


andlord Was Cited Over Lack of Heat
The owner of a Brooklyn apartment house where an elderly couple deprived of heat died on Monday in a fire traced to their space heater was also cited in 1993 for not providing heat, city officials said yesterday.
Tenants say the heat in the building, at 807 43d Street in the Sunset Park section, most recently gave out four days before the early-morning fire that killed Irene Teraskiewicz, 69, and her husband, Florian, 75.
The couple were using a space heater to fend off sub-freezing nighttime temperatures, and according to the Fire Department, a faulty extension cord on the heater gave off a spark that ignited a couch and started the fire.


PEPSICO SEES GROWTH IN WORLDWIDE BEVERAGE SALES
Pepsico Inc. said yesterday that it expected both domestic and international  beverage shipments to rise 5 to 6 percent in the fourth quarter.
Pepsico, based  in Purchase, N.Y., said domestic beverage sales accounted for about 23 percent of its revenue and about 31 percent of its operating profit in 1994.
International beverage sales accounted for about 11 percent of revenue and about 6 percent of operating profit.
The Coca-Cola Company, meanwhile, said last week that it expected its international shipments, which account for about 80 percent of its profit, to rise a smaller-than-expected 5 percent in the fourth quarter.


Executive Changes
NABISCO INC., Parsippany, N.J., a unit of RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp., promoted James Postl to president of Nabisco Biscuit Co., the food maker's largest operating unit.
He succeeds Raymond Verdon, who will become chairman of Nabisco's Canadian unit, Nabisco Ltd.
Mr.
Postl has been president of Nabisco International, which sells Nabisco products outside of North America.


Executive Quits Credit Suisse
Peter R. Nardin, deputy regional head of United States commercial banking for Credit Suisse, abruptly resigned on Dec. 18, just two weeks before he was scheduled to become head of the Swiss banking concern's North American operations.
In an internal memo to employees, the bank said Mr.
Nardin, who joined Credit Suisse in 1980, was leaving for "personal reasons."


SEPRACOR TO MERGE UNIT WITH STERLING ORGANICS
Sepracor Inc. said yesterday that it would merge its Seprachem Inc. unit with newly acquired Sterling Organics Ltd. to form Chirex Inc., a company that will make building blocks for other drugs.
Seprachem purchased an option in October to acquire Sterling Organics from Montagu Private Equity Ltd. for $95 million.
Sepracor plans an initial public offering for Chirex in February to raise about  $90 million to pay for Sterling Organics.
Sepracor, a drug company based in Marlborough, Mass., said it planned to retain about 38 percent of Chirex after the offering.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Wobbly Red Storm Needs to Recharge In Garden Spotlight
For a St.
John's team seeking direction, the Eastern College Athletic Association Holiday Festival will provide a useful road map.
The Red Storm is searching for respectability, hoping to bypass speculation about whether Coach Brian Mahoney and the sophomore guard Felipe Lopez will soon see Alumni Hall in  their rearview mirrors.
A victory tonight over the exquisitely balanced Iona, followed by a strong effort against second-ranked Kentucky on Friday, would reinforce a fragile confidence built from two consecutive victories.
A defeat tonight, or a blowout  in an expected meeting with the Wildcats, and St.
John's season may run out of gas before the Big East starts its engines.


Gumbo Recipe Calls for a Pinch of Heredity
CLEARLY the reluctant cook, Hodding Carter 3d tried to wiggle out of his promise to talk about gumbo, a dish for which he has become justly famous among  friends.
"I don't want to give anyone the impression that I'm a cook," he said in a telephone conversation.
The opinion was seconded by another gumbo maker in the family, his son Hodding Carter 4th.
"You're talking to the real cook in the family," he said from his home in Beckley, W.Va.
"Not to be mean to him, but all he can cook is gumbo, though he did make bacon once."


Entering the Minds of a City's Young Drug Dealers
IN SEARCH OF RESPECT Selling Crack in El Barrio By Philippe Bourgois Illustrated. 392 pages.
Cambridge University Press. $24.95.


Pita Filled With Flavor and Not Much Fat
An easy way to put a creamy, rich flavor in a yogurt sauce, without adding much fat, is with a little blue cheese: its intense flavor suffuses an entire pita sandwich.
It's not easy to find flavorful tomatoes at this time of year but cherry tomatoes are the best bet.
For a new twist on the old greens-and-orange theme, sprinkle a few dried cranberries on the salad.
Lamb and Blue Cheese Pitas


Elizabeth Ball Holmes - Dialect Expert, 95
Elizabeth Ball Holmes, a University of Hawaii speech professor who was one of the state's foremost experts on Hawaiian pidgin English, died on Dec. 17.
She was 95.
Professor Holmes, also known as Elizabeth Carr, devoted most of her research  to the study of Hawaii's pidgin dialect, a combination of English, Hawaiian and  other languages.


Images of Saratoga at Issue in Suit
For 20 years, Jenness Cortez has made a career of painting scenes from the Saratoga Race Course, depicting romantic images of thoroughbreds thundering down the track.
Saratoga's owner, the New York Racing Association, found her work so appealing that it used her paintings in several publications and selected one for the cover of a Christmas card.


Dinner on a Magic Carpet, With a Mideastern Revue
Two blocks north of the Crossroads of the World and slightly to the west of Eighth Avenue, the spirits of Cecil B. DeMille and Ed Sullivan seem to have taken up residence at Ibis, a supper club with an Egyptian theme at 327 West 44th Street in Clinton.
There "The Magic Carpet Revue," which unfolds on a stage between two Pharaonic statues of a height suitable for the lid of an N.B.A. sarcophagus, are to be found bare navels, gold and silver lame, finger cymbals, dancing girls, swirling smoke, wailing music and cobra-topped headdresses in quantities worthy  of DeMille.
And there, too, in acts that conjure memories of long-ago Sunday nights, black-and-white television and "The Ed Sullivan Show," may be found an illusionist who turns a balloon into a bowling ball, a belly dancer who performs with a sword balanced on her head, an obese female impersonator and a whirling dervish.


Teleconferencing Alters Lives of the Homebound
Most people fantasized about chocolate cake, but Jean Lamkay, 79, wanted "shortcake with fresh strawberries mushed with cream all over it." The occasion  for reverie was a birthday party for a dozen people.
What was unusual about it was that everybody stayed home.
They participated by telephone conference call.
While teleconferencing is hardly new, it has found a new role: easing the isolation of homebound people.
At least eight groups in the New York metropolitan area have started using it for this purpose; two are leading the way.


Donations to a Jewish Philanthropy Ebb
With legions of volunteer fund-raisers and donations regularly topping $800 million a year, the United Jewish Appeal-Federation fund-raising drive has long  been the bedrock of Jewish philanthropy, the money machine with which American Jews financed Israel's survival and the fight against anti-Semitism.
Now that bedrock is eroding, its foundations weakened by its donors' lessening interest in a Jewish state that is increasingly more secure and by their own secure standing in the United States.


CONSOLIDATED TECHNOLOGY TO MERGE WITH LEHIGH GROUP
Consolidated Technology Group Ltd. said yesterday that it had agreed in principle to merge with Lehigh Group Inc. in a stock swap.
Lehigh, a distributor of electrical supplies based in New York, said Consolidated shareholders would own about 75 percent of the combined company after the merger.
The financial terms of the deal were not disclosed.
A spokesman for Lehigh said the company had about 10.3 million shares outstanding, and that Consolidated Technology had  about 24 million shares outstanding.
Each company also has warrants that will be exercised before the merger and will affect the mix of outstanding shares.
Consolidated Technology, based in Toronto, provides engineering, medical diagnostics and other services.


Fears, Suits and Regulations Stall Contraceptive Advances
Efforts to create a new generation of contraceptive devices are being stymied by lawsuits, the lengthy Government approval process and fears on the part of both consumers and pharmaceutical companies, according to interviews with family planning experts and a new report by a group that studies reproductive health.
As a result, public health officials and other experts in the field said in interviews, it will be many years before any genuinely new methods of contraception become available in this country, despite years of contraceptive research and many promising new approaches.


There Is Nothing to 'Fix' in Homosexuals
To the Editor:
Re: "An Analyst, a Father, Battles Homosexuality" (news article, Dec. 24): as a psychiatrist and Jungian analyst, I would like to point out that Dr.
Charles W. Socarides's theory that same-sex desire is a "neurotic adaptation" that can be traced to "smothering mothers and abdicating fathers" has been refuted in many scientific studies.


When Memory Plays Tricks, Address Books Don't
A MANUFACTURER with a poor grasp of the typical mind has now created a "lifetime telephone and address directory."
How can an address book be constructed to last a lifetime?
Well, it's erasable.
Simply enter data on the polymer-coated pages with a waterproof pen.
When friends offend, leave town or leave life in toto, "no more messy cross-outs": just wipe them away "with ordinary rubbing alcohol."


Grain Center In Buffalo Is to Close
The Corn Exchange of Buffalo, once a vital inspection point for agricultural  trade in the United States, will be closing next month after 150 years in business.
Today, the colossal silos, empty and rusting, can only hint at the scope of the center's importance to the country's food supply as it inspected millions of bushels of grain -- not just corn, but barley, wheat and soy beans, too.


Once-in-a-Lifetime Art Exhibit, Victim of Shutdown, Is Reprieved
A once-in-a-lifetime show of the paintings of the Dutch master Vermeer, closed during two Federal budget shutdowns, got a partial reprieve today when the National Gallery of Art said it would reopen the exhibition for a week with  private money.
The reopening is to last until Jan. 3.
Earl A. Powell 3d, the gallery's director, said he hoped that the budget stalemate would be ended by then so the  Vermeer exhibition could resume its normal run until the scheduled closing on Feb. 11.


All's Right In Cowboy Playoff Corral
The Dallas Cowboys just won the regular-season game of Monopoly.
It means their itinerary is set -- San Francisco comes to them -- and it means fourth-and-1 can be struck from Barry Switzer's police record.
The same team that could not gain an inch in Philadelphia gained home- field  advantage throughout the playoffs Monday night -- and bid Buddy Ryan farewell.
Atlanta and Arizona made it all possible, and, in the end, the Cowboys' owner emptied another bottle of champagne.


Phil Gramm's Offbeat Charm As a Persistent Conservative
There is a kind of offbeat charm in the roguish self-deprecation of William Philip Gramm, the Texas Senator who wants to be the next President of the United States.
Campaigning in Phoenix recently, Senator Gramm was introduced to 2 1/2-year-old Leah Clark, a dazzling little towhead, by her proud parents.
"I had a girlfriend once named Leah," drawled Mr.
Gramm, tickling the toddler under the chin.
"She dumped me!"


Give Haiti Credit For Changing Itself
To the Editor:
In "Voices of Experience" (column, Dec. 20), Thomas L. Friedman does not credit the role of Haitians in providing constructive thought and leadership in  the movement from brutal dictatorships to self-governing democracy.
He recognizes that there have been significant changes in the final year of the presidency of Jean-Bertrand Aristide and that there was a credible, nonviolent presidential election on Dec. 17.


Sweet 17: Rangers Keep Going And Going
The Rangers lost two of their radical left wings, but prevailed over the Ottawa Senators last night.
They stole a messy, 6-4 victory at Madison Square Garden.
It was an understandable performance, if not admirable.
The Rangers have 52 points in the standing, tied with Florida and Detroit for the most in the National Hockey League.
The Senators have but 15, and no one else has nearly that few.


Connie Boucher, 72, a Pioneer In Licensing Cartoon Characters
Connie Boucher, a pioneer in licensing cartoon characters who provided the inspiration for "Happiness Is a Warm Puppy," a best-selling 1962 book about Snoopy, the "Peanuts" comic strip character, died on Dec. 20 in San Francisco of complications after heart surgery.
She was 72.
Ms.
Boucher was a window dresser for I. Magnin, a San Francisco Bay area women's clothier, in 1959 when she grew dissatisfied with the quality of coloring books available for her two sons.
With her husband, Jim Young, she created a Winnie-the-Pooh coloring book, using a character that was in the public domain.
The book sold 50,000 copies.


G.I.'s Take Up Their First Position in Serb-Held Bosnia
On a gray, incessantly rainy day, American soldiers established their first post in the Bosnian countryside today, in this small, Serb-controlled village five miles south of the Sava River.
On a day of firsts for the American force in Bosnia, the platoon, from the First Cavalry, First Armored Division, was the first to reach Bosnia overland.
It crossed the muddy Sava on a raft made of sections of what will eventually be  a pontoon bridge across the river.


Mara to Back Modell's Move
Wellington Mara, the Giants' co-owner, said yesterday that he would reluctantly vote for the Cleveland Browns' proposed move to Baltimore.
Mara said that the league had damaged itself by not challenging the Rams' move from Los Angeles to St.
Louis for the 1995 season.


Not in Manhattan And Not Married;Singles Who Prefer the Suburbs
Suburbs were not designed for single people.
The week's rhythms are set by children's car pools and Saturday morning soccer games.
The burning questions often concern issues like live-in versus live-out babysitters.


Neo-Nazis in the Army
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 23 news article on an Army investigation of racist groups at Fort Bragg, N.C., explains that the Pentagon permits soldiers to be members of groups that espouse racism or supremacism as long as the soldiers are "not involved in  public rallies, distribution of literature, raising money or recruiting members."


Job Cuts at Quantum
Quantum Health Resources Inc. said yesterday that it would cut about 10 percent of its work force and take a fourth-quarter charge of $3.3 million as part of a revamping plan.


Council Finds Realistic Solutions on Lead Paint
To the Editor:
Re "New York's Law on Lead Paint Removal Compromises Safety" (letter, Dec. 20): As the author of Local Law I of 1982 and sponsor of a bill to amend that law on protecting children from lead-based paint, I would like to correct one premise.


After 2 Great Periods, Isles Add Up to a Tie
After playing what might have been their best hockey of the season for two periods, the Islanders turned conservative and lost a three-goal, third-period lead and ended up tying the Boston Bruins tonight at Nassau Coliseum.
"It's not 6-0 losses that cause coaches headaches, it's games like this," the exasperated Islanders coach, Mike Milbury, said after the 3-3 game.
"You're ahead by three and your team violates the most cardinal rules in the third period. You shouldn't blow a 3-0 lead in the third. I don't care who you're playing."


A Second Look, Then an Arrest In a Girl's Abuse
A neighbor called 911 shortly before 8 P.M.
Christmas night to report a case  of possible child abuse in Brooklyn.
Police officers and Emergency Medical Service workers responded, intent on rescuing a child from harm.
That opportunity, however, was almost lost.
The parents of the two children in the Bedford-Stuyvesant apartment showed the officers and paramedics a healthy 3-year-old boy; the 6-year-old girl with the black eyes and burn marks on her back was kept in another room.
The police left, and the E.M.S. workers returned  to their ambulance to radio their dispatcher.


Valet Parking Considered
Ever try to find a parking space in downtown Princeton on a busy weekend evening?
Borough officials say they are trying to ease driver frustrations by drafting an ordinance that would allow valet parking services to operate in the town on a trial basis.
The idea was inspired by a request from a company that wanted to offer the service at a restaurant on Witherspoon Street, said David Goldfarb, a member of the borough council.
But the ordinance would not limit the service to restaurant patrons.


Cold Eastern Forecast Pushes Energy Prices Higher
Energy prices continued to rise yesterday as more cold weather was forecast for the East Coast through next week.
Natural gas prices jumped, with gas for February delivery rising 10 cents, to $2.468 for 1,000 cubic feet at the New York Mercantile Exchange.
January heating oil gained 0.41 cent, to 60.5 cents a gallon.


World News Briefs;Yeltsin Leaves Hospital And Meets Premier
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia left a hospital today where he has been  under treatment for a heart ailment, his press service said.
He went to a country residence on the outskirts of Moscow, the report said, and he met with Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin about his Cabinet.


Court Backs Suspension Of Licenses
The State Supreme Court today upheld the state's right to suspend the licenses of drunken-driving suspects while also pursuing criminal charges.
The court, in a 6-1 ruling, overturned a lower court's decision that had put  the practice in limbo.
The lower court had found that the suspension constituted double jeopardy, or being punished twice for the same crime.


Cubs Sign Magadan
The Chicago Cubs signed the free agent DAVE MAGADAN to a one-year contract yesterday, an effort to shore up the third base position left hanging when they  decided not to offer a contract to TODD ZEILE, who signed with the Philadelphia  Phillies last week.
Magadan, 33, a left-handed hitter, hit .313 in 127 games for Houston last season with 24 doubles, 2 homers and 51 runs batted in.
He broke into the major leagues in 1986 with the Mets and has played for Seattle, Florida and Houston.
(AP)


About New York;105 Years Old And Betting on the Future
ROSE HAMBURGER'S lifelong passion for the ponies taught her that you can't win unless you take a gamble.
While she doesn't get out to the track too much these days -- she turns 105 on Friday -- her railbird's instincts kick in when she talks about the other turf that she loves: the City University of New York.
As the oldest living graduate of Hunter College (Class of 1910), Mrs.
Hamburger has earned the right  to look back warmly on the era of free tuition, small classes and expanding horizons.


Moonlighting Officer Arrested on Forgery Charge
A New York City police detective was arrested yesterday on charges that he repeatedly forged the signatures of his supervisor and co-workers to help an insurance company circumvent the Police Department bureaucracy.
The detective, Roberto Neves, 36, who worked at the Fifth Precinct in Chinatown, had been given the Police Department's approval to moonlight as a claims investigator for a Manhattan auto insurance company, according to Patrick Kelleher, the chief of the Internal Affairs Bureau.


Turnpike Bond Rating Drops
The New Jersey Turnpike Authority suffered another blow yesterday when Standard &amp; Poor's lowered its rating on $2.8 billion in turnpike revenue bonds two notches, from A to BBB+.
S.&amp; P. said the authority, whose members are appointed by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, was guided by "political concerns" when it decided to avoid a toll increase for the next three years.
Echoing Moody's Investors Service, which downgraded the turnpike bonds last week, S.&amp; P. criticized the authority for using one-time-only revenue like surplus construction funds to balance its budget.
Officials of the authority said they were sticking with their financial plan and denied that politics influenced the decision to maintain current tolls.
A lower bond rating could increase the interest rate the agency pays on its bonds.


Military Officer Becomes Thai Airways Chairman
The board of Thai Airways International Ltd. appointed the commander in chief of the Air Force, Siripong Thongyai, as chairman yesterday.
Mr.
Siripong had been acting chairman, a position he took up in July, after the abrupt resignation of Amaret Sila-on.
Mr.
Amaret quit shortly after a new Government took office.
The Government owns 93 percent of the airline.
The Finance Ministry, the Transport Ministry and Air Force have always had an informal power-sharing agreement regarding board appointments.
The agreement typically changes when a new administration takes power.
But Mr.
Siripong is the first military officer to head the national airline in three years. (Bloomberg Business News)


At Least 119 Dead as Heavy Rains Set Off Floods in South Africa
At least 119 people died and many more were missing in floods caused by heavy rains in South Africa's KwaZulu-Natal Province, the police said today.
Police divers, rescue teams, residents and helicopters were pulling out bodies from the Umsunduze River and its tributary, the Slangspruit, which overflowed Monday night.


30-Year Bond Rises, Its Yield Now 6.03%
Treasury securities rose yesterday in thin trading, as the bond market waited for fresh news about the budget talks in Washington and as retail sales for December seemed to offer further evidence of a weakening economy.
The benchmark 30-year bond rose by 11/32 , to a price of 11117/32 and a yield of 6.03 percent, down from 6.06 percent on Friday.
Bond prices and yields move in opposite directions.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
I enter a small Italian restaurant at Ninth Avenue and 57th Street on a Monday evening.
As I seat myself, a self-confident middle-aged woman at the table opposite mine is about to leave.
The background music is Julio Iglesias singing "La Paloma" in Spanish.


No Headline
My biggest wish is that the Government will change its policies and help us  get rich, because living in this kind of poverty makes us too embarrassed to even go out of doors."
CHEN XIANHE, a Chinese peasant. [A6:2.]


Sears Completes Sale of Its Homart Unit
General Growth Properties Inc. said today that it had completed its $1.85 billion acquisition of the Homart Development Corporation from Sears, Roebuck &amp;  Company.
The transaction makes Des Moines-based General Growth the largest shopping center owner, manager and developer in the nation, the company said.
On Nov. 17, General Growth acquired the community center portion of the Homart portfolio and simultaneously sold it for $405 million to the Developers Diversified Realty Corporation of Moreland Hills, Ohio.


The Snowball Effect
The Giants said they would revoke the season tickets of up to 75 fans whose seats were used as launching pads for icy missiles at Saturday's football game in the Meadowlands.
Wellington Mara, the team's co-owner, said he did not want the stadium to become a "home for rowdiness."
Article, page B9.


Abrasive Ryan Discovers It's a Desert Out There
Citing a losing record and the need to move forward quickly, the Arizona Cardinals' owner, Bill Bidwill, dismissed his pugnacious coach, Buddy Ryan, only a few hours after his team was beaten, 37-13, by Dallas in its last game of the  1995 season.
After the game Ryan said he expected to return next season as coach and general manager.
Ryan believed that he would survive for another season if he made some changes to his coaching staff.


More Criticism For President Of Adelphi
When Adelphi University's president, Peter Diamandopoulos, faced sharp criticism earlier this year for his generous salary and housing benefits, he scoffed at the complaints, terming the university's acquisition of luxury condominiums an investment for the school.
But in the case of an Upper East Side condominium bought by the university, Adelphi stands to lose several hundred thousand dollars, while its president will benefit personally, according to internal university documents.


Sports of The Times;Green Team, But No Name To Envy
RICH KOTITE played it close to the vest yesterday afternoon.
He has played it close all season, as if to save the Jets' best for some dramatic last-gasp emergency.
"I'm not going to talk about anything we haven't covered this season," he announced.
With that, the coach of pro football's worst team didn't break new ground or offer any hope.


NEWS SUMMARY
International
A2-9


New Medical School Dean
Dr.
Harold L. Paz has been named new dean for the University of Medicine and  Dentistry of New Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School.
Dr.
Paz has been the acting dean since April.
Before joining the University last year, Dr.
Paz was associate dean for graduate medical education at Hahnemann University School of Medicine in Philadelphia.


Journal;The Stoning Of Stone
If we are to believe the cries of outrage from the nation's historians and journalists, Oliver Stone's "Nixon" is the worst threat to American civilization since "Beavis and Butt-head." Though the movie has been out only a week, the rhetoric of its detractors has already escalated to the point where one Sunday-morning ABC News talking head (seasonal charity forbids me from naming names) likened Mr.
Stone to Leni Riefenstahl.
Such innuendo surely merits the adjective Nixonesque.
Leni Riefenstahl's 1934 "Triumph of the Will" was a documentary featuring the real-life Hitler and fashioned to advance the Nazi cause.
Mr.
Stone's "Nixon" is a historical drama,  clearly labeled as such and starring an English actor who doesn't remotely resemble its title character, about a lost cause -- a man who has not only been  out of power for 20 years but is dead.
Yet Riefenstahl and Stone were equated anyway, by a journalist who was faulting Mr.
Stone for monkeying with history!


UN Human Rights Resolution
On Nov. 10, as the U.N.
Security Council was discussing the civil war in Liberia, an aide to U.N.
Ambassador Madeleine Albright handed her a note reporting that Nigeria's military leaders had just executed nine opposition human rights activists -- including the playwright and Nobel Peace Prize candidate Ken Saro-Wiwa -- after a sham trial.
Ambassador Albright immediately denounced Nigeria, whose delegate was at the meeting, and she proposed that the Security Council consider punitive action.
Five weeks later the U.N.
General Assembly did pass a resolution condemning Nigeria, but with no sanctions and, therefore, no teeth.
The story of what happened in between is a revealing tale of why it's so difficult today to get the U.N. to stand against even the most outrageous human rights abuses.
During the cold war it was always hard to get the Security Council to take up human rights cases because the Soviet Union would veto any condemnation of itself or its allies.
What's interesting is that today it's just as hard to pass human rights resolutions -- not because of the Russians, but because of a cauldron of third world grievances, Chinese sensitivities, North-South resentments and American contradictions.


Accounts
*
WUSA-TV, Washington, owned by the Gannett Co., to Earle Palmer Brown, Bethesda, Md., to handle its account, previously at Capital Media Inc., Rockville, Md.
The billings were not disclosed. *
Department of Tourism for the Dominican Republic, Santo Domingo, to the Levinson Group/Stephen L. Geller Inc., New York and Greenwich, Conn., as the first agency to handle its worldwide account.
The billings were not disclosed.


AT&amp;T Sells Chicago Center
The AT&amp;T Corporation has sold its regional headquarters in downtown Chicago to an unidentified Singapore company for about $540 million, executives familiar with the deal said yesterday.
AT&amp;T said that it would continue to occupy the two adjoining buildings on West Monroe and West Adams Streets in Chicago's Loop area and that the complex would still bear the AT&amp;T name.
But the company said the current weakness of the Chicago commercial real estate market and the attractive bid had persuaded it to sell.


A Deelite-ful Afternoon
Afternoon Deelites, one of this past spring's leading Kentucky Derby prospects, made a successful comeback from tendon surgery yesterday with a two-length victory over Score Quick in the $160,000 Malibu Stakes, the feature race on the opening-day card at Santa Anita.
Afternoon Deelites had not raced since finishing eighth of 19 in the Kentucky Derby May 6.
That marked his second straight loss after beginning his career with five consecutive victories.
Afternoon Deelites emerged from the race with a strained tendon in his left foreleg.


People


Another Foothold in Bosnia


Maxxam and Chairman Named in Thrift Suit
The Federal regulator of savings and loan associations filed charges today against Maxxam Inc., a mining company in Houston, and its chairman, saying they  contributed to the failure of a thrift unit in 1988.
The Office of Thrift Supervision said the failure of the United Savings Association of Texas in Houston cost the Federal insurance fund more than $1.6 billion.


DAYS INNS TO OPEN CHAIN OF HOTELS IN CHINA
Days Inns of America Inc., a unit of HFS Inc., said yesterday that it had obtained a license to develop expensive hotels in China, Hong Kong and Macau.
HFS, the world's largest hotel franchiser, said Days Inns would create the first international three-star hotel chain in China.
Under the agreement with China's  National Tourism Administration, Days Inn will sell and support franchises in marketing, advertising, training, reservations and guest services.
The financial terms were not disclosed.
The plan calls for Days Inn, based in Valhalla, N.Y., to have 2,500 guest rooms open or under development in two years.


The Day After


SHARES OF CYRIX FALL ON PROJECTION OF WEAK EARNINGS
Shares of the Cyrix Corporation fell yesterday after the chip maker said last week that it would post a loss for the fourth quarter instead of the profit expected by analysts.
Shares of Cyrix fell $2 yesterday, to $23.125, in Nasdaq trading.
The company, based in Richardson, Tex., said late Friday that it expected to report a loss for the fourth quarter that could exceed 40 cents a share, citing poor sales and a write-off of its 486 microprocessor products.
Cyrix earned $12.7 million, or 63 cents a share, in the fourth quarter of 1994.
Wall Street analysts had predicted fourth-quarter earnings of 4 cents to 15 cents a share, according to First Call Inc., a firm that tracks earnings forecasts.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.


Rethink the Army National Guard
During the cold war, the Army National Guard stood by in states across the country as a combat reserve force for possible duty in a global battle against the Soviet Union.
Now as the Pentagon searches everywhere for economies, it is considering a redefinition of the Army National Guard's role and a reduction of  its forces.
The Guard's powerful political allies among the nation's governors and members of Congress, who have long opposed attempts to diminish its role, are resisting this latest effort.
The Clinton Administration must nonetheless press forward with cuts that make sense in terms of budget savings and military  strategy.
The Pentagon's reasoning seems sound.
Defense planners argue that they need only about two-thirds of the existing 386,000-member Army National Guard for use in combat and support of American military operations.
Out of this group have come troops that supported the interventions in the Persian Gulf war, Haiti, Somalia and now Bosnia.
But the Army says that the remaining third of the Army National Guard, or about 110,000 combat troops, is not part of its war-fighting  strategy and simply is not needed, even if the nation has to fight two wars almost simultaneously.
The Army proposes to save at least $1.1 billion a year by disbanding half of these troops and converting the other half to support services that the Army needs.
One of the divisions to be reduced or redefined under the plan draws 15,000 troops from the New York and New Jersey Army National Guards.


The 'enhanced underwriting' of public broadcasting is taking a more commercial flair.
NATIONAL PUBLIC RADIO does not have commercials; it has what it euphemistically refers to as "enhanced underwriting," those short announcements  of corporate sponsorship that have long been a hallmark of public broadcasting.
But that is changing, not only for NPR but for public broadcasting generally.
Because of pressure from Congress, greater demand for quality programming and the need for added revenue, public radio and television stations have begun to stretch the boundaries of corporate underwriting.


CHRONICLE
Did you think TONYA HARDING would skate off into oblivion, once she admitted  her role in the attack on Nancy Kerrigan early last year and was banned from competitive skating?
Not a chance.
On Saturday, Ms.
Harding, who divorced Jeff Gillooly, the mastermind of the attack on Ms.
Kerrigan, was married again, to Michael Smith, a machinist.
Everything seemed to go smoothly at the wedding, held aboard a yacht in the Willamette River near Portland, Ore.


TASTINGS
Chateau Montelena Calistoga Cuvee 1993 (Napa Valley). About $18.


Dissident Holders Seek Control of Tesoro
A group of dissident shareholders said today that it was planning to seek control of the Tesoro Petroleum Corporation.
The shareholders, who together own about 5.7 percent of Tesoro's common stock, hope to gain control of Tesoro's board by replacing five current directors with their own nominees, according to a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Correction
An article yesterday about the film maker Paul Morrissey misidentifed a star  of his film "Heat" in some copies.
As noted in a picture caption, she is Sylvia  Miles, not Vera Miles.
Because of an editing error, the article also misidentified a film made in 3-D.
It was "Flesh for Frankenstein," not "Blood for Dracula."


The Rich Get Richer As Orioles Get Wells
The Baltimore Orioles got stronger yesterday -- again.
This time they did it  at the expense of the Yankees, with whom they have had a monthlong competition for players in preparation for their seasonlong competition for the American League East championship next year.
The Orioles, adding their sixth new player in the past 10 days, acquired David Wells, a veteran left-handed starting pitcher, from the Cincinnati Reds for Curtis Goodwin, a promising young outfielder, and a minor league outfielder, Trovin Valdez.


Russians Try to Save Deal
A top Russian privatization official said today that he would decide in January when to hold a second tender for the Svyazinvest telecommunications company after the nation's biggest privatization deal appeared to have collapsed.
Maxim Boiko, head of the Russian Privatization Center, said that Stet of Italy, the winner of last month's tender for a 25 percent stake in Svyazinvest, had failed to make a proper, timely payment.
Officials at Stet, a state-owned telecommunications company, were unavailable for comment and Italian markets were closed today for a holiday.


Choreographer of Ethnic Tradition
Abdel Salaam has created an unusual dance style by smoothly blending African  and other ethnic forms with the modern dance of the 1990's.
The pieces that his  Forces of Nature company will present on Friday and Saturday at Davis Hall at City College deal with natural lore, Mr.
Salaam's own life as a child in Harlem  and, on Saturday, the African-American feast of Kwanzaa.
Many traditions merge as well in the magical place where the dances have been conceived.
Mr.
Salaam conducts some rehearsals and dance classes and many workshops with children and teachers from across the state in a small studio carved out of the  dark, dank crypt of the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, where he is a resident artist.
"The church is our home, our sanctuary," the 45-year-old choreographer said in a recent interview.


Personal Essay Questions: Turning Torture Into Fun
Instructions for the personal essay question on the University of Chicago undergraduate application form end with the words: "Have fun! (We insist!)"
It used to be -- and still is at many colleges and universities -- that the tell-us-who-you-are essay question was the final torture inflicted on college applicants already weary, bleary and shaken from the Scholastic Assessment Test and from spilling family secrets onto application forms.


Miami Journal;Macarena Madness Now Has The Floor
A few years ago in Caracas, Venezuela, a flamenco dancer so moved Antonio Romero that he blurted out a compliment in verse as she performed: "Give your body joy, Macarena, that your body is to give joy and good things!"
That verse in Spanish has since become the basis of a song by Mr.
Romero, and that song has spawned a dance that has swept nightclubs in Europe, in Latin America and in cities in the United States, like Miami.
In the last year, the song and dance have also made their way to weddings and office Christmas parties, beauty pageants and tour boats, restaurants and ball parks.


Norman Kretchmer, 72, Expert On Nutrition and Journal Editor
Dr.
Norman Kretchmer, a leading expert on infant nutrition, died last Wednesday in the Moffett Hospital of the University of California at San Francisco.
He was 72 and lived in San Francisco.
The cause was kidney failure due to myeloid metaplasia, a bone-marrow disease, his family said.


A Time Traveler With Bad News
A career's worth of bizarre and elaborately spun fantasy films have brought Terry Gilliam ("Brazil," "The Fisher King," "The Adventures of Baron Munchausen") his well-earned reputation as the movies' resident madman.
There's  always overripe method to his madness, but in the new "12 Monkeys" Mr.
Gilliam's methods are uncommonly wrenching and strong.
This apocalyptic nightmare, a vigorous work of dark, surprise-filled science  fiction, is much tougher and less fanciful than the director's films have often  been.
Mr.
Gilliam usually writes his own screenplays, but the contributions of a writer (David Peoples) whose credits include "Unforgiven" and "Blade Runner" may have something to do with a leaner style.
In any case, "12 Monkeys" is fierce and disturbing, with a plot that skillfully resists following any familiar course.
The film's hero fears that he's half-crazy, and for two hours Mr.
Gilliam artfully keeps his audience feeling the same way.


INSIDE
New Drug Epidemic


Attention! Maple Shade Mail
Jack H. Hagopian, of Cherry Hill, remembered how his spirits were buoyed when strangers sent him holiday cards during his Christmas in Vietnam, in 1966.
Nearly 30 years later, Mr.
Hagopian returned the favor, the A.P. reported.
After he put up a sign at his gas station asking for cards to be sent to United  States troops with the peacekeeping mission in Bosnia, he collected nearly 1,500 cards, many made by children.
They were flown to Germany last week.
TERRY PRISTIN


Guerrilla Attack in a Colombian Town


D.M.B.&amp; B. Official Plans to Retire
George J. Simko, chairman of the executive committee at D'Arcy Masius Benton  &amp; Bowles in New York for the last year, will retire from the agency company and  leave its board, effective on Jan. 15.
Mr.
Simko, 60, who joined D.M.B.&amp; B. as a media buyer in 1960, rose to hold positions including president of the diversified communications division and president of Europe and Middle East operations.
After Mr.
Simko retires, Roy Bostock, chairman and chief executive, will add the title of chairman of the executive committee.


NATO Chief Is Asked to Delay on Control of Sarajevo Suburbs
On his first visit to Bosnian Serb officials, the commander of NATO forces in Bosnia was asked today to delay by at least nine months the deadline for one of  the most important and most sensitive issues in carrying out the peace agreement signed 12 days ago: the extension of Bosnian Government authority to the Bosnian Serb-controlled suburbs of Sarajevo.
In what could become a crucial test of the West's ability to balance flexibility in carrying out the peace agreement against the firmness needed to insure that it is not whittled away, the NATO commander, Adm.
Leighton Smith, said he would consider the request.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL REPORT
St. Peter's


Al DeRogatis, 68, Sports Broadcaster
Al DeRogatis, a former defensive tackle for the New York Giants who achieved  considerable popularity and recognition through his keen analyses of pro football games on radio and television, died today at Jersey Shore Medical Center.
He was 68.
In 1960, when pro football was on the upswing across the nation and the Giants were the darlings of New York, DeRogatis began his broadcasting career for WNEW-AM, working with Marty Glickman on Giant games.
After six years, he moved to television and worked along side Curt Gowdy on NBC telecasts of the N.F.L.
Game of the Week.


Anderson Must Sit Out As Nets Lose A Close One
Kenny Anderson finally went up to Coach Butch Beard before the fourth quarter of the Nets' game against the Miami Heat tonight and acknowledged a problem the  point guard had kept secret for three days: his left groin muscle was bothering  him again.
Enough so, it turned out, to ask Beard to sit him in the final quarter.
Anderson, who settled for 6 points on 1-for-9 field-goal shooting, watched as the Nets nearly erased a 7-point deficit in the game's final 37 seconds before losing, 96-93, before 14,996 fans at Miami Arena.


Turkish Secular Parties to Try to Form Coalition
Turkey's major secular parties agreed today to work toward a coalition Government in an effort to prevent the Islamic party that narrowly won general elections from taking power.
Prime Minister Tansu Ciller and her rival conservative leader, Mesut Yilmaz,  agreed to work for a coalition supported by left-wing legislators to block the Welfare Party, the Islamic group that won the election.


Taxi Stands: An Exercise in Absurdity
To the Editor:
When I read about the Giuliani administration's plan to limit passenger access to taxicabs, except at designated pickup and drop-off points (news article, Dec. 25), I wasn't quite sure whether it was Christmas morning or April Fool's Day.


CHRONICLE
Selena, the 23-year-old Tejano singing star who was murdered last April, has  another song to her credit: "A Boy Like That," which is included in a new release of songs from the Broadway show "West Side Story."
MICHAEL GREENE, the executive producer of the album, "The Songs of 'West Side Story,' " said he encountered considerable opposition when he first proposed including Selena on the record more than two years ago.


Private-Sector Illness Declines
Private employers in New Jersey seem to be doing a better job of keeping their workers healthy on the job, but the public sector is apparently doing worse than it did last year, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
In 1994, the rate of documented work-related illnesses and injuries for state workers was 16.1 per 100, up from 14.5 in 1993, the State Department of Labor has reported.
By comparison, New Jersey's private employers reported injury and illness rates of 6.9 out of 100 workers -- down from 7.4 last year and far below the national average of 8.4 per 100 reported by the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics.


The Neediest Cases;Job Club With a Proud Membership
Abby P. fondly remembers growing up on Bainbridge Street in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, running up to her father's car to ask him for money or rushing to the corner where her mother worked as a crossing guard at P.S. 21.


JAPAN BANKS FACE MARKET DISCIPLINE UNDER NEW POLICY
The Ministry of Finance announced sweeping changes today in the way it manages Japan's banks, in hope of ending a series of financial disasters that have harmed the nation's worldwide image.
The measures are intended to make Japan's banks thrive or fail by market discipline.
The ministry's announcement comes at a time when the stock market has been rising to new heights for the year, and the measures appear aimed to ride the resultant crest of good will.


To Sleep, Perchance to Stay Awake in Class
At 8 o'clock on school mornings, Jillian Lastra stares intently at the chalkboard during her math class at the New York City Museum School in Chelsea.
She appears to be learning geometry formulas about line segments, but she can barely keep her eyes open.
She slouches in her chair.
She sneaks a catnap when her teacher is not looking, head propped between her palms.
Jillian, 13, is in what sleep researchers call a twilight zone, caused by sleep deprivation.


There Is Nothing to 'Fix' in Homosexuals;All in the Family
To the editor:
Like the Republican Presidential candidates here in Iowa who are trying to get in good with the Christian Coalition, Dr.
Charles W. Socarides promotes the  lie that gay people are somehow a threat to the family (news article, Dec. 24).
He does so despite the fact that his own son is gay.


Pechiney Stock Falls As Swap Plan Falters
Shares in Pechiney International S.A. plunged as much as 10 percent during the day yesterday as investors abandoned the idea of swapping their shares for stock in the parent company, Pechiney S.A., and sold them instead.
Pechiney International stock recovered by the close, ending down 1.5 French francs at 89.5 francs ($18.27).
The stock had fallen as much as 9 francs, or 10 percent, to 82 francs ($16.73).
"Pechiney is at such a low price that it's better to sell now," said Laurent Mace, a trader at Nomura Bourse.
Pechiney S.A. shares fell to a 52-week low of 169.7 francs, down 0.3 franc from Friday, a 9.3 percent drop from the 187 francs of the French Government's public offering a week ago.
France sold most of its 56 percent stake in Pechiney then.
The offer of 5 Pechiney S.A. shares for 9 Pechiney International shares ends Jan. 9, said the Paris brokerage firm Transbourse. (Bloomberg Business News)


Celebration of Life


Dollar Falls as a Large Buyer Causes an Increase in the Pound
The dollar drifted lower against European currencies yesterday as one large buyer aggressively bid up the British pound.
Most European markets were closed for a holiday, resulting in thin trading that magnified the impact of the pound-buying spree.
The pound dominated activity, rising against both the dollar and the German mark after a large commercial buyer sent out a flurry of sterling purchases from a range of banks.


Food Notes
Drinks by the Book


Aggies' McElroy Still Hurt
LEELAND MCELROY can jog but isn't yet sprinting on his sprained left ankle.
"If I can be out there, I will," the Texas A &amp; M running back said yesterday.
His trainer, however, is less optimistic.
He has pronounced McElroy doubtful  for tomorrow night's Alamo Bowl between the Aggies (8-3) and Michigan (9-3).


Mexican Drug Dealer Pushes Speed, Helping Set Off an Epidemic in U.S.
Like hundreds of other brash young Mexican narcotics wholesalers working the  California market, Jesus Amezcua did well in cocaine, well enough to shuttle between Tijuana suppliers and his Los Angeles clients in a $50,000 BMW.
Then in  1993 the Americans brought a Federal indictment against him.
But Mr.
Amezcua evaded arrest, and adopted a shrewd business strategy that American and Mexican officials say has carried him to the front ranks of Mexican traffickers.
Retreating to safety south of the border, Mr.
Amezcua shifted from  cocaine to a drug then surging in popularity across the American West, and now sweeping east: methamphetamine, or speed.


Public Art: A Fence With Faces To Grace Times Sq.
The furnace, fed by coal and forced air from old-fashioned bellows, rages.
Sledgehammers beat against anvils.
For the last two months in a sooty basement in Chelsea, James Garvey, a blacksmith, and his crew at Koenig Iron Works have been building a new fence for the middle of Times Square.
It will replace the broken-down fence on the eastern edge of the traffic island dividing Broadway and Seventh Avenue between 45th and 46th Streets.


Woman Dies in House Fire
An 89-year-old woman was killed and a 75-year-old man was critically injured  yesterday when an electrical fire swept through the woman's house, the authorities said.
The woman, Patricia Rogers, called 911 just after 1 A.M., but may have been trapped by flames rising up the hallway steps to her second-floor bedroom, said Edward M. Neafsey, Acting Prosecutor for Union County.
A friend who lived in the house, Jack Noble, was flown to St.
Barnabas Medical Center.
Mrs.
Rogers's adopted son, Henry Rogers, 44, and another man, Earl Glasco, 18, escaped uninjured, Mr.
Neafsey said.


U.N. Journal;When This Rwandan Speaks, the Big Guys Listen
A year ago, when Rwanda had plumbed the depths of genocide and civil war and  was stumbling back to a stunted normality, a former guerrilla army that had become the new Government went looking for someone to be its international face.
Manzi Bakuramutsa was the choice, and the United Nations Security Council was in for a wild ride.


AT LUNCH WITH: Faith Stewart-Gordon;Leaving With the Samovars And the Memories Gleaming
TWO beautifully dressed women, brimming with hair bleach and entitlement, balk at the front table being offered for lunch.
Since it is that rare day at the Russian Tea Room when no celebrities are on display, it is gently explained  to them that a front table is indeed desirable.
"Oh, we didn't know!" one cries.
"We're new." They settle down happily with sudden pride of placement.


GE Capital To Acquire An Insurer
GE Capital Services announced yesterday an agreement to buy for $960 million  most of the annuities and life insurance business of the Aon Corporation, a Chicago-based company that plans to concentrate on its insurance brokering and corporate advisory businesses.
By purchasing the Aon subsidiary, the Life Insurance Company of Virginia in Richmond, GE Capital would become one of the country's five largest sellers of annuities to individuals, larger than such widely known names as the Equitable Companies and the New York Life Insurance Company.


Car Drags Snow Tube
A woman was listed in serious condition at an Albany hospital today after she slid down a snowy hill on an inner tube, hit a car and was dragged 25 feet, the  state police said.


Finding Warmth In a Shy First Lady
Pat Nixon was one of the more enigmatic First Ladies in recent years.
But Joan Allen, who plays Mrs.
Nixon in Oliver Stone's film "Nixon," is convinced that beneath the public stoicism of the former First Lady rested a warm, strong and quite remarkable woman.
"Do I like her? Very, very much," said Ms.
Allen, whose portrayal of Mrs.
Nixon has been singled out by critics as a high point of the three-hour movie, which opened on Dec. 20 to mixed reviews.
"I would have liked to have sat down and had coffee with her, and I think she would have been a warm person, compassionate. People tagged her with the words 'plastic Pat,' but that's unfair and not true."


Emmanuel Levinas, 90, French Ethical Philosopher
Emmanuel Levinas, a philosopher and religious thinker who made ethical responsibility for "the Other" the bedrock of his philosophical analyses, died of heart failure in Paris on Monday.
He would have been 90 within a few days.
His thought influenced several generations of French philosophers and, bolstered by his reflections on the Talmud, won an admiring readership among Jewish and Christian theologians, among them Pope John Paul II, who often praised and quoted his work.


Market Place;A Giant of Wind Power Stumbles Badly
Kenetech, the world's biggest maker of wind turbines and the once-proud symbol of the coming of age of wind power in the United States, is scrambling to survive.
A little more than a year ago, the San Francisco company was on a roll.
Impressed by its high-technology variable-speed turbines and by analysts' upbeat sales projections, investors bid Kenetech's stock to a peak of $29.50 in  March 1994 from $16.50 at its initial public offering in September 1993.


Pier 1 Expects $20 Million Loss From Trading
Pier 1 Imports Inc., a retailer of furniture and housewares, said yesterday that "inappropriate trades" made by an outside financial consultant would result in a $20 million loss for the company.
The announcement drew outrage from an institutional investor who had been pressing the company to take better care of  its short-term investments.
Although the company refused to identify the consultant, Bloomberg Business News, quoting unidentified Federal officials, reported that it was Capital Insight, a money-management firm in Beverly Hills, Calif.


Nicolas Slonimsky, Author of Widely Used Reference Works on Music,Dies at 101
Nicolas Slonimsky, a formidably gifted musicologist and lexicographer who also made his mark as a conductor, pianist and composer, died on Monday at the U.C.L.A.
Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 101.
Mr.
Slonimsky's many reference works, among them "Music Since 1900," "A Lexicon of Musical Invective" and the last several editions of Baker's Biographical Dictionary of Musicians, are considered indispensable by musicians, critics and music lovers.
A compendium drawn from his writings, "Nicolas Slonimsky: The First Hundred Years," edited by Richard Kostelanetz, was published last year.


Look! In the Playoffs! A Pack of Underdogs
The first round of the National Football League playoffs offers plenty of underdogs.
And each team has faced a bushel of adversity.
The Falcons have surprised everyone here, waiting until the last day of the season to make the grade, toppling their old nemesis, San Francisco.
Green Bay has found life goes on without Sterling Sharpe.
Miami and Coach Don Shula have turned a whirlwind of underachievement into success.
The Buffalo Bills were supposedly old and finished.
The Detroit Lions began the season with a 3-6 record.
The Philadelphia Eagles flourished despite the benching of Randall Cunningham.
San Diego was 4-4 before finishing 9-7.


Health Maintenance Organizations Turn to Spiritual Healing
The psychological and spiritual sides of healing, long poor cousins of mainstream medicine, are finding new support from some institutions with growing power in medical care: health maintenance organizations.
At a recent conference here, Dr.
Herbert Benson president of the Harvard Medical School's Mind/Body Medical Institute, said that his office at Harvard was now getting five or six calls a week from H.M.O.'s that were interested in the medical uses of relaxation and other nontraditional treatment methods.
The reason, he said, is clear: if such methods succeed reliably in reducing workload, they are "just plain money in the bank for the H.M.O.'s."


March of the Toy Restaurants
THE newest restaurant toys are expensive and mechanical.
First there was the  Official All Star Cafe and its six-figure revolving blimp.
Now comes Osteria del Circo (pronounced CHEER-co), 120 West 55th Street, which has acrobatic monkeys in orbit near the ceiling and glittery mechanical performers that could double for creatures from the Delacorte Clock in Central Park.
Circo is bankrolled by Sirio Maccioni of Le Cirque and will be run by his three sons, Mario, Marco and  Mauro, with his wife, Egidiana, as food consultant.
The playful circus decor is not surprising.
Circus has become a Maccioni restaurant theme.
The Maccionis spent $3.5 million on the space designed by Adam Tihany.
With Italianesque main courses at dinner from $8 to $25, it may be a while before the festive 120-seat restaurant, due to open Jan. 8, is in the black.


Interpublic Group To Take a Charge
The Interpublic Group of Companies, which owns agencies like McCann-Erickson  Worldwide, Lintas Worldwide and the Lowe Group, said yesterday that it would take a fourth-quarter pretax charge of about $39 million to reflect a change in  its accounting procedures and a write-down involving certain small European agencies.
Interpublic, which is based in New York, said it expected net income for the  year, excluding the noncash charge, to be in line with estimates, but offered no figures.
According to a First Call Inc. survey of five analysts, Interpublic was estimated to earn 85 cents a share for the fourth quarter and $2.15 a share for  the full year.


Shortchanging the Mentally Ill
In his most recent budget, Gov.
George Pataki of New York proposes significant changes in state mental health policy.
He would give more flexibility to counties to administer local programs, but with a lot less money.
He also continues to retreat from a bargain struck just two years ago to put more resources into community treatment programs while phasing out some of the state's outmoded and costly psychiatric hospitals.
For mental health patients, this is a bad deal.
Since taking office earlier this year, Mr.
Pataki has been reneging on the sensible bargain that was struck between former Gov.
Mario Cuomo and the State Legislature with passage in 1993 of the Community Reinvestment Act.
That law promised the gradual closing, over five years, of several of the state's 22 then-operating but underused adult psychiatric hospitals.
At least some of the projected saving was to be used to create new community-based mental health programs that are more responsive to patient needs.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY Second Look Leads to Arrest Police officers and Emergency Medical Service workers responded to a report of possible child abuse in Brooklyn, intent on rescuing a child.
But the parents of the two children in the Bedford-Stuyvesant apartment showed the officers and  paramedics a healthy 3-year-old boy; the 6-year-old girl with the black eyes and burn marks on her back was kept in another room.
A second look led to the discovery of the girl and the arrest of her father. [Page B1.] Betting on the Future As the oldest living graduate of Hunter College (Class of 1910), Rose Hamburger  says she thinks the current generation of students is being shortchanged in reputation while being charged more for tuition.
"I think it's unfortunate that  youth with workable brains are being deprived of the privilege of going on in their studies," she said.
About New York by David Gonzalez. [B1.]


FRESH CHOICE TO CLOSE SOME RESTAURANTS IN REVAMPING
Fresh Choice Inc., a restaurant operator based in Santa Clara, Calif., said yesterday that it would close up to 10 of its 58 outlets in a revamping and take an after-tax charge of $23.9 million in the fourth quarter.
The company said it  would announce the restaurants to be closed when financial arrangements were in  place and employees had been notified.
Fresh Choice operates restaurants in California, Washington, Texas and the Washington metropolitan area.
Fresh Choice said it would provide a reserve of $13 million in the fourth quarter to cover the cost of closing the restaurants.
Shares of Fresh Choice fell 50 cents, to $6.375, in Nasdaq trading.


New Plant for Mitsubishi
The Mitsubishi Motors Corporation will build a new transmission and engine assembly plant in the Philippines for 20 billion yen, or about $200 million, a company spokesman said today.
Construction of the plant is scheduled to begin in early 1996 and is expected to be completed by mid-1997.
The plant will replace an existing Philippine plant that has a production capacity of 156,000 units.
The new factory's projected output is 234,000 units, the spokesman said.


F.D.A. Approves 2 Implantable Defibrillators
The Food and Drug Administration granted approval yesterday for two heart defibrillators, implantable devices that deliver a jolt of electricity to stabilize a racing heart.
The manufacturers are the Guidant Corporation of Indianapolis and Ventritex Inc. of Sunnyvale, Calif.
The action stands to heat up the $650 million worldwide market for heart defibrillators, which has been dominated by Medtronic Inc. of Minneapolis.
Medtronic, which is also the largest maker of pacemakers, bolstered its lead in  March with the first F.D.A.-approved device small enough to be implanted in the  upper chest near the shoulder, rather than in the abdomen.
The pectoral procedure places the device closer to the heart, requires less surgery and is less obtrusive than the abdominal method.


DELUXE TO TAKE CHARGE FOR REORGANIZATION
The Deluxe Corporation said yesterday that it might sell some businesses and  product lines and close some plants under a revamping program that would result  in a fourth-quarter charge of $60 million to $70 million.
Deluxe, based in Shoreview, Minn., makes bank checks and software for the electronic transfer of  funds.
The company said the charge would reduce its 1995 earnings by 42 cents to 50 cents a share.
Deluxe earned $40 million, or 49 cents a share, on revenue of $478.9 million in the fourth quarter of 1994.
For the year, it earned $140.9  million, or $1.71 a share, on revenue of $1.75 billion.
Deluxe said the changes  would enable the company to cut about $100 million to $125 million a year in operating costs by the end of 1997.


Corrections
An obituary by The Associated Press on Tuesday about a former Disney executive misspelled his surname.
He was William H. D. Cottrell Jr., not Cotrell.


Lower AIDS Risk Is Found in Blood Transfusions
Only about two dozen of the 12 million pints of blood used in transfusions each year are infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, a new study has  found.
Experts already knew that the risk of catching AIDS from a transfusion was vanishingly small.
But the new study shows it is only about half as great as previously estimated.


Stet's Shares Rise
Shares of the state-controlled telecommunications company Stet rose 2.9 percent today on investor hope that it had abandoned a risky and costly venture  with Russia's second largest telecommunications company, Svyazinvest.
The Russian privatization agency said that the $1.4 billion deal was definitely off, but Stet insisted that it had not pulled out and just needed more time. (Reuters)


A Crown, Be It Frog Or Swine, Is a Crown
Hers was a short but poignant reign.
Janet Duhon, the outgoing Miss Teen Swine Queen, wept as she made her final promenade around the high school gymnasium in Basile, La., her mantle gently swooshing as she waved one last time to her subjects.
In her abdication, she warned the incoming queen not to waste one second of fleeting glory.
"Wear your crown with pride," she said, "and never forget who you are or where you came from."


Defend New York City in Albany
New York City was never likely to be rewarded by the budgets of Gov.
George Pataki, who owed his election at least partly to upstate and suburban resentment of the costly social services provided to the city's poor.
But this year Mr.
Pataki seems to have gone out of his way to punish the city with disproportionate spending cuts.
He may have the upper hand because the city's supporters in the New York State Legislature are weak and divided.
They need to  forge a common strategy and find partners in other parts of the state to combat  the Governor's punitive budget proposals.
Faced with a nearly $4 billion deficit created largely by previously enacted  tax cuts, the Governor proposes to make most of his cuts in Medicaid, welfare, school aid and mental health programs.
About two-thirds of the state's spending  in the social welfare area goes to New York City, so cuts in these programs hit  the city the hardest.
In education, the city has historically received less state aid than it is entitled to, based on the proportion of students in the state attending city schools.
Now it is being hit with more than its share of new cuts because Mr.
Pataki proposes to target his reductions on aid for special education and handicapped and disabled students, most of whom are in the city.


Ford Redesigns Escort, Tracer
The Ford Motor Company is hoping a redesign of the Escort will help keep it near the top of best-seller lists in the small-car market.
Details of the redesign will not be released until next week when the new Escort will be shown to the public at the North American International Auto Show here.


Croatia's Responsibility in Bosnia
Americans rightly view the Bosnian Serbs and Serbia as the chief villains of  the Bosnian war.
But the prospects for turning the Dayton agreement into a real  peace depend at least as much on the behavior of Bosnian Croats and Croatia.
This Croatian connection imposes a special responsibility on the United States.
For the past two years the Clinton Administration has built up Croatian  military power to roll back the Serbs, without complaining too loudly about Croatian mistreatment of Serbian and Muslim civilians caught in the Croatian advance.


Sales Off at Club Med
Club Mediterranee S.A., the French company that operates the Club Med vacation resorts, said today that sales fell 3.4 percent for the year that ended on Oct. 31, to 8.47 billion francs ($1.73 billion) from 8.77 billion francs in the previous year.
Factoring in the exchange rate, sales in dollar terms rose 1.7 percent.
The company said it still expected a net profit for the year of 160 million to 180 million francs, a rise of 70 percent to 90 percent from the 94 million francs earned in the 1994 fiscal year.


Liberties;A Winter's Tale
My reaction to the curriculum for Georgetown University's English department  can be summed up with a few Elizabethan imprecations: "Fie, fie, fie! Pah, pah!  Howl, howl, howl! Tut!"
Joining the rush to multiculturalism, the Jesuit university no longer will require English literature majors to study the English language's dynamic trio -- Chaucer, Shakespeare and Milton.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Tuesday with the Market Place column, about brokerage-house stocks, reflected erroneous figures for the performance of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
A corrected chart appears today on page D6.


Vietnamese Going Home
The last 5,048 Vietnamese still living in a refugee camp here will be sent home under an agreement signed on Tuesday that would bring to an end the 20-year saga of boat people in Thailand.
But whether the Vietnamese will go peacefully remains to be seen.
The new agreement calls for all the Vietnamese living in the Sikkiu refugee camp in northern Thailand to be returned to Vietnam by June 1996.


In New York, Local Management of Welfare Is Democratic
To the Editor:
As a county executive and the president of the New York State Association of  Counties, I must address your Dec. 19 editorial opposing Gov.
George Pataki's block-grant proposal to grant counties and the City of New York more authority to manage welfare and Medicaid programs.


Gretchen Geber, Cello Instructor, 81
Gretchen Geber, a cello instructor whose students have gone on to play in major American orchestras, died on Saturday at her home in Woodland Hills, Calif.
She was 81.
Mrs.
Geber studied briefly at the University of Southern California and later taught there while pursuing studio work and performing.


Edward J. Pope, 76, International Business Executive and Adviser
Edward Julius Pope, an international business executive and onetime civilian  adviser to American military commanders in Europe, died last Saturday at Sibley  Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 76 and lived in Middleburg, Va.
The cause of death was cancer, said the National Association of Chain Drug Stores, of which he was the managing director of international affairs.


Sales of Existing Homes Fall For 2d Consecutive Month
Sales of existing homes fell for a second consecutive month in November, an industry group said today, as a slowing economy reduced confidence about future  job security.
The group, the National Association of Realtors, said resales of single-family homes dropped 1.7 percent in November, to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 4.04 million units, despite lower mortgage rates.


Japanese-Americans Don't Lose Identity
To the Editor:
Your front-page article "Japanese in America Looking Beyond Past to Shape Future" (Dec. 25) assumes that once a Japanese-American "intermarries" and has children, those children are not part of the Japanese-American community.
Although this is a common assumption, it is incorrect and encumbers the development of the Japanese-American community.


Leaving the Driving to Car Services
WHEN Harry Turitz announced his decision to stop driving last June, his son and daughter hugged him.
"They told me this was the moment they'd been waiting for," he recalled.
At 95, Mr.
Turitz is alert and lively, but his eyesight is failing.
His car represented his only means of getting to the family business, other than a $20-a-day taxi habit; that was more than he was ready to spend.
What got him to  change his ways was the presence here of the Independent Transportation Network, an innovative car service that takes the elderly where they want to go, when they want to go, for a relatively low fee -- in his case, $8 round trip.


As Snug as a Bug in a Yurt
MISSY GIOBE, 23, a professional mountain biker, has just celebrated her first Christmas in a yurt -- a tentlike structure (left) that she built from a mail-order kit.
Ms.
Giobe (below left) called on a little help from her friends one weekend in October to put up the yurt -- which she uses as a retreat -- on her mountain  property in Durango, Colo.
With its vinyl and polyester "skin" stretched over a  flexible wooden frame, it is a modern-day version of the portable homes used by  the nomads of Mongolia.
It looks like a chic circus tent.


Airlines Begin Winter Fare War
Delta Air Lines began the latest airfare war today, slashing 30 to 50 percent off its regular advance-purchase fares for winter travel in the United States, Canada and Mexico.
The discounts were quickly matched by American Airlines, United Airlines, USAir, Trans World Airlines and Continental Airlines as they sought to bolster travel during the slow season.


FEDERATED DETAILS CONVERSIONS OF 11 BROADWAY STORES
Federated Department Stores Inc. said yesterday that it would convert seven of its Broadway stores to Macy's stores and four others to Bloomingdale's stores.
The Cincinnati-based retailer said it would spend more than $525 million to convert and remodel its Broadway stores over the next three years.
Federated  bought the 82-store chain, based in Los Angeles, in October.
The conversion increases Macy's presence in California and five other Western states.
The Bloomingdale's stores, the first in California, will be open in November.


It's Soft, Warm and Polyester
POLYESTER fleece, originally developed for winter sports clothing (Polartec is the most famous brand) is lightweight, warm and washable -- qualities that make the fabric appealing for home furnishings as well.
Galapagos Childrens' Sportswear in Bedford, N.Y., recently began making blankets with the material in crib, twin and full/queen sizes for $50 to $145.
They feel as soft as cashmere.


Lugar Hones His Message, But the Delivery Needs Work
Consider the resume: two-term Mayor of Indianapolis; United States Senator for nearly two decades; former chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee; three times on the short list to be the running mate of the Republican Presidential nominee.
By a number of measures, Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana is among the most qualified candidates ever to run for President of the United States.


Darwin E. Smith, 69, Executive Who Remade a Paper Company
Darwin E. Smith, who led the growth of the Kimberly-Clark Corporation into a  consumer products giant, died on Tuesday after collapsing at his home in Longboat Key, Fla.
He was 69.
The cause was a heart attack, said his wife, Lois Claire Archibold Smith.


U.S. BANCORP COMPLETES PURCHASE OF WEST ONE
U.S.
Bancorp Inc. said yesterday that it had completed its $1.8 billion purchase of West One Bancorp, creating one of the largest banks in the Northwest.
U.S.
Bancorp, based in Portland, Ore., paid 1.47 shares of its own stock for each share of West One, based in Boise, Idaho.
The acquisition created a bank holding company with nearly 600 branches and $30 billion in assets.
The Federal Reserve approved the transaction this month, after U.S.
Bancorp agreed to sell 27 bank offices in Washington and Oregon.
U.S.
Bancorp's shares fell $2.25 yesterday, to $33.75, in heaving Nasdaq trading.


Tax Filing by Telephone
The Internal Revenue Service is adding New Jersey to the list of states where some taxpayers will be able to file their returns by phone.
The program will be  available to single people who earn less than $50,000 a year and have previously filed the 1040 EZ form, a spokesman for the agency said yesterday.
The I.R.S. has identified some 500,000 eligible taxpayers in the state who will  receive dialing instructions for the Tele File program, said the spokesman, Kevin McKeon.
Another new program will enable taxpayers who file their 1995 Federal returns electronically to submit their state returns at the same time to be passed on to the state's Division of Taxation, Mr.
McKeon said.


Market Place;Boston Scientific Cheered by Market
Even in the midst of the current mergers and acquisitions frenzy in corporate America, the Boston Scientific Corporation has raised eyebrows with its voracious appetite this last year and a half.
The company, a maker of medical devices, has swallowed five significant competitors since August 1994, in stock swaps totaling $2.08 billion.
The hypergrowth strategy has caused revenues to more than double, from $450 million  in 1994 to more than $1 billion this year; meanwhile, the company's work force has leaped from 1,800 a year ago to more than 7,000 by year's end.


2d Death in Kenilworth Fire
A second person has died as a result of an electrical fire in a Kenilworth home that also took the life of its owner, the authorities said.
Jack Noble, 75, died on Tuesday evening at St.
Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston.
He was a friend of Patricia Rogers, 89, the owner of the home, said Edward M. Neafsey, Acting Prosecutor for Union County.


Korean Rumor That Won't Die: Big Bribe by U.S. Company?
With former President Roh Tae Woo now in jail because of charges of corruption and other matters, another major target of the Government's investigation is an American military contractor that has been widely suspected  of paying bribes in South Korea.
No evidence has surfaced that the company, General Dynamics, paid any money to win a $5 billion contract to sell 120 F-16 jet fighters to South Korea in 1990.
Indeed, two investigations -- one by the South Korean Government and one by the American authorities -- have cleared General Dynamics, whose F-16 jet fighter division is now owned by the Lockheed Martin Corporation.


Iona Makes Its Season as St. John's Hits Bottom
The St.
John's-Iona game was not decided until the final minutes last night,  which was just as well.
Neither team played deservedly of victory, though Iona displayed steadiness and a fierce determination down the stretch while St.
John's folded in what has become a familiar retreat.
In a sloppy game filled with frayed shooting and inept ball handling, the Gaels finally prevailed, 70-57, in the Holiday Festival at Madison Square Garden, despite going eight minutes of the first half without scoring a single point.
It was the first victory by Iona over St.
John's since 1979.


Enthusiasm for R. F. K.
To the Editor:
In your Dec. 26 front-page article "Issue for Dole Isn't Courage, but Convictions," Bob Dole concedes that while he "has generated significant institutional support, he has not inspired much enthusiasm among the public." He then compares that lack of enthusiasm to the 1968 Bobby Kennedy campaign.


World News Briefs;At Least 12 Killed In New Chechen Battles
At least three Russian soldiers and nine Chechen rebels have been reported killed in scattered fighting across the breakaway republic of Chechnya.
The battles late Tuesday and early today were heaviest around the capital, Grozny.
Russian troops said they destroyed several rebel trucks, armored vehicles and an ammunitions depot, the ITAR-Tass news agency reported.


Party Leader May Signal Shift in Japan
Ichiro Ozawa, a highly unusual Japanese politician who calls for a virtual revolution in his nation's politics, economics, society and foreign policy, was  elected leader of Japan's main opposition party today.
Mr.
Ozawa, who would almost certainly put relations with the United States on a new footing, thus moves one step closer to the Prime Minister's office.


Essay;Office Pool, 1996
Only two picks right last year, a record for the 22-year history of this much-imitated pool; now let's go for a clean sweep.
1.
Whitewater will (a) spawn a scathing Senate report titled "Doubting Thomases"; (b) be a fizzle with no new independent counsel convictions; (c) reveal petty crimes in Arkansas and serious wrongdoing in Washington; (d) be concluded by a post-election Presidential pardon of Web Hubbell and any others indicted or convicted, except Hillary.


Three Wise Men, Please Note
ANYONE who finds that less is a bore will revel in the decorative arts of Morocco.
The Claiborne Gallery in SoHo is featuring exuberant 10-inch Moroccan bottles in deep emerald, amethyst and amber (left).
They are fitted with elaborately embossed and hammered tin bases and trim, and cost $30 each.
Although they originally held perfume, they can be used throughout the house for bath oils, cruets -- or even as props for the Three Wise Men in next year's pageant.


The Worst Flu Epidemic in Decades Strikes Russia and Ukraine
The most severe flu epidemic in decades is sweeping Russia and Ukraine, with  as many as 200,000 people falling ill each day, according to health officials here.
Nearly one million people have been infected in Moscow alone, and it is nearly impossible to find a family that has been spared.
In Ukraine, at least two million people have already gotten sick and health officials there said the  number could triple in the next two weeks.


INSIDE
Pataki Veto Pleases Giuliani


Papers Tell Of a Wife's Suicide Plan
A month before her husband assisted in her death, Myrna Lebov, who was deteriorating from multiple sclerosis, lamented in a letter to her sister that fear of losing control of her bodily functions was dominating her life and she felt it was time to end it, according to court papers released yesterday.
"I've been trapped in my life, with no escape -- except suicide," reads the letter that was released after Ms.
Lebov's husband, George Delury, 62, pleaded not guilty to second-degree manslaughter at his arraignment in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.


Theratech Estrogen Patch
Theratech Inc. said yesterday that it had asked the Food and Drug Administration to approve its estrogen skin patch and that it planned to make similar applications in Europe early next year.
Theratech, based in Salt Lake City, made the announcement with the Procter &amp; Gamble Company of Cincinnati, which has exclusive marketing rights to the patch everywhere but in Asia.
The patches deliver Estradiol, the main female estrogenic hormone, through the skin, generally for post-menopausal women with osteoporosis.


AIDES FOR 2 SIDES RENEW THE QUEST FOR A BUDGET DEAL
As staff members for the White House and Congressional Republicans resumed discussions today on balancing the budget and ending the partial Government shutdown, about three-quarters of a million Federal employees grew increasingly  restive and confused over their plight and their pay.
After a four-day holiday break, each side sent aides to the negotiating table to try to clear a thicket of niggling differences over the agenda for talks so that higher ranking officials, including President Clinton, might find common ground on the bigger issues of Medicare, Medicaid, tax cuts and welfare and end  a budget impasse that forced the partial shutdown of the Federal Government -- the longest on record -- 12 days ago.


World News Briefs;Jordanians Intercept Chemicals Bound for Iraq
The authorities have seized several pounds of chemicals bound for Iraq that could be used to make weapons in violation of United Nations sanctions, officials said today.
The material was intercepted several weeks ago after a tip from United Nations authorities who discovered information on the shipment in documents Iraq had handed over to weapons inspectors, one official said.


Neither Separate Nor Equal;Yonkers Integrates Its Schools, to Little Effect
Nearly a decade after a Federal judge ordered this city to desegregate its public schools, officials here can confidently declare that every single school  has been opened to all children, no matter the color of their skin.
But to people throughout the city these days, such statements offer little comfort.
For all its success at bringing racial diversity to the classroom, the  era of desegregation in Yonkers has proven a profound disappointment to blacks and whites alike.


Nasdaq Shows a Decline In Short Sales Outstanding
In the first decline in five months, the number of open positions of short sales on the Nasdaq market fell less than 1 percent in the month that ended on Dec. 15, the National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday.
The short position in Nasdaq shares, which represented trading that took place from Nov. 16 through Dec. 12 and was settled as of Dec. 15, totaled 921.2  million shares.
That compared with 929.4 million in the period that ended on Nov. 15.


Judge Approves Implant Accord
A Federal judge has approved a scaled-back settlement between three makers of silicone breast implants and implant recipients, removing another hurdle for women awaiting money for health-related claims.
The decision by Federal District Judge Sam C. Pointer, released Friday, clears the way for women to begin receiving forms next month to accept or reject the deal.
Payments are expected to begin in 1996.


Pier 1 Adviser Said to Have Lost Money For 2d Client
An outside financial consultant that the Pier 1 Imports retail chain contends lost $20 million of its money is under investigation by the Securities and Exchange Commission in connection with losses at another company, people with knowledge of the investigation said yesterday.
The second company, Pair Gain Technologies Inc., of Tustin, Calif., told shareholders earlier this month that it lost $15.9 million as a result of unauthorized trades by a financial adviser.


Corrections
A picture caption on Friday about children in a Manhattan Christmas pageant misidentified the site, on West 114th Street.
It was the Episcopal School of St.
Hilda's and St.
Hugh's, not the Church of St.
Hilda's and St.
Hugh's.


Andrew H. Heide, Candy Maker, 86
Andrew H. Heide, the retired chairman of Henry Heide Inc., manufacturers of such candies as Jujyfruit, Jujubes, Red Hot Dollars, Gummi Bears and Mexican Hats, died on Saturday at Muhlenberg Hospital in Plainfield, N.J.
Mr.
Heide, who lived in Martinsville, N.J., and Manhattan, was 86.
At his retirement in 1992, Mr.
Heide (pronounced HI-dee) had spent nearly 60  years at the company, which was founded by his grandfather in 1869.


Child Welfare Chief Is Forced to Testify
Facing her most sustained and hostile public interrogation since the death of 6-year-old Elisa Izquierdo, the head of New York City's Child Welfare Administration appeared under subpoena yesterday before a City Council committee that tried to establish a link between city budget cuts and her agency's failure to protect the girl.
The official, Kathryn Croft, had originally been scheduled to testify before  the Council's Committee on General Welfare on Dec. 19, but the Giuliani administration instructed her not to appear because she would not be the first to testify.
Committee members responded with a subpoena for her to appear yesterday.


Heaven Can Wait
To The Home Section:
Usually when one reads about families with three boys, it's in reference to the everlasting chaos they tend to produce and to the guaranteed places in heaven that their mothers are said to hold.
When our third son in a row was born, some relatives and friends permitted themselves the statement, "I'm sorry  you didn't have a girl."


Market Forces Can't Drive Doctors' Decisions;How Physicians Think
To the Editor:
In "Doctors Say H.M.O.'s Limit What They Can Tell Patients" (front page, Dec. 21), you make the simplistic assumptions that all the physicians interviewed have only the best interest of the patient at heart and that the physician can be expected totally to make the appropriate decision about what is best for the  patient.
With these assumptions, it then follows that any interference by an H.M.O. is arbitrary and obstructive.


Lingering Federal Shutdown Tearing at Threads of Safety Net
Beyond the Vermeers, there wait the garment workers.
While much of the nation looks upon the partial shutdown of the Federal Government as a vague puzzle best measured by the closing and reopening of tourist exhibits like the Vermeer show, the effects of the budget standoff are gradually reaching across the country.


VECTRA BANKING TO BUY A ONE-BANK COMPANY IN DENVER
The Vectra Banking Corporation of Denver said yesterday that it would acquire the Southwest State Bank and its parent, the Bank Land Company, for $22.3 million in cash and new convertible preferred stock.
The acquisition is expected to close in 1996, subject to approval by regulators and shareholders.
Southwest, a family-owned one-bank company in Denver, had about $110 million in assets, $96 million in deposits and $78 million in loans as of Sept. 30.
Vectra's shares fell 37.5 cents yesterday, to $10.125, in Nasdaq trading.


As Snug as a Bug in a Yurt
MISSY GIOBE, 23, a professional mountain biker, has just celebrated her first Christmas in a yurt -- a tentlike structure (left) that she built from a mail-order kit.
Ms.
Giobe (below left) called on a little help from her friends one weekend in October to put up the yurt -- which she uses as a retreat -- on her mountain  property in Durango, Colo.
With its vinyl and polyester "skin" stretched over a  flexible wooden frame, it is a modern-day version of the portable homes used by  the nomads of Mongolia.
It looks like a chic circus tent.


Suit Seeks to Bar Revco Purchase
A Cleveland woman has sued in Federal District Court here to stop the acquisition of Revco D. S. Inc. by the Rite Aid Corporation.
The woman who filed the class-action lawsuit on Tuesday, Ruth Brady, is seeking a preliminary injunction to block the $1.8 billion merger of drugstore chains, which was announced on Nov. 30.


SPIEGEL SKIPS DIVIDEND TO EXPAND STORES OVERSEAS
Spiegel Inc. said yesterday that its board had eliminated the company's 5-cent quarterly dividend so that the money could be used to expand its Eddie Bauer unit in Japan and Germany, and other projects.
Spiegel, a catalogue retailer based in Downers Grove, Ill., reported in November that its total sales for the month rose 3 percent, to $299.5 million, from the corresponding period last year.
Analysts expect Spiegel to earn 38 cents a share for its fourth quarter, up from 9 cents a share a year earlier.
The company lost money in its first three quarters this year.
Spiegel shares fell 62.5 cents yesterday, to $7.25, in Nasdaq trading.


Crawl Into the Camera, Please
A SUNNY day is the best time to look inside Alicia Imperiale's installation at Here, a theater-gallery in SoHo.
Ms.
Imperiale, an architect and sculptor, has built a camera obscura big enough to climb into.
Once inside, one can see a surreal street scene through the aperture.


Israel and Syria Gingerly Reopen Peace Talks
Negotiators for Syria, Israel and the United States convened today in rural tranquillity on the Eastern Shore of Maryland to try once again to forge a comprehensive peace settlement to end nearly 48 years of hostility between Israel and its Arab neighbors.
No breakthrough is expected at the initial round, which is set up to allow the negotiators to measure each others' intentions -- and sincerity -- and to probe for shifts in position.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
World Juniors


Retrieving the Future Under a Desert Sky
THEIRS were twin visions of perfect order.
When the architects Richard Neutra and Albert Frey built adjacent homes overlooking West Vista Chino road 50 years ago, they created a paragon of modernist beauty in a scorched desert landscape.
Neutra, working for his maverick patron, Edgar Kaufmann, and Frey, for Raymond Loewy, were designing the glamorous dream houses of tomorrow.
Today, that dream is a dim memory.


Brooklyn Fire Kills Two Sisters Recently Re-united and Injures a Third
New Year's Eve was going to be something special for 73-year-old Constance Gittens, friends and relatives said.
A native of Guyana who immigrated to the United States in the 1960's, Ms.
Gittens just last month flew two of her sisters to New York from their homeland  to live with her, relatives said.
The sisters were preparing a New Year's Eve feast together, cooking up the rice, the pepper pot and the beans, baking the cakes and stocking up on Guyanese rum.


Samuelsson To Have Surgery On Elbow
Before the Rangers began their journey to western Canada for a three-game road trip, Coach Colin Campbell spoke with relief about a busy month of December, with 17 games in 31 days.
"You hope to get the points and to get out of it injury free, and we did that," said Campbell, whose Rangers went 9-2-3 for 21 points, out of a possible 28, in their first 14 December games.


Rushdie On India: Serious, Crammed Yet Light
THE MOOR'S LAST SIGH By Salman Rushdie 435 pages. Pantheon Books. $25.


Philadelphia Zoo Guards Smelled Smoke, but Did Nothing About It
Employees at the Philadelphia Zoo smelled smoke nearly three hours before a fire that killed 23 primates was reported, but they did nothing, officials said  today.
"The fire was going for at least three hours before we ever got called," the  Fire Commissioner, Harold Hairston, said at a news conference.


Time Warner Seeks Action on Ameritech
Time Warner Inc. has asked Ohio regulators to intervene in its negotiations with the Ameritech Corporation over plans to offer a competing local telephone service.


When History Is Up for Grabs
Though I was Richard Nixon's friend from 1956 to his death and for four years of that time a close White House aide -- I agree with Oliver Stone's apologists: The film maker was not out to get the former President in "Nixon," his latest foray into historical manipulation.
Demonizing Nixon on film was just a means to a greater end.
And demonizing is certainly what the movie does.
The brooding figure on film  bears little resemblance to the man I knew in the White House.
For example, far  from being vengeful toward the Kennedys, as the movie makes him out to be, the real Nixon quietly invited Jacqueline Kennedy and her two children to spend a private evening back at the White House -- the first time the family had been invited back since John Kennedy's assassination.
A P.R. gesture?
Hardly.
Nixon warned me sternly that there was to be no publicity.
"I want Jackie and the children to feel at home, to know they are welcome here," he told me.


Corrections
The Personal Computers column in Science Times on Tuesday, about a program called Softram 95, misstated the Internet address of a Web site offering literature on the software.
The address, entirely lowercase, is http://www.ora.com/windows/feat/softram/index.html.


Water Disputes Settled
The Western Water Company said today that it had settled the final complaint  against its plan to sell water and water rights from sources in Douglas County,  Colo.
Details of the settlement, reached on Dec. 20, were not provided.
The settlement allows the San Diego-based company to begin operations in the county.
When the company's plan to develop the water resources was filed in August 1993, 24 parties objected.
Western Water's stock was up 68.75 cents, to $30.25,  in Nasdaq trading today.


Economic Scene;A monetary union will probably face many grounds for divorce.
THE European Union has come up with a not-so-snappy name for its would-be common currency: the Euro.
And at the European summit meeting this month in Madrid, the member states more or less confirmed that 1999 would be the year for monetary merger.
But now that the banns have been posted, romance is giving way to second thoughts about how -- or if -- monetary union would work in practice.
The closer one looks, the more daunting the obstacles to a happy marriage appear.


Rhone-Poulenc Gains Rights on Cancer Drug
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc. said yesterday that it acquired the marketing rights in more than 100 countries for a new drug for colorectal cancer from the Yakult  Honsha Company for undisclosed terms.
The company, which is developing the drug  in Europe, already sells the anticancer agent in France under the tradename Campto.
The newly acquired rights will allow Rhone-Poulenc Rorer to develop the drug throughout the Middle East, Southeast Asia, Africa, the former Soviet Union, Eastern Europe, the Indian subcontinent, the Pacific and the Caribbean.


Man Knifed in Effort To Break Up Attack
A Brooklyn man was stabbed several times in the hand and arm yesterday when he tried to break up a knife attack in a midtown Manhattan subway station, the police said.
Neil Kaplan, 37, was in stable condition at Bellevue Hospital Center.


Closing In On Raines
The Yankees are expected to announce today that they have completed a trade with the Chicago White Sox that will bring TIM RAINES to Yankee Stadium's left field.
Raines, 36, has played for the White Sox for the past five seasons and had one year remaining on a three-year contract.
However, as part of the deal the Yankees have apparently negotiated a new contract with Raines.
Last season,  Raines batted .285, scored 81 runs, drove in 67 and had 13 stolen bases in 15 attempts.


CHRONICLE
Meanwhile in Vail, Colo., the talk was about a celebrity who's not even there: the PRINCESS OF WALES.
"Where's Diana?" "When is she arriving?" "Where is she staying?" Those questions have rippled through the gilt-edged ski town.


Giuliani and Ex-Mayors Intensify Battle Over Judicial Demotions
The political clamor over Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's decision to demote two  little-known Criminal Court judges intensified yesterday as he became embroiled  in a fresh dispute with the state's top judge and lost any possibility of a re-election endorsement from former Mayor Edward I. Koch, one of his key supporters in 1993.
Former Mayor David N. Dinkins also stepped up his criticism of his successor  yesterday, suggesting at one point that the Mayor was racially motivated in a recent attack on him.


Bosnia's Foreign Minister Criticizes Serbs
Bosnia's Foreign Minister said today that he is confident NATO will not allow a delay in the unification of Sarajevo under Bosnian Government control.


World News Briefs;Beijing Court Upholds 14 Years for Dissident
A Beijing court today upheld a 14-year sentence for the dissident Wei Jingsheng, a founder of China's democracy movement who was convicted of anti-Government plotting.
"The court upheld the original verdict," a court spokesman, Chen Xiong, said  in an interview.
Mr.
Wei attended the hearing, he said, adding that he could not say whether the defendant had spoken in court.


Former Officer Convicted in Corruption Case
A former New York City police officer who was implicated in the corruption and brutality scandal in the Bronx's 48th Precinct was convicted yesterday of charges stemming from a corruption sting.
The officer, John Lowe, is the second of 16 officers accused in the scandal to be convicted, and the first from the 48th Precinct.
He was found guilty of making a punishable false written statement, a misdemeanor that could draw a sentence of up to one year in prison, after a nonjury trial in front of Acting Justice John Collins of State Supreme Court in the Bronx.


Corrections
An obituary of Dean Martin on Tuesday misspelled the surname of a character he played in the film "The Young Lions" and of his second wife.
The character was Martin Whitacre, not Witacre.
The actor's second marriage was to Jeanne Biegger, not Riegger.
The obituary also misstated his birth date; it was June 17, 1917, not June 7.


Connecting Every Pupil to the World
An advisory council to President Clinton has recommended, after two years of  study, that every community connect its elementary and secondary schools to the  Internet -- the network of millions of computers around the world that provides  a limitless array of on-line information.
The council shows that its recommendation would be easily affordable and almost certainly beneficial, especially for poor students whose educational opportunities are limited now by  lack of resources in their school districts.
Once connected to the Internet, students can explore education opportunities that would otherwise be unavailable.
The Internet already makes available to some rural and inner-city students advanced calculus and physiology courses taught by superstar teachers at faraway high schools, courses taught by professors at distant universities and access to art collections and other video and text-based information at the best libraries and museums in the world.
Students at one private high school have gone on a simulated archeological dig of an actual site dating back to ancient Greece.


A Shaky House of Plastic With No Quick Fix in Sight
Jeanne Hill has a good heart, but to her credit card companies, she's simply  "a bad."
"When my dog came down with lymphoma, I maxed out two credit cards on chemotherapy trying to save her," said Ms.
Hill, 54, who lives in San Francisco.


Gant's $25 Million Heads List
Although other players, including David Cone and Roberto Alomar, have new contracts that pay them a higher annual average, Ron Gant has this off season's  most lucrative total package among the 79 free agents who have signed new contracts.
Gant, who signed last Saturday with the St.
Louis Cardinals, will receive $25 million over the next five years at an evenly proportioned $5 million a year.
The next highest package is Cone's $19.5 million for three years, but his $6.5 million average is the highest for those who became free agents last month.


Long-Bond Yield at 6%, A 2-Year Low
The yield on the Treasury's bellwether 30-year bond dipped briefly below 6 percent yesterday, then closed at an even 6 percent, its lowest in more than two years, as the market rallied for a fourth consecutive day on favorable economic  data and investor optimism that a Federal budget agreement was attainable.
Some market participants have said that as long as President Clinton and Republican leaders are still talking, there is a chance that the deadlock will be resolved in the near term.
The market's price rise was limited, however, by bouts of profit taking.


Altitude Could Pose Problem in Some Spots
It is something that ski-resort brochures don't advertise.
But a trip to an area where elevation levels are about 6,000 feet or higher can occasionally cause the same kind of altitude sickness among visitors that mountain climbers face regularly.


Pataki Vetoes Promotions for Police
Siding once again with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani over the politically potent  police unions, Gov.
George E. Pataki vetoed legislation yesterday that would have automatically promoted hundreds of sergeants and lieutenants in New York City's Police Department.
The veto is the Governor's third involving bills that overwhelmingly passed the Assembly and the Senate with strong support from the police unions but faced equally strong opposition from Mr.
Giuliani, who has accused lawmakers in  Albany of trying to micromanage a police force 150 miles away.


Allen Gives Teammates Share of Spotlight
Connecticut 77, Charleston 60


The songs change, as do the singers, but it's all for the greater promotion of Northwest Airlines.
EVEN listeners who tune in during the song are likely to recognize the voice, the phrasing and the intonation as those of Tony Bennett.
But they are unlikely  to know the name of the song, whose lyrics include the following:
And when I start to roam again The thought of you brings me home again


A Hatter in Her Lair
AMY DOWNS is a milliner whose custom hats in friendly shapes and punchy colors prompt smiles.
Her designs for women and "adventuresome men" are made from "squishy wool" and are cut and sewn, not steamed, into shape.
The hats cost $30 to $80 at Ms.
Downs's tiny shop at 103 Stanton Street on the Lower East Side (212 598-4189), which looks like the Mad Hatter's attic.
As a tribute to the neighborhood, Ms.
Downs has pasted every surface with Chinese newspapers.
The decoupage effect makes customers feel as if they were inside the yellowing pages of an old book.


Leipzig Journal;This Beer Hall Will Even Sell Its Soul to Reopen
Several centuries ago, according to Goethe, the Devil brought Dr.
Faust into  a tradition-shrouded Leipzig drinking hall called Auerbach's Keller for a demonstration of his powers.
While rowdy students watched in amazement, he wove a spell that brought wine  and champagne spilling from holes in a wooden table.


Shore Rail Line To Extend East
Shore Line East, the heavily subsidized commuter train from Old Saybrook, Conn., to New Haven that Gov.
John G. Rowland tried to end, will instead be expanded, the state announced today.
The line, operated for the state by Amtrak, will be extended to New London as early as Feb. 1.
The service links up in New Haven with Metro-North trains to New York.


Dubious Playoff Privilege: Dolphins Are Back in Buffalo
On the bulletin board in the Miami Dolphins' locker room is a caricature of a frog with a death grip on a pelican's neck, even as the frog is being enveloped  in the pelican's bill.
The caption reads: "Don't EVER give up."
The Dolphins can relate to it.
Their topsy-turvy 9-7 season, after mountains  of preseason hype, appeared headed for an ignominious and playoff-less end.
And  it would have come out that way, except for Denver's 31-28 comeback victory over Oakland on Sunday.


The Nikkei Breaks the 20,000 Mark, but Then Retreats


James E. Meade, Nobel Economist, Dies at 88
James E. Meade, an economist who won a Nobel Prize for his pioneering research into international trade and played an influential role in British politics, died on Dec. 22 at his home in Cambridge, England.
He was 88.
His family, which withheld announcement of the death until today, declined to specify the cause of death.


Ex-Anchor Gets a New Job
Nearly two years after she was dismissed as an anchor for WWOR-TV, Channel 9, Sara Lee Kessler will start a new job on Tuesday as health reporter for NJN, the New Jersey public broadcasting network.
Earlier this year, Ms.
Kessler, 44, asserted in a lawsuit that WWOR had engaged in age, sex and religious discrimination.
An Orthodox Jew, Ms.
Kessler accused WWOR of telling her to work on the Sabbath.
No trial date has been set.


Philippine Airlines Gives Big Order to Boeing
The Boeing Company, continuing to win business in the quickly expanding Asian market, received an order from Philippine Airlines for eight 747's and is expected to win part of a $4 billion order to be placed by Malaysia's national carrier.
Jaime Bautista, chief financial officer for Philippine Airlines, said today that the airline planned to buy eight 747-400's, Boeing's largest long-distance  aircraft, as part of a program to spend $2.7 billion to purchase 32 new aircraft from Boeing and Airbus Industrie in the next three years.


Some Offensive Punch Provided by Devils
In a season of such sparse scoring by the Devils that goaltender Martin Brodeur has characterized goals as being "very expensive around here," New Jersey broke the bank tonight.
The defending Stanley Cup champion Devils matched their largest offensive production of the season in a 5-3 victory over the Islanders at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Five players scored for the Devils against two goaltenders for the Islanders, who rallied from a three-goal deficit to tie the score midway through the second period, only to falter in the third and suffer their first loss in the last four games (1-1-2).


Blood Donations Decline
December is never a good month to collect blood, but this year's snow and cold weather have slowed donations even more than usual, an official of the North Jersey Blood Center said yesterday.
Instead of 350 units a day -- the amount needed to adequately serve hospitals in northern and central New Jersey -- the center is getting only 150 units a day, said Judy Knecht, the center's spokeswoman.


Metro Matters;For Heeding Only His Own Gavel, A Mayor Pays
IT has happened again, and this time it may have cost Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani dearly.
He set out to do something admirable -- raise the quality of the city judiciary.
But the Mayor went about it so heavy-handedly that his policy could boomerang -- and may have already, since it cost him former Mayor Edward I. Koch's valuable political support.
In just a week, Mr.
Giuliani has accused Mr.
Koch and former Mayor David N. Dinkins of playing politics with the bench, criticized the widely respected Chief Judge of the State Court of Appeals for speaking to him about the two sitting judges he refused to reappoint, and taken an event out of historical context to make a point.
If the Mayor's goal is to improve the quality of the city bench, this does not sound like the way to persuade New Yorkers of his righteous motivation.


Dollar Gains in Light Turnover As Traders Await Budget Action
The dollar rose slightly yesterday in light trading devoid of any major trend.
Many traders in the United States and Europe remained on holiday and those who were working were reluctant to make big moves ahead of developments in the Federal budget stalemate.


Lincoln Center's Vision
To The Home Section:
Your "Design Notebook: Cherishing Landscapes as Living Art" (Nov. 30) contained a number of incomplete and misleading statements that should be clarified.


Report on Leading Indicators Is Delayed
The partial shutdown of the Federal Government has forced the Conference Board to postpone its first release of the newly privatized report on leading economic indicators.
In a statement released today, the business group said the report, for November, would be delayed because economic data compiled by the Government were unavailable.


BUSINESS DIGEST
30-Year Bond Falls to 6%, Its Lowest Level in 2 Years


No Headline
It is amazing to think that it has turned out to be this unprepared, accidental President who faces the greatest challenge in Mexico since the revolution.
All of us hope he is up to it."
CARLOS FUENTES, on President Ernesto Zedillo. [A4:3.]


Community Playgrounds
To The Home Section:
Your article on landscapes and playgrounds ("Design Notebook: Cherishing Landscapes as Living Art," Nov. 30) focuses on the designers of play structures  rather than on the users, who are right in placing the safety of children ahead  of the artistic vision of architects.


Aide Charged In Sex Crimes As Fake Doctor
A Bronx medical technician gained the confidence of a 15-year-old girl and a  24-year-old woman by posing as a doctor, then sexually assaulted them, the authorities said yesterday.
The suspect, Efrain Vasquez, 41, drew blood samples, gave injections and administered breathing tests at a small storefront medical clinic in the Tremont section of the Bronx, activities for which he was licensed, according to the supervisor at the clinic.
But in the last two months, he told two patients he was a doctor, then sexually abused them, police officials and the Bronx District Attorney's office said.
Both incidents occurred in the examination room, where the victims were waiting for a doctor, the police said.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


In U.S. Sector, Warring Factions Meet on Bosnian Accord


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY


Deadline to Swap Tokens
In a few days, subway and bus riders will no longer be able to go to token booths to exchange old bull's-eye tokens for the new ones with a pentagonal cut-out that went into use with the Nov. 12 fare increase.
"Beginning New Year's Day, at 12:01 A.M., the bull's-eye token will only be redeemed here at Transit Authority headquarters at 370 Jay Street" in Brooklyn,  said Termaine Garden, an authority spokesman.


Sports of The Times;The Louts Get Their Just Reward
A GIANTS season ticket-holder from New Jersey was unable to use, or so he said, his five tickets to the Chargers game last Saturday.
So he made an announcement in his office: Anyone who wanted the tickets could have them for free.
One of his colleagues considered the offer. "You're overcharging," he said.


2 Agencies Merge In San Francisco
Two small San Francisco agencies, MacDaniels Henry &amp; Sproul and Zuckerman/Fernandes &amp; Partners, have merged to form Zuckerman Fernandes MacDaniels &amp; Sproul.
Terms were not disclosed.
MacDaniels Henry has 7 employees and billings estimated at $9 million from clients like Mexicana Airlines, while Zuckerman/Fernandes has 25 employees and billings estimated at $19 million from clients like Golden Pacific Brewing.


The Zipkin Estate
To The Home Section:
Christopher Mason's article concerning the liquidation of Jerome Zipkin's estate (Dec. 14) only serves to reinforce the condescending attitude of pompous  journalism.
He failed to report that the Dec. 2 auction in Dedham, Mass., grossed over $125,000 and garnered bids from across the country.
Instead, he focused on the "determinedly unglam orous" location of the sale that he did not  even attend.


Accounts
*
FSI International, Chaska, Minn., to Kamstra Communications Inc., Austin, Tex., and St.
Paul, to handle advertising and public relations for the producer  of semiconducter equipment, which were previously handled by various agencies on a project basis.
Billings have not been determined.


France Sets Off 5th Nuclear Test in Pacific
France detonated a nuclear blast in the South Pacific today, the fifth in a series of tests on two remote atolls that has drawn worldwide protests.
The explosion came at 12:30 P.M. local time on Mururoa Atoll, the public radio station France Info reported, quoting the Defense Ministry.


Calendar: Tours, Exhibits
New York 'Firsts' Big Onion Walking Tours; (212) 439-1090.


Justice O'Connor's Views Shun Dogma
To the Editor:
Re "Make Up Our Mind, Justice O'Connor" (Op-Ed, Dec. 26):


Cordis Stock Drops as Deal Is Delayed
Shares of the Cordis Corporation plunged 11 percent yesterday after Johnson &amp; Johnson delayed its $1.8 billion buyout of Cordis, a maker of medical devices.
But some Wall Street analysts said they doubted the deal was in danger.
Cordis shares fell $11.25, to $95.25, in Nasdaq trading after the companies released a one-paragraph statement saying Johnson &amp; Johnson would take an extra  month to examine Cordis's businesses.


Getting the Message in Physics-Speak
To the Editor:
In your Dec. 23 obituary of Dr.
Nathan Rosen, a renowned physicist, you referred to the Physical Review as "one of the most impenetrable periodicals in  the English language."


Stocks Mixed in Slow Day Amid Hope for a Rate Cut
Stocks were mixed yesterday in thin trading, amid continuing expectations that the Federal Reserve would again reduce interest rates.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which at one point gained more than 16 points, ended down 4.34 points, at 5,105.92.
The Nasdaq composite index dropped  1.24 points, to 1,048.13, but the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index inched up 0.23 point, to 614.53.


2 Die in Traffic Accident
Two teen-agers were killed and another was injured when their car struck a tree in Dover Township early Tuesday morning.
Law enforcement officials said 23  bags of heroin were found with the youths.
The driver, James P. Burke, 18, of Toms River, and his stepbrother, Ross Kosick, 19, of Manchester Township were killed in the crash, The Associated Press reported.
Joseph Britton, 16, who lived with Mr.
Kosick, was hospitalized at Kimball Medical Center in Lakewood, N.J.
His condition could not be determined.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17


Wild Dogs in the Streets
A pack of wild dogs has been roaming Woodbine's streets, the Cape May County  Health Department said yesterday.
Up to nine dogs, with an average weight of 50  pounds, have kept residents trapped in their homes, health officials said.
At least one poodle was killed by the pack.
TERRY PRISTIN


New York Manager of Daiwa Is Indicted in Cover-Up of Losses
A former manager of the New York branch of Daiwa Bank Ltd. was indicted yesterday on Federal charges that he conspired with other bank officials to defraud the Federal Reserve by helping to conceal $1.1 billion in trading losses at that office.
The former manager, Masahiro Tsuda, was also indicted on a separate charge by a Federal grand jury in Manhattan -- that he failed to report knowledge of a felony to law-enforcement officials.
If convicted on both counts, Mr.
Tsuda could face as long as eight years in prison and a fine of $500,000.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about a judge's appointment of receivers to monitor the finances of 18 waste-hauling companies accused of being part of a Mafia-dominated cartel misspelled the judge's surname at one point.
He is Walter M. Schackman, not Shackman, of State Supreme Court in Manhattan.


TIME WARNER BEGINS INTERACTIVE CABLE IN FLORIDA
Time Warner Inc. reached a long-desired goal yesterday of bringing its interactive digital cable television network to suburban users north of Orlando, Fla.
A spokesman said the company connected the last of the 4,000 test customers yesterday.
Time Warner's interactive network began a year ago, after a delay that caused critics to question whether the company could deliver on its promise to build the world's first interactive TV system.
The system provides users with movies, video games and sports on demand.
Customers can also order goods from about 10 retailers.
A spokesman, John Dunn, said that customers of the pilot project were told that they may experience some glitches.


Pension Board to Pay $100 Million for Failed Plans
The Federal agency that guarantees many private pension plans settled the largest class-action lawsuit ever brought against it today, agreeing to pay nearly $100 million to 40,000 retirees who were covered by pension plans that failed.
Today's settlement by the agency, the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, resolves cases involving 11,000 failed pension funds that imposed stricter rules than allowed by Federal law for the number of workers qualifying for benefits.
The pension agency had previously made payments only to workers who met the very strict standards set by these pension funds.


Market Forces Can't Drive Doctors' Decisions
To the Editor:
Re "Doctors Say H.M.O.'s Limit What They Can Tell Patients" (front page, Dec. 21): The first time I heard of "gag clauses" in H.M.O. contracts, I refused to believe it.
Would a society that had rebelled against government gag orders on physicians caring for pregnant women give such power to business?
Would physicians sign a document that placed such an encumbrance between them and their patients?
Apparently, I was wrong.


CHRONICLE
HARLEY BALDWIN owns the Oyster Bar, the Brand Hotel, the private Caribou Club and two shops where the belts he designs are sold, all in Aspen, Colo.
But today he is tackling something new: modeling.
He is to walk down a runway in the Ritz-Carlton hotel in Aspen late this afternoon dressed in ski wear -- what else would you wear there? -- as part of a benefit for the Aspen Art Museum.


Syracuse Returner Hurt
While the Clemson Tigers are mostly healthy and hitting the town before the Gator Bowl in Jacksonville, Fla., the Syracuse Orangemen have lost their No. 2 kick returner to an injured right knee.
Tailback KYLE McINTOSH, Syracuse's third-leading rusher, has a strained knee  ligament that will require surgery, Syracuse Coach PAUL PASQUALONI said yeterday.


THREE-DAY YEAST INFECTION DRUG APPROVED BY F.D.A.
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company said yesterday that it would begin to market in  the United States a nonprescription medication for yeast infections that takes three days to work instead of seven.
The medication, Femstat 3, is manufactured  by Roche Holding Ltd. of Switzerland, and was approved for nonprescription sales by the Food and Drug Administration last week.
P.&amp; G. said Femstat would be on store shelves by spring.
Femstat contains the antifungal agent butoconazole nitrate, available by prescription since 1986.
Ivy Kupec, a spokeswoman for the  F.D.A., said that some women with persistent yeast infections or other complicating diseases may still need the seven-day drug.


Ventritex Shares Fall After F.D.A. Ruling
The shares of Ventritex Inc. fell sharply in heavy trading yesterday, a day after the Food and Drug Administration said it had not approved the implantation of the company's heart regulating device in the chest area.
The shares fell as low as $18.375 before closing at $18.75, down $2, in Nasdaq trading.


A Right to Free Speech When Hate Is the Subject
On first acquaintance, Prof.
Bernard Cooper seems like a lovable little man.
Pacing abstractedly in the waiting room of a California law office in the opening scenes of "Denial," Peter Sagal's ambitious play at the Long Wharf Theater, he has an air of academic befuddlement and a nervous stammer that make you want to finish his sentences for him.
That instinct dies quickly.
When Cooper, played with disturbingly cheery conviction by Max Wright, finally spits out what he has to say, it is full-strength poison.
The editor of a newsletter called the Journal of Independent Inquiry, this ostensible milquetoast has devoted his life to the proposition that the Holocaust is a myth.
Another character in the play refers to him, quite accurately, as "Sieg heil, Mr. Chips."


Knicks Looking For Jumper Cables
The Knicks hope a four-day break between games has given them time to jump-start their offense.
Heading into Thursday night's home game against the Cleveland Cavaliers, the  Knicks have averaged just 93.1 points in their past six games, including five games of fewer than 100 points.
During that time, Patrick Ewing has complained about spending too much time on the perimeter.
Charles Smith has wondered about  his diminished playing time.
And a 21-point loss to Orlando has raised concern about the gap between the Knicks and the Magic, not to mention the Bulls.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BAB HOLDINGS INC., Chicago, the operator of the Big Apple Bagels store chain, signed a letter of intent to buy the trademark rights, wholesale accounts and other assets of the Brewster's Coffee Co., a coffee bean roasting company.
Terms were not disclosed.


K. H. Hofmann, 84, Expert on Synthesis Of Body Compounds
Klaus Heinrich Hofmann, University Professor emeritus of experimental medicine and biochemistry at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, died on Monday at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center.
He was 84 and lived in Mount Lebanon, Pa.
The cause was acute kidney failure, the Freyvogel Funeral Home in Pittsburgh  said.


Of Motels and Other Myths
A TOY train races around a bottle-shaped track in front of a glowing hearth:  that's the look of "Absolut Tradition" depicted in the holiday advertisement for a popular brand of vodka.
The picture is more complex than it looks at first glance.
A hearth symbolizes stability.
Trains represent mobility.
And the conflict between the moving and the fixed is a major modern predicament: the insistence on self-improvement frustrates the desire for roots.
Here are two books that handsomely illustrate that predicament, collections of photographs that serve the past up with a twist: "Mediterranean" (Aperture) by Mimmo Jodice  and "Home Away From Home" (Bulfinch Press) by John Margolies.
This being a season closely identified with childhood, some readers may be chagrined by a book on architecture that devotes a chapter to "Sleazebo Motels." On the other hand, there is something so endearingly innocent about Mr.
Margolies's presentation of roadside vice in his new book, an illustrated history of the American motel, that some readers may find themselves yearning for the kinder, simpler sleaze of yesteryear.


Florida Crops Survive
Temperatures fell below freezing again early today throughout much of Florida but the state's citrus and vegetable crops suffered little damage, growers said.
Early morning temperatures fell below freezing in northern and central Florida but lows in south Florida remained near 40.


Two Studies Link Easy-to-Cure Infection to the Risk of Premature Birth
A common, easy-to-cure female infection is responsible for about 6 percent of premature births, making it a major underlying cause of infant mortality, researchers say.
The condition, called bacterial vaginosis, affects up to one-quarter of pregnant women and can be eliminated with standard antibiotics.
But most women who are infected do not know they are.


Shift in Venezuela Drilling
Maraven S.A. said today that it would use new drilling technology to produce  as much as 74 million barrels of oil at Lake Maracaibo in northwest Venezuela.
Maraven, a unit of Petroleos de Venezuela S.A., the state oil company, said that 12 new wells using the technology had been drilled in the company's Lagomar field.
Maravan said the technology, which uses narrower bits, less packing and fewer seals, permits deeper drilling at less cost.
Maravan said it planned to drill 150 new Lagomar wells in the next 10 years.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt


Spacemen, Lost Souls and Toys in 1995's Best Films
This year's movies went to the moon or to the gutter without making enough successful stops in between.
It was a dismal time for big-budget Hollywood productions, which in some cases ("Waterworld," "Cutthroat Island") were almost  literally sinking ships.
But a thriving independent spirit salvaged an off year, creating an unusually diverse mixture of good work.
Pigs talked, toys walked, and Jane Austen was practically a pop star.
From political turmoil in Albania to a wild alcoholic haze in Las Vegas, films went places they hadn't been before.
The 10 best films of 1995:


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League


Bridge
Perhaps the most remarkable tournament performance of 1995, earning 15th place, and second place for women, in the National Player of the Year Race, was  that of Lila Perlstein of Roslyn Heights, L.I.
She won two national events and was runner-up in another while battling major health problems.
After finishing second in the Life Master Women's Pairs at the Fall Nationals in Atlanta last month she offered these four rules for playing with professional partners:


CHRONICLE
Despite reports that he was shattered by the death of his former partner, Dean Martin, on Monday, JERRY LEWIS opened in "Damn Yankees" in Denver on Tuesday with nary a hitch.
Mr.
Lewis, who plays the Devil in the musical, canceled a news conference on  Tuesday morning with less than two hours' notice and did not attend the cast party held at Morton's of Chicago in downtown Denver after the performance.


A Bar Admits Serving Youths Who Died
The corporate owner of a New Rochelle bar has pleaded guilty to serving alcohol illegally to six teen-agers the night two of them died in a 1994 car accident.
Garben Tavern Inc., which owns Gary's Barley Corn, made the plea in New Rochelle City Court on Tuesday, District Attorney Jeanine Pirro of Westchester County said.


Tenneco Set to Invest In Indonesia Power Plant
Tenneco Inc. plans to buy a 50 percent stake in an Indonesian gas-fired power plant and a 9.9 percent stake in the developer of the project, Energy Equity Ltd. of Australia.
Energy Equity said yesterday that Tenneco would pay 28 million Australian dollars ($20.74 million) for the half- interest in the power  project.
In June, Energy Equity received approval from the Indonesian Government to produce and sell gas from the Sengkang gas field in South Sulawesi.
The approval also cleared the way for the Australian company to develop a gas-fired  135 megawatt power station at Sengkang.(AP)


Mostar Assumes the Role of Phoenix
From the devastation wrought by relentless shelling a few years ago, the good life is poking through in eastern Mostar.
In early December, Sahadija Delaic opened a small boutique after laying polished Italian tiles on the floor of a building that had been demolished, like nearly every other building on the street.
Levis and Italian shirts are now displayed on glass shelves; a few winter parkas and an imitation fur coat -- price, 400 German marks, the currency of choice here -- hang on chrome-plated racks.


New Agency In St. Louis
Two former executives at the St.
Louis office of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles have opened an agency in that city, Waylon Ad.
Jim Palumbo, 45, is president at Waylon Ad, which is affiliated with the Waylon Company, a sales promotion agency with offices in St.
Louis and Cincinnati.
He is a former executive vice president and worldwide acccount director at D.M.B.&amp; B. Kipp Monroe, 38, who is vice president and creative director at Waylon Ad, is a former creative director at D.M.B.&amp; B. Waylon Ad is  working on assignments for U. S. Healthcare; two Anheuser-Busch brands, Busch and Natural Light, and the St.
Louis Cardinals.


Children Removed From Custody Of Man Charged in Abuse of Girl
The city's Child Welfare Administration has taken over custody of the two children of a Brooklyn man arrested Monday night in the beating of his 6-year-old daughter, law enforcement officials said yesterday.
The officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that the 3-year-old  son of the man, Jose Balbuena Sr., had been placed with a foster family, and that his injured sister, Yanin, would join him when she was released from Kings County Hospital Center.


Wyche and Bucs Say Enough Is Enough
By mutual agreement, Sam Wyche and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers parted company yesterday.
The coach's 23-41 record in four seasons with the National Football League's losingest team of the last 20 years suggested that neither side really  had a choice.
The dismissal came one day after the Arizona Cardinals dropped Buddy Ryan, whom the Buccaneers snubbed in 1992 to hire Wyche because of his reputation as a motivator and offensive innovator who had taken Cincinnati to a Super Bowl.


The Neediest Cases;Mother's Struggle to Improve Life for Her Family
As the second-oldest of 10 girls growing up in Trinidad, Bernadine T. always  felt unloved by her mother, who was hoping for a boy.
"My life has been going horrible ever since I was born," she said.


Payroll Tax Prospects Dim
Prospects for a payroll tax on Jersey City's businesses seem to be fading.
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman has joined local business leaders in opposing the tax, which cannot be imposed without legislation.
But now the long-established payroll tax in Newark may also be in jeopardy, even though the Governor supports it, according to her spokeswoman.
Walter Kavanaugh, Republican of Somerville, and the chairman of the Assembly Appropriations Committee, said on Tuesday that he is unwilling to approve a bill that allows Newark to renew its payroll tax but excludes Jersey City.
Losing the tax, which Newark has relied on for 25 years, would cost the city an estimated $26 million, state Senator Wynona Lipman, Democrat of Newark, said yesterday.


Where France's Bureaucratic Corps Gets Its Esprit
In a month of strikes by French transport workers and other public servants,  union leaders and others who blame the ruling elite for the heartlessness of Government austerity measures did not look far to find the root of all evil: the National School of Administration.
Behind cream-colored high walls in the Government quarter of Paris, this single institution has produced most of the technocrats who have run France for  the last 30 years.
Long hailed as the country's future, they are now increasingly denounced as arrogant know-it-alls who are out of touch with the real problems of ordinary people.


To Be Suddenly Part of a Very Big Family Tree
I NEVER had any trouble picturing myself scaling a Himalayan peak or kayaking in the Arctic Ocean.
But the one place I could never see myself was posing for a big family photograph.
The idea of a picture crowded with rows and rows of relatives, generation after generation, was just too remote.
That was for the Queen of England, not for me.
My family was small -- tiny, in fact.
Or so I thought.


Bullets' Webber Scores 40
Bullets 115, Warriors 94


Fannie Mae to Buy Back 9% of Its Common Stock
The Federal National Mortgage Association said today that it would buy back as much as 9 percent of its common stock in one of this year's largest buybacks.
The company, better known as Fannie Mae, said it would also split its common  stock on a four-for-one basis and give three million shares to its charitable foundation, taking a $350 million fourth-quarter charge to do so.


CIRRUS LOGIC LOWERS EXPECTATIONS AGAIN
For the second time in two months, Cirrus Logic Inc. yesterday sharply lowered its earnings estimate for the current quarter.
The computer equipment company, based in Fremont, Calif., predicted earnings of 13 cents to 19 cents a  share for its third quarter, which ends on Saturday.
Analysts had expected earnings of 46 cents a share.
In November, Cirrus said operating profits would be as much as 15 percent below those in the second quarter, because a customer cut its order.
Yesterday, the company cited reduced demand in Taiwan and in the  home PC market for specialty graphics and audio chips.
The announcement was made after the markets closed.
Earlier, Cirrus shares fell 75 cents, to $26.875, in Nasdaq trading.
Yesterday's forecast was for revenue of $290 million to $300 million, a decline from $318 million in the second quarter.
In November, the company said revenue would grow 3 to 5 percent in this quarter.


In Okinawa Rape Trial, a Plea From 2 Mothers
On what was to have been the final day of the trial of three American servicemen accused of raping a 12-year-old Japanese girl, the mothers of two defendants asked today to have the trial moved off Okinawa.
Saying the Governor, Masahide Ota, and others had linked the case to the antagonism toward United States bases on the island, the two mothers argued that there might be a bias against their sons.


All Eyes On Phillips As Huskers Get Ready
The reinstatement of Lawrence Phillips will be completed here next Tuesday night, ending a long and controversial legal and political process at the University of Nebraska that began soon after Phillips assaulted his former girlfriend three and a half months ago.
When undefeated Nebraska meets undefeated Florida in the Fiesta Bowl in the Cornhuskers' attempt to become the first undisputed repeat national champions in 39 years, Phillips will be the starting I-back for the first time since the weekend his actions changed forever his Nebraska career and the national perception of Coach Tom Osborne's team.


French Say 2 Cult Members Shot Others
Two French police officers who belonged to a doomsday cult killed 14 drugged  members, then committed suicide after setting themselves and the others on fire, a prosecutor said today.
The charred bodies of 14 members of the Solar Temple cult, including three young girls, were found on Saturday in a forest outside Grenoble.
Their bodies were arranged in a star shape.


Palestinians Take Control Of Ramallah
Under a final cascade of stones, Israeli troops withdrew today from Ramallah, completing a pullout from six West Bank cities and their neighboring villages in preparation for Palestinian elections next month.
"Out!," shouted youths as a column of Israeli jeeps moved away from a police  station downtown, trailed by scores of cheering Palestinians.
As stones pitched  by the crowd arched toward the receding vehicles, Palestinian officers entered the station, raised a flag and greeted the throng from the roof, waving their rifles.


Record $275 Million Spent By City for Court Awards
New York City paid a record $275 million to settle lawsuits and other claims  for the 1994 fiscal year, according to a report released yesterday by City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi.
The report attributed the total in part to a program started by state courts  to clear some of the cases against the city that had lingered for years.
The program closed about 750 backlogged cases, costing the city about $43 million.
Last year, the city paid $247 million in claims.


Al Barlick, Umpire, 80
Al Barlick, whose calls of balls and strikes in major league baseball games were among the loudest in umpiring history, died of cardiac arrest at Memorial Medical Center today.
He was 80.
Barlick collapsed at his home in Springfield and died after being taken to the medical center.


Natural Gas Price Leaps 16% On Prediction of Frigid Weather
Futures prices for natural gas soared 16 percent yesterday as traders became  increasingly concerned about falling supplies and below-normal temperatures through much of the country.
"People are concerned about the natural gas supply, and they're not afraid to buy it and really drive the market higher," said Tony Lerner, chief energy trader at Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.


Williams Makes Case For More Court Time
Jayson Williams is trying to stay open-minded.
Williams, the Nets' sixth-year center, is the National Basketball Association's leading offensive rebounder and fifth over all, yet he still gets modest playing time.
"I can't question the authority," Williams said late Tuesday, after he had played only 18 minutes in the Nets' 96-93 loss to the Miami Heat.
"If I start doing it, everybody will.


3 Children Die in Blaze Linked to a Drug Lab
Three young children died and their mother was critically burned on Tuesday in an explosion and fire that investigators said might have started in an illegal drug laboratory set up in their mobile home.
The authorities said they suspected that the trailer was one of the laboratories for making methamphetamine, or speed, that are often found in desert and rural areas of Southern California.
Officials said they were not surprised that children were in the house.


Ontario Stores Sell on Holiday
Many Ontario retailers were open during the Boxing Day holiday on Tuesday in  defiance of a provincial law forbidding them to do so, The Globe and Mail reported today.
Retailers looking to make up for sluggish pre-Christmas sales risked as much  as $50,000 Canadian in fines ($36,800) under the province's 20-year old Retail Business Holiday Act, the paper said.


Gallaudet U. Gets Bequest Of Stranger
It was sometime in the 1950's when Olive Swindells first told a neighbor on her suburban Baltimore block that when she died, she planned to leave whatever she had left to Gallaudet University, the school for the deaf in Washington.
"Of course, she didn't have any money then," the neighbor, Hilda Brewer, recalled yesterday.


Rewiring for New Year's Eve


Between Brothers
To The Home Section:
The article on the warm relations between two young brothers (Close to Home,  Dec. 14) was the most beautiful and warm article I have ever read.


Mexico's 'Accidental' Chief Spurns Role of Strongman
The tall pines for which Mexico's presidential mansion is named filter the midday sunlight and cast gentle, dancing shadows.
But such tranquillity is deceptive because inside Los Pinos a struggle is raging over the Mexican presidency and, in large part, Mexico itself.
Economic disarray, official corruption, an unresolved Indian uprising and several unsolved killings have pushed Mexico to what some here say is the brink  of the most serious crisis of state since the 1910 revolution.


RESULTS PLUS


Mercedes-Benz Sales Up More Than 2% in '95
Mercedes-Benz A.G. said yesterday that its sales rose 2 percent in 1995, but  the strength of the German mark cut more than 1 billion marks from the company's earnings.
Mercedes said that of the 72 billion marks ($50.3 billion) worth of sales recorded in 1995, passenger cars contributed more than 40 billion marks.
In terms of units, car sales dropped 2 percent, to about 580,000, from 592,000 in 1995, while truck sales rose 10 percent, to 320,000, the company said.
The company predicted worldwide car sales would rise to 600,000 in 1996 and truck sales would top 330,000 units. (AP)


U.S. General Has Talks on Bosnian Accord
In a bombed-out guest house covered with snow and surrounded by mines, Maj.
Gen.
William L. Nash gathered military leaders of the three warring factions here today to talk together for the first time about how they will comply with the NATO-enforced peace agreement.
The hourlong meeting in this front-line village was largely symbolic: The hotel and restaurant, with its toppled brick arches and bullet-battered walls, is part of the Serbian defense position along the road that will carry Americans soldiers from Croatia throughout the sector that will be patrolled by the American contingent.


Patric Knowles, of 'Robin Hood' And 'Light Brigade,' Dies at 84
Patric Knowles, a patrician British actor who was a co-star of the 1936 film  "The Charge of the Light Brigade" and had roles in more than 80 other movies, died on Saturday at a hospital in suburban Woodland Hills, Calif.
He was 84.
He was born Reginald Lawrence Knowles in 1911 in Horsforth, England.
He left  school to enter his father's publishing house and eventually joined the repertory group of the Playhouse Theater in Oxford.


People
*
Ken Pearl was named publisher of Computer Life magazine, San Francisco, published by the Ziff-Davis Publishing unit of Forstmann Little &amp; Co.
He succeeds James Stafford, who left to join Softbank Expositions, Foster City, Calif., a unit of the Softbank Corp., as vice president for on-line development.
Mr.
Pearl was previously publisher of Computer Retail Week magazine, San Francisco, owned by CMP Publications.
CMP has promoted Keith Newman, associate publisher and editor in chief, to succeed Mr.
Pearl.


For On-Off-On-Off Art Show, a Dab of Luck Is the Ticket
Sheila Cooper had one of those days today that might encourage a person to buy a lottery ticket.
Long ago, she got a ticket to see the Vermeer exhibition at the National Gallery of Art and had planned to stay here just one day while on her return from Egypt to the University of Indiana, where she is associate dean of the graduate school.


A Difficult Year for Clubs and Those Who Love Them
This has been a rough year for live-music clubs in Manhattan.
More than half  a dozen club owners (including those at Wetlands and Fat Tuesday's) have put up  for sale, sold or closed their spaces.
Other entrepreneurs trying to open clubs  have found themselves stalled, no further in their plans today than they were last January.
For concertgoers, a lack of competition can result in rising ticket prices, less attention paid to audience comfort, fewer opportunities to see new bands and, quite simply, a less interesting night life.


Eagles Coach Pondering 2 Teams and a Baby
Ray Rhodes guided his Philadelphia Eagles to a 10-6 record and a playoff berth this season and was even voted National Football League coach of the year.
But forces of nature have converged to sap all of Rhodes's enjoyment out of these accomplishments.
As the Eagles prepare for the Detroit Lions -- Philadelphia's first playoff game since 1992 -- Rhodes is faced with the prospects of Babygate II and Snowball Blitz II.


Investors Complete Deal To Buy Canary Wharf
A consortium of North American, Swiss and Middle East investors completed their purchase of the giant Canary Wharf complex in London yesterday.
The completion of the deal was announced by Lloyds Bank, the leader of a group of bank lenders that owned the property.
The price was not disclosed.
The deal was  first announced Oct. 2.
The consortium, known as the International Property Corporation, is led by the Canadian developer Paul Reichmann and includes Prince al-Waleed bin Talal of Saudi Arabia; the Swiss banker Edmond Safra; the CNA Financial Corporation, a unit of Laurence A. Tisch's Loews Corporation, and Mutual Series Fund Inc., which is managed by Michael Price.
Mr.
Reichmann's company, Olympia &amp; York, built Canary Wharf in the 1980's only to lose it to bank lenders in 1992. (AP)


Executive Changes


Forte Selling Budget Hotels To Whitbread
Forte P.L.C. of Britain, taking another big step in its defense against a hostile takeover bid by the Granada Group P.L.C., announced plans today to sell  its restaurants and budget hotels in Britain to Whitbread P.L.C. for L1.05 billion ($1.62 billion).
Forte, trying to show shareholders that it can raise cash from the company's  holdings faster than Granada, has recently raised about $1.7 billion through asset sales.


TRANSCRIPT SERVICES SETTLE CHARGES WITH F.T.C.
The nation's two largest producers of verbatim news transcripts have reached  a settlement with the Federal Trade Commission on charges that they had an anti-competition agreement.
The F.T.C. said yesterday it was approving a consent agreement with the Reuters America unit of Reuters Holdings P.L.C. and with Federal News Service Group Inc. and its president, Cortes W. Randell.
The F.T.C. said the agreement did not constitute an admission of guilt.
Washington-based Federal News Service denied that there were any anti-competitive results from its agreement with Reuters.
A spokesman at Reuters headquarters in New York did  not return a telephone call.


Bernard Yoh, 74, Lecturer on Warfare
Bernard Yoh, a lecturer on psychological warfare and former underground fighter in China and Vietnam, died on Monday at a nursing home in Bethesda, Md.
He was 74 and lived in Rockville, Md.
He suffered a stroke, according to Accuracy in Media, a conservative media watchdog organization of which he was director of communications.


AT HOME WITH: Amy Tan;In the Country of the Spirits
THERE are two sides to Amy Tan, and they start with her appearance.
She looks neat and well organized, but she adds a swath of color to her carefully trimmed black hair (she calls it her wild streak, and it is sometimes  magenta).


Giants Express Regrets Over Snowball Throwers
The Giants are taking out a full-page advertisement that will appear in a San Diego newspaper to apologize to the Chargers and their fans for the ugly afternoon of snowball and ice-ball throwing during the regular-season finale last Saturday at Giants Stadium.
Also, the fan who appeared in a widely published photograph that showed him throwing a snowball from the stands was identified yesterday by the Giants, who  passed his name on to the New Jersey State Police.
He was identified as Jeffrey  Lange, 26, of Bridgewater, N.J., Jim Gray of the state police said.


Canadian Agency Is Accused of Spying on Citizens and Allies
It looks like any other nondescript Government building, in a city full of them, until you notice that the nine-foot-high fence surrounding it is topped with barbed wire and there is only one way to get in -- through what looks like  a guardhouse.
The four-story Sir Leonard Tilley Building, named after an obscure 19th-century Canadian Finance Minister, houses Canada's most secretive intelligence agency, the Communications Security Establishment, a remnant of the dusky world of cold-war electronic espionage.


Eccentricity as the Mother of Invention
This is the week in which the dreary side of television gets even drearier.
Viewer levels are traditionally low as a good many people spend time with one another instead of dozing in front of a piece of furniture, and network schedules are stuffed with reruns and throwaways.
For children, there are animated features made decades ago.
Grown-ups can find a version of Handel's "Messiah" on public television that was taped at Westminster Abbey in 1982.
Tonight at 10, ABC dips into its 1990 files for a "World of Discovery" documentary called "Inventors: Out of Their Minds," produced by Kane Productions International in association with ABC.
This is obviously recycling on the cheap.
What we have is a year-end tribute to American ingenuity, which needs all the tribute it can get nowadays.


Defining Circumcision
To the Editor:
Barry Ellsworth (letter, Dec. 19) equates male and female circumcision.
The term "female circumcision" is a misnomer.
This practice, more accurately known as female genital mutilation (FGM), involves the cutting of the clitoris and, in the more drastic forms, all external genitalia.
The male equivalent of even the  less severe forms of FGM would be castration, not circumcision.


Seoul Still Rules Out Aid for North Korea
Brushing aside the release of five captured seaman, South Korea today ruled out resuming rice aid to North Korea unless Pyongyang changes its attitude toward Seoul.
"There is no change in our Government's position," Deputy Unification Minister Song Young Dae said.
"For additional rice assistance, there must be a change in North Korea's attitude toward us. The return of the Woosung crew should not be seen as a change in North Korea's basic attitude."


Al DeRogatis, 68, Sports Broadcaster
Al DeRogatis, a former defensive tackle for the New York Giants who achieved  considerable popularity and recognition through his keen analysis of pro football games on radio and television, died of cancer on Tuesday at the Jersey  Shore Medical Center.
He was 68.
In 1960, when pro football was on the upswing across the nation and the Giants were the darlings of New York, DeRogatis began his broadcasting career for WNEW-AM, working with Marty Glickman on Giant games.
After six years, he moved to television and worked alongside Curt Gowdy on NBC telecasts of the N.F.L.
Game of the Week.


Large Increase In Deportations Occurred in '95
Responding to a rising tide of anti-immigration sentiment, the Clinton Administration said today that the number of illegal aliens deported this year was a record 51,600, up 15 percent from 1994 and up nearly 75 percent from 1990.
Most of the increase came from deportations of criminals who are illegal aliens.
Nearly 62 percent of those deported this year were prison inmates who were expelled after serving their sentences, up from 52.6 percent in 1991 and 4  percent in 1986.


A Non-Black Player Joins Globetrotters
ORLANDO ANTIGUA, a former University of Pittsburgh player, joined the Harlem  Globetrotters yesterday as the first non-black on the team in 52 years.
Antigua, 22, played at Pittsburgh from 1991-1995, scoring more than 900 points.
The 6-foot-7-inch, 210-pound forward also collected 192 assists, 400 rebounds and 74 steals in 113 career games for the Panthers.


TENNECO DROPS PLAN TO SELL STAKE IN GAS PIPELINE
Tenneco Inc. of Houston said yesterday that it was abandoning plans to sell its 50 percent stake in a natural gas pipeline to the Questar Corporation of Salt Lake City because Federal regulators objected to the deal.
The Federal Trade Commission had threatened to seek a court order blocking the deal, saying  it would give Questar a monopoly on natural gas delivered to the Salt Lake City  market.
Questar agreed in September to pay $225 million for Tenneco Energy's stake in the 904-mile Kern River pipeline.
Tenneco said it would reopen bidding  rather than challenge the F.T.C. in court.


New Therapy for Throat Tumors Approved
The Food and Drug Administration today approved a new therapy for throat tumors that destroys cancerous cells with simple light.


COTT PLANS TO BUY BACK UP TO 10% OF ITS SHARES
The Cott Corporation said yesterday that it had filed with the Toronto Stock  Exchange to buy back up to 4.02 million, or 10 percent, of its common shares over the next 12 months.
Shares of Cott, a Toronto-based maker of private-label  soft drinks and food, have declined 46 percent from a year ago, amid disappointing earnings.
Cott's shares rose 25 cents (Canadian) yesterday, to $7.50, on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
The shares were up 31.25 cents (United States), to $5.4375 in Nasdaq trading.
Cott said last month that it would take a pretax charge of $40 million (Canada), or $29.6 million (United States), to cut  jobs, close offices, write down inventories and sell some assets.


GANDER MOUNTAIN TO SELL ITS CATALOGUE OPERATION
Gander Mountain Inc., the financially troubled retailer of outdoor sports and recreation equipment, intends to sell its catalogue operation, which accounts for about two-thirds of the company's sales, to Cabela's Inc.
Terms of the deal  with Cabela's, a privately held retailer based in Sidney, Neb., were not disclosed.
The transaction, which was announced yesterday after the close of stock trading, would leave Gander with 17 retail stores in the Midwest.
The catalogue operation had sales of $202.3 million in the 1995 fiscal year, which ended June 30, up from $181.7 million the previous year.
Gander, which is based  in Wilmot, Wis., lost $10.8 million in its 1995 fiscal year. (AP)


Yankees Get Leadoff Man In Raines
The Yankees yesterday announced the acquisition of Tim Raines in a move that  incorporated two of their favorite pastimes: making a deal with the George Steinbrenner-friendly Chicago White Sox and making the announcement on a delayed basis.
The trade the Yankees said they made in exchange for vague "future considerations" gives the team a 36-year-old leadoff hitter who should add the stolen base to an offense that has grievously lacked it.
The Yankees' 50 stolen  bases were the fewest in the major leagues last season.


Santa Maria del Tule Journal;Grand Old Tree Has Nothing to Fear but Mexico
The enormous tree that dwarfs the Church of the Assumption and everything else in this town inspires legend.
It is said that 500 years ago, soon after the conquistadors arrived, lightning struck the already gigantic ahuehuete tree called Tule and gouged a hole in it large enough for a man on a horse to ride through.


Sounds Around Town: On New Year's Eve
Here are choices by pop critics of The New York Times of New Year's Eve celebrations that were not sold out at press time. (An introduction appears on page C1.)


That Warhol Factory
To the Editor:
Re "Why Not a Detroit 'Acropolis'?" (letter, Dec. 17): We at the Andy Warhol  Museum are in fact happily ensconced not in an old mattress factory but in a former industrial space, the Frick &amp; Lindsay Company's 1911 building, beautifully refurbished by Richard Gluckman.
Frick &amp; Lindsay distributed supplies for oil wells, mills and mines.
The building is a simple, early American industrial structure.
It has a lovely Beaux-Arts terra cotta facade.


A. Sydney Herlong Jr., 86, Florida Congressman
A.
Sydney Herlong Jr., who spent 20 years in Congress as a conservative Democrat and was then appointed by President Richard M. Nixon to the Securities  and Exchange Commission, died on Wednesday at his home in Leesburg, Fla.
He was  86.
Mr.
Herlong became an influential member of the House Ways and Means Committee in a Congressional career that began with his election in 1948 and ended when he chose not to seek re-election in 1968.
He regarded as perhaps his  most significant accomplishment his successful lobbying to bring the Kennedy Space Center to Brevard County in Florida.


What New Yorkers Wore When (The Wealthier Ones, Anyway)
It is always rewarding when one of New York City's lower-profile museums pulls out all the stops, startling the public with a renewed sense of its hidden treasures.
Such is the start provided by the Museum of the City of New York with its fashion-as-history exhibition, "Uncommon Threads: 300 Years of New York Style." Call it an extravaganza on a shoestring.
This crowded, unpredictable, almost mind-bogglingly rich show presents the tip of the iceberg, if not the creme de la creme of the museum's extensive costume collection.
It ranges through garments of all description: sumptuous evening dresses, handsome costumes for opera and theater, and everyday clothing  from pre-Revolutionary to post-hippie times. (Thus, for example, among the exhibition's opening cluster of mannequins, a Quaker dress from the 1840's nearly rubs shoulders with a pair of bell-bottom pants topped by a T-shirt printed with tattoo designs.)


Shura Cherkassky, 84, Pioneer of Romantic School, Dies
Shura Cherkassky, a Ukrainian-born, London-based pianist whose individualistic interpretive style and affinity for dazzling virtuoso showpieces made him one of the last exponents of the great Romantic keyboard tradition, died on Wednesday at the Royal Brompton Hospital in London.
He was 84.
Mr.
Cherkassky was a small, gnomic figure who could seem unprepossessing and  at times self-effacing in interviews and who routinely brushed off his reviews,  both positive and negative.
He declared himself wholly unfit to teach and described his musical education as sketchy, particularly in the realm of music theory.


Row Houses Destroyed in Camden


2 British Banks Finish Merger
Shares of Lloyds TSB Group P.L.C. began trading as the merger of Lloyds Bank  P.L.C. and TSB Group P.L.C. bank, a deal valued at L13 billion, or $20.1 billion, became effective.
The marriage of Lloyds and TSB to form the largest retail bank in Britain, with L150 billion in assets, was the largest of several mergers and takeovers among British financial institutions this year.


Olympia &amp; York to Halt Some Payments
The Olympia &amp; York Companies USA said yesterday that its units that own two of the company's buildings would suspend payments on their $970 million of floating-rate notes.
The company, one of New York's largest landlords, said the companies that own 1290 Avenue of the Americas and 237 Park Avenue in midtown Manhattan also received New York City permission to defer semiannual real estate tax payments due next month.


Abroad at Home;The Big Lie
The House Republicans who have closed much of the Government for two weeks say they are doing it to assure a balanced budget.
Only their plans, they say -- ending Federal welfare and Medicaid and gutting many other programs -- will return us to fiscal sanity.
"We believe this is an historic struggle," one of the Republican freshmen, Representative Ron Lewis of Kentucky, said, "perhaps our last great chance to stop robbing our children."


Times Co. Makes Three Executive Appointments
management positions yesterday.
Frank R. Gatti, the company's vice president and corporate controller, has been named to the new position of vice president for financial management.


2 Men Held in Attempt to Bomb I.R.S. Office
Federal officials announced today that they had arrested a pair of disgruntled taxpayers in the attempted bombing of an Internal Revenue Service office in Reno earlier this month.
The two men, Ellis Edward Hurst and Joseph Martin Bailie, were taken this afternoon for an initial appearance before a Federal magistrate in Reno after being arrested near their homes in Gardnerville, Nev., a ranching community about 45 miles south of Reno.


Corrections
A biographical sketch of Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana yesterday referred incorrectly in some editions to the date of his arrival in the Senate.
It was 1977; his election occurred in 1976.


At Swearing-In Ceremony, A Judge Snubs the Mayor
Beneath the current political debate swirling around the appointment of city  judges are two men with lives, families and feelings, and one of those two judges -- subjected to an extraordinary demotion and public humiliation by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani this month -- could not withhold those feelings in a painful moment yesterday at City Hall.
Judge Eugene L. Schwartzwald, a 19-year veteran of the Criminal Court, was required to come to City Hall to be sworn in for the one-year probationary term  assigned him by the Mayor rather than the 10-year term he had been expecting.
But when the Mayor came around to congratulate each of the 15 judges, Mr.
Schwartzwald defiantly turned his back and refused to shake hands with the man who had belittled his "intellectual capacity" a few days before.


World News Briefs;Fasting Ex-Korea Chief Is Put on Life Support
Former President Chun Doo Hwan, who told aides he would rather die in jail than seek leniency on criminal charges, was put on a life-support system today,  the 25th day of a hunger strike.
"His condition abruptly deteriorated early today, and there was a danger of his slipping into a coma," said Kim Kwon Jun, a doctor at the National Police Hospital.
Mr.
Chun, 64, was transferred to the hospital from jail on Dec. 20 after becoming too weak to drink water.


Foreigners Flock to Slopes to Work, Not Ski
Snowshoes adorned the ski chalet wall, a snow-clad Rocky Mountain peak dominated the bay window, and Sidy Ba paused in his cleaning chores to talk about the mountains back home.
"In Mauritania, we have mountains, too, but it's the desert, the Sahara," the 32-year housekeeper said, his body lithe and his French precarious, since he rarely used his second language during a nomadic youth spent herding goats along the Senegal River in West Africa.


Corrections
A brief article by Reuters in some editions yesterday about an extradition case against a former Mexican official held in the United States referred incorrectly to action taken on Tuesday by a judge in Newark.
The judge postponed a decision on an application by the Mexican, Mario Ruiz Massieu, for bail; the judge did not deny bail.


Smith Is Thinking Trade
If the Knicks are going to make a trade, Charles Smith wishes they would do it soon.
And if he is included in the deal, Smith said he can handle it.
"If it's me, we can do it mutually and not play games," said Smith after last night's 86-76 loss to Cleveland.
"I'm not as optimistic as I've been in the past. If it is me, it might be better for both of us. It's not that I'm unhappy. It's a little frustrating."


Presley Goal Lifts Rangers
Wayne Presley's power-play goal midway through the second period broke a 2-2  tie, and goalie Mike Richter stopped 20 shots, to propel the Rangers to a 3-2 victory tonight over the Vancouver Canucks at G.M.
Place.
Presley drilled a 25-foot wrist shot past Vancouver goaltender Kirk McLean after a beautiful lead pass from defenseman Bruce Driver.


Answering the March's Call;More Community Involvement by Black Men
After the march, one man was so moved that he joined a church in Harlem and committed himself to helping its young members.
Another decided to organize a group of men to adopt a high school in the Bronx, to instill images of successful black men in students' minds.
A teen-ager, shy beforehand, was emboldened to set his sights on becoming an actor.
More than two months have passed since a group of 51 men boarded a chartered  Tour Kings bus outside Wells Restaurant in Harlem in the predawn chill of Oct. 16 to attend the Million Man March in Washington.
And now that the huge crowd, the passionate speeches and the feeling of camaraderie are just memories, many of the men who rode together on that bus say they are answering, in their own ways, the march's call for black men to take more responsibility for their communities.


Stocks Drift Lower in Another Slow Day
The stock market drifted lower yesterday in slow and somewhat aimless trading.
"The day was quiescent," said Edwin D. Walczak, chief investment officer of Vontobel U.S.A., describing the inactivity among traders.
"You could call it a day of gestation in anticipation of vacation."


Adding More Glitter to New Year's Eve


Paine Webber Is Again Target of Rumor
Perhaps bored during what is traditionally a slow week on Wall Street, the handful of traders, brokers and bankers still at their desks yesterday seized on a comment made a month ago during an analysts' meeting and turned it into speculation that Dean Witter, Discover &amp; Company had its eye on Paine Webber Group Inc.
Never mind that Paine Webber has topped the list of most likely acquisitions  in the securities industry for years.


Evolution's Role in Dictating Our Artistic Tastes
In recent years, we have become accustomed to thinking of science and art as  belonging to completely separate realms: the objective and subjective, the real  and metaphorical.
While the first focuses on the rules and regularities of Nature -- its symmetries and rhythms -- the second tends to celebrate inventiveness, idiosyncrasy and the exceptional.
"Science and art have diverged," writes John D. Barrow in his new book.
"As science became more successful in its quest to explain the seen by unseen laws of Nature, so art became increasingly subjective, metaphorical and divorced from realistic representations. It explored other worlds, leaving science to deal with this one."
In "The Artful Universe," Mr.
Barrow, a professor of astronomy at the University of Sussex and the author of "Pi in the Sky," "Theories of Everything" and other books, proposes to examine the hidden connections remaining between science and art, the concealed roots that our esthetic likes and dislikes have in the world of Nature and our evolutionary past.
The result is a highly discursive book filled with both intriguing asides and highly vexing digressions.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Gingrich Won't Compromise On Reopening Government The House Speaker, Newt Gingrich, on the eve of scheduled negotiations with President Clinton to balance the budget, said that until an accord was reached,  Republicans would not agree to any temporary measures to reopen shuttered Government offices.


Insurance Rates Questioned
New Jersey's three-year-old health insurance law, which was designed to make  coverage more affordable, has drawn complaints from some people who are self-employed.
They have said that the 1992 law penalizes them by forcing them to buy individual policies at higher rates, which in certain cases are rising by $1,000 or more a year, said State Senator Gerald Cardinale, Republican of Demarest.
He sponsored a bill, sent to Governor Whitman, that would authorize the State Department of Insurance to ascertain whether the complaints are justified  and require a change in the law.


Filofax, 80's Talisman, Thrives in Too-Busy 90's
It was both celebrated and mocked during the 1980's as the essential yuppie accouterment, the repository of all information needed to keep a go-go life in Britain going.
But the Filofax, or at least the London-based company that makes the notebook-like personal organizer, Filofax Group P.L.C., ended the last decade much like the caricature of the young urban professional: overextended, chastened and facing a much harsher business environment.


Arts in Review
'Worlds Seen and Imagined' 'Japanese Screens From the Idemitsu Museum of Arts,' Part 2 The Asia Society Galleries 725 Park Avenue (at 70th Street) Through Jan. 7


Publisher's Profit Falls
Sing Tao Holdings said yesterday that its net profit fell almost 90 percent in its fiscal first half, which ended on Sept. 30.
The company, which publishes  Chinese-language newspapers in Hong Kong, Europe, the United States and Australia, as well as English-language papers, reported that its profit after tax and minority interests was $20.69 million Hong Kong ($2.68 million United States), compared with $194.22 million Hong Kong a year earlier.
(Bloomberg Business News)


KLM Sues Northwest Air
Northwest Airlines said its largest shareholder, KLM Royal Dutch Airlines, had challenged the validity of its "poison pill" takeover defense in Delaware Chancery Court.
The poison pill limits KLM's ability to exercise stock options it got in return for helping Northwest avoid bankruptcy court in 1993.


Judge Shows His Anger At Demotion by Mayor
A longtime judge whose intellect was questioned by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani  refused to shake the Mayor's hand at a City Hall ceremony and later angrily attacked the Mayor.
The judge, Eugene L. Schwartzwald, was required to go to City Hall to be sworn in to a probationary judgeship after being demoted by the Mayor.
After the ceremony, the judge called Mr.
Giuliani's comments on his abilities an "outrage," saying, "I tried 50 to 100 felony cases when he was still in junior high school in britches."


Holiday Weekend Fun
Here is a sampling of holiday events this weekend in the three-state region.
Unless noted, events are free.
Churches accept donations.


Whitewater Panel Issues New Subpoenas
The Senate Whitewater committee issued another round of subpoenas today, seeking documents related to the failed real estate venture that has plagued President Clinton for several years.
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, the New York Republican who heads the committee,  announced that 16 subpoenas had been served on both banking institutions and people, including Gov.
Jim Guy Tucker of Arkansas, James B. McDougal and Mr.
McDougal's former wife, Susan.
All three have been indicted in connection with a savings and loan involved in the Whitewater real estate venture.
That savings and loan, Madison Guaranty, went bankrupt later.


Money Poured Into Funds In November
As several stock indexes surged to new highs last month, American investors poured more money into stock and bond mutual funds than at any time since January 1994, shortly before equity prices stalled and bond prices plunged.
According to figures released yesterday by a mutual fund trade group, the Investment Company Institute, Americans continued to use their mutual fund investments to chase the best-performing categories of assets, evidently putting aside fears that the prices of these sometimes volatile investments might drop.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in Manhattan that are to close soon:


Cirrus Shares Fall as Outlook Slips for Profits
Shares of Cirrus Logic Inc. fell 26 percent yesterday after the company said  its third-quarter earnings would not meet analyst expectations because of slow sales to companies that make home computers.
The announcement was the second cut of Cirrus's earnings estimate in two months and it raised investor concerns that tough competition in audio and video computer chips would hurt the company's results for several quarters.


A Sober New Year Promoted
New Jerseyans are being encouraged to welcome the New Year without alcohol under a program called First Night that will offer street festivals, art exhibits and cultural events in 10 communities in the state Sunday night.
Last year, 150,000 adults and children participated in First Night, said Paul Ellis,  executive director of First Night in Montclair.
Other communities that received $1,500 grants from the state to hold First Night celebrations are Flemington, Manasquan, Morristown, Oakland, Ocean City, Ridgewood, South Orange/Maplewood, Summit and Toms River.


Clinton Vetoes Military Authorization Bill
President Clinton vetoed the 1996 military authorization bill today, arguing  that it would force the creation of a costly and unnecessary missile defense system that could violate the 1972 antiballistic missile treaty and derail arms  control efforts.
At the same time, in an effort to preserve an element of the bill that he supports, the President issued an executive order raising military pay by 2 percent -- the most he is allowed to do on his own.
He asked Congress to pass a  bill promptly to bring the total increase to 2.4 percent, the amount in the bill he vetoed.


Sounds Around Town: On New Year's Eve
Here are choices by pop critics of The New York Times of New Year's Eve celebrations that were not sold out at press time. (An introduction appears on page C1.)


Ralph Demmler, 91, Chairman Of the S.E.C. Under Eisenhower
Ralph H. Demmler, who served as chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission during the first two years of the Eisenhower Administration, died in  Pittsburgh on Saturday.
He was 91.
A lawyer, Mr.
Demmler began his practice in Pittsburgh in 1928.
A specialist  in corporate banking law, he joined the law firm Reed Smith Shaw &amp; McClay in 1943 and was elected a partner in 1948.


Playoffs Will Air Things Out
The next Super Bowl champion will be like all of the rest, right?
Familiar with that old formula?
Champions run the ball and stop the run, right?
Wrong.


A 120-Year Lease on Life Outlasts Apartment Heir
Andre-Francois Raffray thought he had a great deal 30 years ago: He would pay a 90-year-old woman 2,500 francs (about $500) a month until she died, then move  into her grand apartment in a town Vincent van Gogh once roamed.
But this Christmas, Mr.
Raffray died at age 77, having laid out the equivalent of more than $184,000 for an apartment he never got to live in.


CHRONICLE
THOMAS HAMPSON, the baritone who is accustomed to being at center stage, will certainly be there at the concert "I Hear America Singing" on Jan. 7 at Town Hall.
He is the mastermind and artistic director of the show, which will benefit Thirteen/WNET.
The concert, to be shown on Channel 13 next fall in the "Great Performances"  series, will be a compilation of songs whose lyrics are poems or that have been inspired by poetry.
The composers range from Stephen Foster to Aaron Copland to Leonard Bernstein.


Yards to Go Before They Sleep


DEAL REACHED FOR UNIT OF FUND AMERICAN
The Mellon Bank Corporation has tentatively agreed to buy the home mortgage unit of Fund American Enterprises Holdings Inc. for about $350 million, people familiar with the agreement said yesterday.
The acquisition of Fund American's Source One Mortgage Services Corporation reportedly includes the acquisition of  debt and preferred stock obligations, which totaled $732.7 million in September.
Fund American, which is based in Norwich, Vt., disclosed that it had reached a tentative agreement to sell Source One, its principal business, to "a significant financial institution," and people close to the companies identified the buyer as Mellon, which is based in Pittsburgh.
Mellon also was identified as the buyer in an article yesterday in The Wall Street Journal.
Officials at Mellon and Source One declined to comment.
The acquisition may signal that Mellon is shying away from consideration of a major bank acquisition; it had reportedly been in talks with several companies.


Hollinger Buys 14 Newspapers
Hollinger Inc. said today that it had agreed to buy 14 newspapers in western  Canada from the Armadale Company for an undisclosed sum.
The publishing company, based in Vancouver, said it would acquire The Leader-Post of Regina and The Star Phoenix of Saskatoon, two daily newspapers in Saskatchewan, as well as 12 nondaily newspapers in Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta.


On Stage, and Off
Nicky Silver's Success


Bills and Fears Mounting For a Federal Hospital Staff
I'm sorry you're not getting paid," Kerry Barefield says the Cablevision bill collector told her, "but it's not my problem.
Go get a loan."
Ms.
Barefield, 27, is a nurse at the Olin E. Teague Veterans Center, a thousand-bed hospital in Temple, Tex., 60 miles north of Austin, that is one of  the nation's major medical centers.
As Veterans Affairs, as well as many other Government agencies, continues to run without a budget, Ms.
Barefield and other  nurses at Olin, as well as doctors and support staff, are essentially working without pay, even though they are expected to get the money after the budget crisis is resolved.


COMPANY BRIEFS
TENNECO ENERGY, a unit of Tenneco Inc. of Houston, plans to try again to sell its half ownership of Kern River Gas Transmission Co., following the collapse of a proposed $225 million sale to Questar Corp. because of antitrust concerns by the Federal Trade Commission.
Williams Cos. owns the remaining 50 percent of Kern River, a pipeline operator.


A New Sponsor Adds Spicy Flavor to Game
We should be grateful to Baked Tostitos.
Had the tortilla-chip maker not stepped up to sponsor Tuesday's Fiesta Bowl, the game might have been dubbed the Brillo Fiesta Bowl, with giant steel wool pads painted at midfield and in the end zones of Sun Devil Stadium in Tempe, Ariz.
Scour along, folks, with Florida  Coach Steve Spurrier!
In the Fiesta's recovery from I.B.M.'s pullout last year as the title sponsor (the unwieldy sounding I.B.M. OS/2 Fiesta Bowl reigned for three years), it arranged for the Phoenix-based Dial Corporation, which makes Brillo pads and Breck shampoo, to step in.


Showdown and Shutdown: The Basics Over the Budget
It seems irrational.
Some Government offices are closed, but many more are open.
Some Government workers have been furloughed, but they have been promised  they will be paid for not working.
Others are working at full pay.
Still others  are at work but will draw only half a paycheck this week.
Congress, meanwhile, is in recess.
Many top Administration officials are on vacation.
President Clinton is planning his annual New Year's weekend in South Carolina.
Speaker Newt Gingrich says no break in the deadlock over the Federal budget is possible until the middle of next week at the earliest.


Ex-Trooper Admits a Plot To Falsify Fingerprints
A former New York State trooper admitted in court yesterday that he took eight fingerprints from the corpse of a 12-year-old murder victim and planned to use them as false evidence against anyone later charged in the case.
The ex-trooper, Robert M. Lishansky, and three others are already serving prison sentences for evidence tampering in what experts have called the largest  fingerprint-faking scandal in the history of American law enforcement.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows:


Holiday on Monday
Monday is New Year's Day.


25 and Under
Pitchoune, a small French-influenced restaurant on the nondescript corner of  Third Avenue and 19th Street, is the latest restaurant to open in New York City  bearing the influence of Jean-Claude Iacovelli.
Mr.
Iacovelli, the owner of two small downtown bistros, Jean-Claude and Caffe Lure, has perfected the formula for hip little French restaurants: take a small  dining room, decorate minimally and emphasize a brief, creative menu of beautifully executed dishes.
Mr.
Iacovelli is not a partner in Pitchoune but has helped with it.


U.S. Ends Serbia Sanctions
President Clinton has suspended American sanctions imposed three years ago against Serbia.
The President said today that the economic and military sanctions had achieved their purpose of bringing the Serbs to the negotiating table to reach a peace agreement.


ON WALL ST., SIGNS OF SLOW GROWTH FOR THE ECONOMY
The interest rate on long-term Treasury bonds closed at less than 6 percent yesterday for the first time in more than two years, reflecting a growing view that the economy is much weaker than most experts thought just weeks ago and will remain slack into the Presidential election year.
What is notable is that no one is challenging this view of Wall Street's traders, who buy and sell huge quantities of securities, manipulating the nation's interest rates in the process.
They contend that a budget deal will soon emerge that shrinks the deficit, and a smaller deficit, combined with mild  inflation and data signaling weaker growth, all justify lower rates.


Rape Trial In Okinawa Is Suspended
The trial of three American servicemen charged with raping a 12-year-old Japanese schoolgirl was suspended today after the mothers of the two Marine Corps defendants asked to have the trial moved out of Okinawa.
The rape of the girl, on the southern island of Okinawa on Sept. 4, has provoked deep outrage throughout Japan, and increased tensions in the military relationship between Japan and the United States.


Corrections
A picture caption on Tuesday about a train derailment in Spain misstated the  route of the train.
It was bound from Barcelona to Malaga, not Barcelona to Madrid, when it derailed 200 miles south of Madrid.


St. Peter's Surprises Alabama
St. Peter's 59, Alabama 49


Corrections
An obituary headline on Wednesday about Emmanuel Levinas, a philosopher, misstated his age.
He was 89, not 90.


Harlem Store Sprinkler Was Cut Off Just Before Fire
Construction workers shut off the emergency sprinkler system at Freddy's clothing store in Harlem hours before an arson fire killed eight people there on Dec. 8, law enforcement officials said yesterday.
On the morning of the fire, investigators said, contractors were scheduled to replace a suspended ceiling at the store and had to deactivate the basement sprinklers, the only ones in the building, to remove the ceiling.
Law enforcement officials said one of the plumbing contractors acknowledges having turned off the water early that morning.


For Children
Palisades Interstate Park State Line Lookout Alpine, N.J. (201) 768-1360 Recommended for all ages


Esiason Ponders the Future
Boomer Esiason sounded like a former Jet yesterday. Sort of.
The unrestricted free agent has vacillated for much of the season about his future with the Jets and perpetuated the uncertainty during a conference call about his studio analyst's role for CBS's college football bowl broadcasts.


At One Hotel in Bosnia, Hunters and the Hunted
Dario Kordic, a Bosnian Croat political leader who has been indicted as a mass murderer by the war crimes tribunal in The Hague, had breakfast this morning at a hotel coffee shop 12 feet away from a table full of European police officers sent to Bosnia to help re-establish a justice system.
The police officers did not seem to notice Mr.
Kordic as he ate rolls, drank coffee and made jokes with two companions who appeared to be bodyguards.
When the police officers were told that a man accused of organizing the murders of hundreds of Muslims was getting in his car and about to drive away, the officers said they knew little about the case, and they turned back to their meal.


Who Is Gramm's Boss?
To the Editor:
In your front-page article about Senator Gramm ("Phil Gramm's Offbeat Charm as a Persistent Conservative," Dec. 27), he is quoted as telling the Heritage Foundation, "No poor person has ever hired me." Senator Gramm has been a public  employee for two decades, elected by and answering to the taxpayers of Texas --  not all of whom are rich, and some of whom are indeed poor.
If he is elected President, will he consider himself to be working for all Americans, or will he  feel that he has been "hired" by those who are not poor?
MICHAEL INGRISANI Mountainside, N.J., Dec. 27, 1995


Bronx Gunman Had Been Ignored by Police, Official Says
The man accused of shooting five people dead in a Bronx shoe store on Dec. 19 wanted to confess to an earlier killing months ago, but he was apparently turned away by New York City detectives, a top police official said yesterday.
Chief of Department Louis Anemone said the suspect, Michael Vernon, was not only willing but eager to talk about a killing and other crimes when he was arrested last July on a minor assault charge in the Bronx.
Instead, he was released the same day, with a ticket to appear in court.


Dr. Tom Practices Spin Control
The road to No. 1 is paved with mixed messages, which get in the way of the commercials and the audibles.
Coach Tom Osborne is a saint.
He is a snake oil salesman.
He is both.
This is good, bad, necessary.
There is no place for bad boys on a great university's football team.
Football is a safety net for really  strong bad boys.
If Lawrence Phillips and Christian Peter weren't playing for Nebraska, they would be loose in your neighborhood.
How would all those "special interest groups" like that?
Next Tuesday's Tostitos Fiesta Bowl is already overflowing, and we haven't even got to the other team, the University of Florida, and its fascinating coach, Steve Spurrier.
We might not get to them until game time.
The buildup seems to be about Dr.
Tom, about the hard hitting his boys do outside the white  lines and the protection they get from the university, which appears to be merely a partner, rather than the parent company, of the Osborne Cornhuskers.
Both companies seem involved in a campaign to spin Phillips's image from perpetrator of an assault on a female student to victim of the media and women's groups.


Atlanta Police Face Criticism In Recent Killing by an Officer
The events of Dec. 7, in which three plainclothes police officers got into a  gunfight at a downtown motorcycle repair shop that resulted in the death of one  customer and the wounding of two other people, have always been muddled, at best.
But the muddle turned into a cloud of suspicion this week when it was learned that it had taken 20 days and several news reports before investigators interviewed three witnesses who contradict the police account of the incident.


MAJORITY STAKE IN POLISH TIRE MAKER TO BE ACQUIRED
The shareholders of Debica S.A., a tire maker based in Poland, have approved  a plan for the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company to acquire a majority stake in Debica.
The plan calls for Goodyear to buy 3.7 million shares, for $60 million,  in addition to the stake that Goodyear bought from the Polish treasury earlier this month for $55 million.
Goodyear, which is based in Akron, Ohio, will hold 50.7 percent of Debica when the deal is completed.
The money is to go toward modernization, expansion and introduction of Goodyear technology to make radial  truck tires.
Debica is expected to have $200 million in sales this year.


Dr. Crew Hurts Pupils and Helps His Staff
To the Editor:
Many New York City teachers were outraged that Mayor Rudolph Giuliani pressed for a large salary increase for top city officials just after he negotiated a two-year wage freeze for the teachers, and this outrage contributed to the rejection of the contract by union members.


Police Expert Faults Method In Fatal Arrest
A police expert in the use of force said today that the methods used by five  white suburban police officers to subdue a black motorist who later died of asphyxiation were in keeping with state guidelines.
But the expert, Robert Swartzwelder, a trainer with the Pittsburgh police SWAT team, also said that the standards were out of date.


Walter Horn, 87, a Historian Of Medieval Cloisters and Barns
Walter Horn, a historian of medieval architecture and the co-author of a monumental study of the monastery of St.
Gall in Switzerland, died on Tuesday at his home in Point Richmond, Calif.
He was 87.
Mr.
Horn, the son and grandson of Lutheran ministers, was born in Waldangeloch, Germany, and grew up in Heidelberg.
He studied at the Universities of Heidelberg and Berlin and received his doctorate in art history at the University of Hamburg, where he studied under Erwin Panofsky.


Sounds Around Town: On New Year's Eve
Here are choices by pop critics of The New York Times of New Year's Eve celebrations that were not sold out at press time. (An introduction appears on page C1.)


In America;Firing Their Customers
The miserable retail sales figures from the holiday season should be taken as an S O S, a distress signal from American consumers who are loaded with debt and deeply insecure about employment.
The quintessential symbol of corporate profits in the 90's is the pink slip.
The number of announced layoffs since 1989 will reach three million by New Year's Eve, according to the outplacement firm Challenger, Gray &amp; Christmas.


China Names Committee to Steer Hong Kong Toward Beijing Rule
China named the committee today that will be responsible for steering Hong Kong through its transfer from British colony to Chinese rule in 1997, but excluded local democrats.
The Preparatory Committee, as it is called, is made up of 150 men and women,  more than half from Hong Kong.
It was approved by the standing committee of the  National People's Congress, China's parliament.


Taking In the Sights


Sounds Around Town: On New Year's Eve
Here are choices by pop critics of The New York Times of New Year's Eve celebrations that were not sold out at press time. (An introduction appears on page C1.)


Executive Changes
AFC CABLE SYSTEMS INC., Providence, R.I., a maker of wiring systems, said it promoted Robert Wheeler, its executive vice president, to president, succeeding  Harry Crump, who resigned for personal reasons.


Statue of Jesus Stolen Again


AIRBORNE FREIGHT TO BUY 12 USED BOEING AIRPLANES
The Airborne Freight Corporation agreed yesterday to acquire 12 used Boeing 767-200 aircraft.
Airborne Freight, a shipping company based in Seattle, said it intended to pursue the acquisition of an additional 10 to 15 of the 767-200 aircraft.
The cost of introducing the first 12 planes will be about $290 million.
The additional jets should cost about $310 million, for a projected total of $600 million over an eight-year period.
Airborne Freight is buying 9 of the 12 aircraft from a subsidiary of the Itochu Corporation and 3 from the Marubeni Corporation.
Both companies are based in Japan.


Health Care Acquisition
The Kentucky Medical Insurance Company said today that holders of its class A and class B shares approved the company's $25.37 million acquisition by the Michigan Physicians Mutual Liability Company, under which Kentucky Medical shareholders will receive $12.37 for each of their shares.
The transaction will  be effective Jan. 1, the companies said, as Kentucky Medical becomes a subsidiary of Michigan Physicians, which is based in East Lansing, Mich.


A Domain of Prehistoric Beasts. Scary.
THE jaws of the prehistoric sea monsters move rhythmically, the giants' darting eyes ceaselessly surveying the sea for prey and predator.
The darkness is streaked with luminescence as light from the surface -- another world -- filters ever deeper.
The surreal scene pulsates with eerie underwater sounds: nearer the surface are thunder crashes, the patter of rain, whalelike serenades.
Toward the floor, the ocean hums with the timeless sound of waves.
"It's scary: it's like a haunted house," whispers Guy, my 5-year-old son, his sparkling blue eyes as big as hubcaps.


Troubled School Board Loses Some Powers
Five days before a state hearing on the removal of the troubled Roosevelt, L.I., school board, the State Commissioner of Education yesterday seized some of the board's powers, saying it had failed to improve its management.
The Commissioner's order represents the first time that the state has stripped a school board of any power.
The hearing next week will determine whether Roosevelt's board will become the first in the state to be ousted.


Persistence of Pagan Myth in Modern Imagination
With every nation it conquered, ancient Rome imported another set of gods.
Classical deities like Mars, Venus and Minerva were soon outnumbered by new arrivals like Cybele, Mithras and Ishtar.
Mortal heroes like Hercules were elevated to the status of gods; they were followed by historical individuals like the Emperor Augustus and the boy Antinous.
If an obscure Jewish sect could  topple classical paganism, it was, in part, because paganism had by late antiquity become little more than a hollow husk.
"Imaginary Beings," an exhibition at Exit Art/The First World, suggests that  both the classical deities and their nonclassical rivals continue to haunt the imaginations of contemporary artists.


Heida Hermanns, 89, Pianist and Philanthropist
Heida Hermanns, a pianist, teacher and philanthropist, died on Wednesday at her home in Westport, Conn.
She was 89.
Mrs.
Hermanns was born in Wiesbaden, Germany, in 1906.
She received her first piano lessons from her mother, Alice Goldschmidt Hermanns, and when she was 15 she enrolled at the Berlin Hochschule fur Musik.
Her teachers included Egon Petri, Artur Schnabel, Carl Friedberg and Isabella Vengerova.


Virginius Dabney, 94, Southern Writer Who Fought Segregation
Virginius Dabney, historian, author, journalist and a winner of the Pulitzer  Prize for editorial writing, died in his sleep yesterday at his home in Richmond.
He was 94.
A native of Virginia and a grandson of a Confederate veteran, he was an early and steadfast opponent of segregation.
For many years as the editor of the Richmond Times-Dispatch, he took stands against Southern sectionalism and fundamentalism that aroused protest from his conservative colleagues and neighbors.


4 Pigs Found Alive In Ruins From Fire At Research Site
Four pigs have been found alive a week after fire destroyed a swine research  center and killed hundreds of other pigs, officials of the University of Wisconsin said today.
"Miracles happen," said Tom Crenshaw, a faculty supervisor.
"It just had to be a miracle that they survived at all."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-12


Kieslowski's Drama Of a Voyeur in Love
If every film director has a streak of the peeping tom, every actor who agrees to appear in a movie becomes an exhibitionist in a voyeuristic collaboration.
That is the deadpan joke that ripples from the heart of "A Short  Film About Love," a taut, psychological drama made in 1988 by the Polish director Krzysztof Kieslowski.
Where movies have traditionally treated voyeurism as sneaky detective work with an erotic frisson, "A Short Film About Love" has the temerity to present it as an intensely romantic enterprise.
Everything takes on a magical aura when it  is contemplated through a lens, this icy film reminds us.
It also suggests that  romantic love itself is a mystery that requires distance for the imagination to  construct and sustain what is essentially an illusion.


Stocks Flat in Tokyo
Stocks showed little change here today.
At the end of the half-day session, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 4.98 points, or three-hundredths of 1 percent, at 19,868.15.
On Thursday, the Nikkei fell 138.63 points.


Fire Damages 8 Row Houses
Seven families were left homeless yesterday after a fire severely damaged eight row houses, the A.P. reported.
No one was seriously injured in the blaze,  which may have been deliberately set, said Lieut.
Joseph Richardson of the Camden police.
One home was unoccupied, he said.


America Is Ready for the Original Democracy;Logic of the Senate
To the Editor:
Daniel Lazare ("The Lords of Misrule," Op-Ed, Dec. 27) both mischaracterizes  and trivializes one of the central debates of the Constitutional Convention of 1787.


Irked by Focus on Inmates, California Bans Interviews
Trying to limit what they called the glorification of criminals by some news  organizations, California prison officials have temporarily barred reporters from conducting face-to-face interviews with inmates.
First Amendment and prisoners' rights advocates condemned the ban, saying it  would limit public scrutiny of the prison system.
But several of these advocates said they doubted there could be any successful legal challenge because the policy was part of a national trend of limiting inmate publicity that has been approved by the courts.


World News Briefs;300 Join Wedding Of Rabin Killer's Sister
Supporters of Mr.
Amir scuffled with them and tore up a sign that said, "The nation is crying, and the Amir family is celebrating." No one was injured, and the protesters left.
Inside the hall in this religious suburb of Tel Aviv, Vardit Amir and Yitzhak Cohen, in their 20's, were married without incident.


World News Briefs;Turkish Jet Crashes In Aegean Encounter
A Turkish F-4 jet fighter crashed in the Aegean Sea today after Greek warplanes intercepted it near the island of Mitilini.
The Turkish plane's systems operator was rescued, but the pilot was missing.
A search was under way by Greek and Turkish military aircraft and ships.


With Milder Weather Forecast, Natural Gas Prices Fall Sharply
Surging natural gas prices suddenly reversed course yesterday, tumbling on forecasts for milder weather in the Northeast.
The losses nearly wiped out big gains a day earlier in a market that has been edgy over tight supplies available to the Northeast, a big consumer of heating fuel.


Lawsuit Filed For 2 Injuries From Toilets
In the Parkchester section of the Bronx, people worry about crime just as much as in any other neighborhood.
But now there is a new worry: exploding toilets.
Yesterday, two people filed a suit claiming that when they flushed their toilets in the Parkchester condominium complex, the bowls ruptured, spraying them with pieces of porcelain.


Hyundai Announces Management Changes
South Korea's second-biggest business conglomerate, the Hyundai Group, announced a sweeping personnel shakeup today.
A Hyundai spokesman said the changes would affect 404 executives and would mark a generational shift in the group's management.
Hyundai named a new chairman, Chung Mong-koo, who is a son of the founder and honorary chairman, Chung Ju-yung.
The younger Mr.
Chung, who is 57, had been chairman of the Hyundai Precision and Industry Company.


Couple Charged in Death Plot
A Barnegat Township man and his live-in girlfriend were jailed earlier this month and accused of plotting to kill the man's estranged wife and then avoiding prosecution by planting someone else's semen and blood at the crime scene, the authorities said yesterday.
But a tip led investigators to the husband, Daniel D. Hynes, and his girlfriend, Monica W. Fritz, and thwarted the plan, said Daniel J. Carluccio, Prosecutor for Ocean County.
The couple have been charged with conspiracy to commit murder, The Associated Press reported.


The Mayor Ruins His Own Case
In refusing to reappoint two Criminal Court judges to new 10-year terms, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani of New York asked why "adequate" should be a high enough  standard for such important positions.
The Mayor raised an issue any citizen might endorse.
There is no shortage of qualified New Yorkers who would like to sit on the bench.
Why can't all our judges be the very best?
But the Mayor's clumsy, self-righteous performance during this controversy actually set his cause back.
He dismissed his own screening panel's initial recommendation that the judges be reappointed.
He denigrated the performance of his predecessors, who had deliberately refrained from intervening in the reappointment of sitting judges.
He denounced his critics, including Chief Judge Judith Kaye.
The argument shifted from a debate about the quality of judges to the fitness of Mr.
Giuliani as judicial arbiter.


Dr. Thomas C. Chalmers, a President of Mt. Sinai, Dies at 78
Dr.
Thomas C. Chalmers, a past president of the Mount Sinai Medical Center and the Mount Sinai School of Medicine whose urgings led to the establishment of the country's first department of geriatrics, died on Wednesday at the Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center in Lebanon, N.H.
He was 78.
The cause was prostate cancer, said Dr.
John W. Rowe, the current president of the Mount Sinai Medical Center.


First Masonic President
To the Editor:


STANDARD BRANDS PAINT FILES FOR CHAPTER 11 PROTECTION
The Standard Brands Paint Company, citing an inability to secure additional financing from its biggest stockholder, said yesterday that it was filing for protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
The company, whose operating units include Standard Brands Paint and Major Paint, said it planned to seek a buyer for some or all of its assets.
Standard Brands operates 50 retail stores in California, down from 135 in 1992.
Standard Brands said the filing resulted from an inability to secure additional financing from Corimon S.A.C.A., a paint company based in Venezuela that owns 55 percent of Standard Brands.


CHRONICLE
Oh, those wickedly witty lawyers.
Once again, as it does every year, the New  York City Bar Association will shine its light on a public figure for its "Twelfth Night" show.
Next Friday, the target will be MARIO M. CUOMO, who will be depicted in "The Tragedie of Mario, Prince of Queens," based, of course, on "Hamlet." The script by MYRON D. COHEN, a trial lawyer, will be enacted by a cast of more than 40 lawyers and judges.
"To run, or not to run," the script has the former Governor say.
"That is the question. Whether 'tis nobler to suffer the slings and arrows of outrageous Albany politicians or to take arms against a sea of trouble and formally announce my candidacy for President."


INSIDE
Do Not Return to Sender


Onetime Walk-On Lives His Dream
If Chris Doering's superstitions last one more game and in the final game of  his senior season, it's too late to change now -- he will take a football into his hotel room on New Year's night, the night before the Florida Gators will play for a national championship.
He will toss it in the air to himself, reviewing the plays for the following evening and considering the possibilities.
And then he will tuck it away and go to sleep.
"If I fall asleep and drop it on the floor, I get real nervous," Doering said.


KEEP IN MIND
Some 1995 Movies That Enjoyed A Second Life in the Living Room


Top Court Outlaws Secret Killing of Bills Passed in Albany
For years, state legislative leaders have quietly killed bills passed by both houses, simply by not sending them to the governor for his signature or veto.
The maneuver allowed legislators to take credit for passing bills that they privately knew would die in legislative limbo, and often rescued governors from  awkward political binds.
Today, the state's highest court struck down the practice as unconstitutional, sharply rebuking legislative leaders for allowing it.


Inside Art
Gifts to Museums


2 COMPANIES TO DEVELOP DRUG FOR DIALYSIS PATIENTS
Amgen Inc. and NPS Pharmaceuticals Inc. said yesterday that they had agreed to jointly develop NPS's Norcalcin and other drugs for a disorder commonly suffered by people who need dialysis treatment.
The drugs treat hyperparathyroidism, a disorder that causes parathyroid glands to secrete too much hormone, upsetting the calcium-phosphorus balance of the body.
A common form, which follows kidney failure, affects as many as 80 percent of dialysis patients.
Amgen agreed to offer NPS, based in Salt Lake City, a $10 million initial license fee, $26 million in additional payments if NPS meets certain targets and royalties on product sales.
Amgen will also purchase one million shares of NPS for $7.5 million.


Report Says Serbs Tormented 2 French Pilots
Two French pilots who were released recently after three and a half months in Bosnian Serb hands were starved, beaten and tormented with mock executions by their captors, according to a classified military report published by the weekly newspaper Le Canard Enchaine.
The Bosnian Serb military commander, Gen.
Ratko Mladic, personally threatened the pilots with torture and death, according to the newspaper, which often gets  information leaked from within the French Government.


An Arch-Evil Monarch, Updated to the 1930's
For all the talk nowadays about a revival of swank, nothing in contemporary fashion can compete with the glamour of upper-class English life in the 1930's as it is elegantly caricatured in Ian McKellen's updated "Richard III."
The blase aristocrats who sweep through gilded marble halls, dressed to the nines and dangling cigarette holders from their gloved fingers, are a supremely pampered breed.
They are just the sort who would tolerate a Fascist takeover of the country as long as it didn't disrupt their social schedule or cut into their incomes.


Long Bond's Yield Falls Below 6%
The yield on the Treasury's bellwether long bond fell below 6 percent for the first time in 26 months yesterday as Treasury securities gained in thin holiday  trading.
The price of the 30-year bond rose 11/32 of a percentage point, to 112 11/32  ; its yield, which moves in the opposite direction, dropped to 5.98 percent, down from 6 percent on Wednesday.
Yesterday's yield was the lowest since Oct. 29, 1993, when it was at 5.97 percent.
It was quite a feat considering that most dealers and investors elected to stay on the sidelines ahead of the year's end.


The King's Vet, Beard and Cuckolder
Since the robust 17th-century picaresque tale is not enjoying any current vogue, the success of "Restoration" can be considered a very pleasant surprise.
This jaunty period piece owes its puckish cleverness to Rose Tremain's distinctly 20th-century perspective on an array of quaint characters.
Miss Tremain's colorfully eccentric 1989 novel (which was short-listed for the Booker Prize in England) tells of Robert Merivel, a perpetually disheveled doctor who becomes King Charles II's medic to the royal dogs.
Through a series of frequently humiliating ribald adventures, Merivel sustains both nostalgic quaintness and the haplessness of a thoroughly modern hero.


Pier 1's Loss Only Intensifies Investor Anger
The $20 million loss disclosed by the retailer Pier 1 Imports was but the latest in a string of financial events that have damaged the company's credibility, several institutional shareholders said yesterday.
Before Pier 1's announcement on Tuesday that "inappropriate trades" made by an outside financial consultant would result in the hefty loss, the shareholders said, the company had created anger and disgust with an announcement earlier this year that it would take a $14 million pretax charge to unload its holdings  in Sunbelt Nursery.
Shareholders disliked that holding because it had nothing to do with its core business.


America Is Ready for the Original Democracy;Congress Is Balkanized
To the Editor:
Warren Rudman's Dec. 21 Op-Ed piece ("Take This Job. Please.") did not go far enough.
Sure, he explained why members of Congress are retiring in record numbers.
He did not propose a solution.


GINGRICH RETURNS TO FIRMER STAND ON BUDGET ACCORD
On the eve of scheduled negotiations with President Clinton, Speaker Newt Gingrich said today that without an agreement on a balanced budget House Republicans would not agree to any temporary deal reopening parts of the Federal Government that have been shut for two weeks because of the budget impasse.
"I think that the House Republicans feel very, very deeply that the President had from the time we signed the continuing resolution in November up through most of December to get this solved," Mr.
Gingrich said at a news conference.
"We didn't get it solved. And having meetings doesn't count as progress. We've got to actually get an agreement."


Olympic Champion to Return to the Slopes
DEBORAH COMPAGNONI, the two-time Olympic champion long sidelined by a knee injury, will make her World Cup season debut next week.
She will start in two giant slalom races and a slalom at Maribor, Slovenia, beginning on Tuesday.


Welfare Financing Received
New Jersey received $12 million from the Federal Government yesterday to cover half the cost of welfare payments for January.
The state's 119,000 recipients of Aid to Families with Dependent Children receive $24 million a month, with half paid by the Federal Government and half by the state.
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman had said the state treasury would make up the difference if funds from Washington were unavailable because of the Federal budget crisis, but emergency legislation signed by President Clinton resolved the problem, said Jacqueline Tencza, spokeswoman for the Department of  Human Services.


Ewing Sprains Ankle and Knicks Come Up Lame
When the Knicks lost Patrick Ewing to a first-quarter ankle injury last night, it was was an omen.
It was the beginning of a frustrating evening for the Knicks, and the frustration did not end after they lost to the Cleveland Cavaliers, 86-76, at Madison Square Garden.
The bad feelings spilled into the locker room after the game.
Charles Smith wondered out loud if he was about to be traded.
Charles Oakley said the Knicks did not play hard enough to win.


Home Video
Kings of the Market


Dollar Mixed in Thin Trading As Year-End Slowdown Arrives
The dollar closed mixed against other leading currencies yesterday in thin trading, as many traders opted against taking new positions before the end of the year.
There was little news or hints of the market's technical momentum to influence traders, but in London a late-day flurry of sales of the British pound helped push the dollar up against the pound and German mark.


New York Views With Pathos and Detachment
New York City, in all its noisy confusion, is the star of two current shows that celebrate photographers' visions of the city from the 1930's to the 60's.
A retrospective of Arthur Leipzig's work, at the Museum of the City of New York, and "New York Stories," a group show at the James Danziger Gallery, offer varied views of the city and its people and demonstrate how photographers' approaches to the subject shifted over the years.
As might be expected, Mr.
Leipzig's show provides the more coherent view of the changing life of the city.
As a photojournalist who got his start as a staff photographer for the weekly newspaper PM in the 1940's, he covered a diverse range of stories; excerpts from many of them are featured in this survey.


Rabbi Pinchas M. Teitz, 87, Founder of Schools
Rabbi Pinchas Mordechai Teitz, a prominent Orthodox religious leader, educator and broadcaster, died on Tuesday at St.
Elizabeth's Hospital in Elizabeth, N.J.
A longtime resident of that city, he was 87.
He suffered a long illness, according to the Jewish Educational Center of Elizabeth, which he founded in 1941.


Arts in Review
'The Loving Eye of Peggy Bacon' Kraushaar Galleries 724 Fifth Avenue (at 57th Street) Through Jan. 13


On-Line Service Blocks Access To Topics Called Pornographic
In the most far-reaching example yet of Internet censorship, Compuserve Inc.  has blocked access by its subscribers in the United States and around the world  to more than 200 sexually explicit computer discussion groups and picture data bases, after a federal prosecutor in Munich said the material violated German pornography laws.
The action, which Compuserve described as a temporary move while it studies its legal options, underscores the extent to which diverse national, cultural and political values are coming into conflict with the essentially borderless technology of the global Internet computer network.


Results Plus


Fighting Rages in Separatist Russian Region


People
*
Barbara Davies was named general manager and director of new- business development at Blue Marble Advanced Communications Group, New York, a new-media  advertising and production unit of Adcom Inc.
She was previously creative technologies director at FCB/ Leber Katz Partners, New York, a unit of True North Communications.
Also at Blue Marble, Kevin Davis was named interactive development director.
He was previously the interactive services manager at the  Richards Group, Dallas. *
Peter Oravetz was named to the new position of senior vice president and group creative director at Culver Moriarty Glavin, New York.
He was previously executive vice president for creative at Frierson &amp; Mee, New York.


NEW VIDEO RELEASES
The Glass Shield 1995.
Buena Vista. $101.72. 109 minutes.
Closed captioned.
PG-13.
Release date:  Tuesday.


Victory Puts Seton Hall In Championship Game
After three straight losses, Seton Hall was looking to get back in sync tonight as it prepared for the opening of the Big East schedule next week.
With Adrian Griffin, the senior swingman, leading the way with 21 points, the Pirates got the victory they needed, securing a 93-80 triumph over the University of New Hampshire in the Seton Hall/Meadowlands tournament.


Corrections
An article on Monday about a proposal to change taxi regulations for midtown  Manhattan misstated part of the plan.
Although the city intends to establish taxi stops on many blocks, cabdrivers will still be able to pick up and discharge passengers at other locations.
The taxi stops would not be the only places for pickup or discharge of passengers.
Further developments on the issue  are reported today on page B3.


India's Nuclear Temptation
With chances improving for completion of a nuclear test-ban treaty next year, France and China have arrogantly defied world public opinion and conducted more  nuclear tests to get in under the wire.
Now comes word that India, which conducted its one and only nuclear test in 1974, is considering some testing of  its own.
Even worse, India now suggests it may not sign the test-ban treaty, despite longstanding support for such an agreement.
These moves can only raise tensions in South Asia, damage the cause of nuclear nonproliferation and undercut the goals India says it espouses.
Earlier this month Tim Weiner of The Times reported that American intelligence experts suspected that India was preparing for a nuclear test.
They based their view on a surge of activity at the Pokaran test site in the Rajasthan desert, picked up by spy satellites.
India denied that it had any such intention.


Isis Drops Human Trials of a Genetic Drug
Isis Pharmaceuticals Inc. said today that it was halting clinical trials of a genetic drug for the treatment of genital warts.
The drug was the first of a new class of compounds known as antisense molecules ever to be injected into humans.
While holding broad therapeutic promise, antisense molecules have proved difficult to turn into drugs.
They are meant to work inside cells by blocking genetic activity that would produce disease-causing proteins.


Perez, 38, Wants Another Chance to Pitch
Four years after drugs ended PASCUAL PEREZ's 11-year major league career, he  wants another chance to pitch professionally.
The Licey Tigers of the Dominican League, in dire need of middle relief, are  willing to take a chance on Perez, who reportedly is throwing as hard as he did  while he pitched for four major league teams, compiling a 67-68 record with a 3.44 earned run average.


Chinese Import Tax
China will begin levying taxes on the imports of capital equipment by foreign-financed companies, beginning April 1, the New China News Agency reported yesterday.
The agency said some ventures approved before that date would continue to be excluded from import taxes for a limited period.
Those companies with investments less than $30 million will have until the end of 1996 to import the equipment tax free.
Those with investments of more than $30 million will enjoy tax-free imports until the end of 1997.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Sports of The Times;A Wildcat Who Paid Not to Play
RICK PITINO, who in 1988-89 coached the Knicks to 52 victories before Pat Riley came around and convinced everyone that nothing at all happened at Madison Square Garden between Red Holzman and himself, was asked the following question  the other night: Which is more rabid, Kentucky for its Wildcats or New York for  its Knicks?
There was no hesitation, and no doubt.
"You can't imagine what U.K. basketball means," he said.
"It's not even close."


No Headline
This just shows how cyberspace doesn't belong to a single country.
If you have laws in one nation it affects other nations as well." -- ESTHER DYSON, a computer privacy expert. [A1:2.]


Special Teams Master Catches On to New Role
As if they had never been away, the Buffalo Bills have returned as division champions for the fourth time in the 1990's -- and for the third time in that span, they will meet the Miami Dolphins in post-season play.
"We went to four Super Bowls on the strength of our offense -- the no-huddle  -- but this year it's been apparent our defense was better than it was before," the irrepressible Steve Tasker said yesterday.


Perry to Visit U.S. Troops
Defense Secretary William J. Perry plans to visit American troops at six posts in and around Bosnia next week, including the main base at Tuzla, the Pentagon announced today.
He would be the first high-level United States official to visit the area since the first of 20,000 troops began deploying to Bosnia and Herzegovina on Dec. 16.


Survey Says Many in Protestant Clergy Were Pressured to Quit
Four years ago, the Rev.
Ray Welles took early retirement -- at least officially -- as his church's senior minister.
In reality, he had faced growing  conflicts over everything from his desire to replace a church employee to his defenses of gay rights and inclusive language in the prayers.
Finally, "the atmosphere had become so poisoned, the situation so uncomfortable," Mr.
Welles now says, "that even though I could have stayed, I exited."


Official Resigns At Dart Group
The Dart Group Corporation said today that its chief financial officer, Robert Marmon, was resigning.
The company said it could not reach agreement with Mr.
Marmon on a compensation package.


AMERICA WEST SUED OVER DISMISSAL OF 400 WORKERS
A class-action lawsuit has been filed against America West Airlines, Inc., claiming the Phoenix-based carrier discharged nearly 400 workers because of union organizing activities.
The International Brotherhood of Teamsters and five former America West employees filed the suit on Wednesday in Federal District Court in Phoenix, a spokesman for the teamsters said.
America West laid off mechanics and maintenance workers on Dec. 2 and said it would turn over its heavy maintenance to an outside company.
The airline, which emerged from Chapter 11 bankruptcy in 1994, said it would save $35 million over five years as a result of the move.


Metro Digest
NEW YORK CITY


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Dec. 22
Dec. 15
Dec. 23
1995
1995
1994 Gasoline production, daily
7.6
7.6
7.8 Distillate production, daily
3.4
3.4
3.4 Gasoline stocks
196.4
197.4
209.9 Distillate stocks
128.0
131.2
140.4 Crude imports, daily
6.3
7.1
6.6 Product imports, daily
1.5
1.9
1.8 Crude stocks
314.7
319.1
337.9 Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.7 Refinery utilization (%)
91.4
91.6
93.0


Bank Group to Buy 6% of Mediaset
Six banks led by Istituto Imobiliare Italiana S.p.A. will acquire 6 percent of Mediaset S.p.A., a group of Italian television channels belonging to former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, for 400 billion lire ($252 million).
The sale  is part of Mr.
Berlusconi's plan to reduce his stake in his holding company Fininvest S.p.A. to less than 50 percent.
A seventh bank, Banca Nazionale di Lavoro, may acquire a stake along with British Telecommunications P.L.C., according to the Italian press, through their telecommunications joint venture Albacom.
I.M.I., which is managing the sale, will acquire 1.5 percent of Mediaset.
Monte Paschi di Siena S.p.A.'s board was expected to approve its purchase of 1.2 percent.
Istituto Bancario San Paolo di Torino S.p.A. will acquire 1 percent.
Banca Commerciale Italiana S.p.A., Banca di Roma S.p.A. and Caripolo S.p.A. will acquire 0.75 percent each.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Sniper Attack Laid to a Boy Proves Fatal
A motorist shot in the head by a sniper on Monday has died, and the 13-year-old boy accused of pulling the trigger, in what investigators initially  regarded as a misguided effort to obtain Christmas toys, may now face more serious charges.
The motorist, Alberto Tarango, 41, died at a hospital on Wednesday of wounds  he received while driving his pickup truck with his wife on Interstate 10, officials said.


Art in Review
'Beyond Ars Medica' Thread Waxing Space 476 Broadway (near Broome Street) SoHo Through Jan. 11


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt


4th Slaying In 4 Weeks In Ulster
The shooting death of a 30-year-old man in a Roman Catholic area of West Belfast on Wednesday night -- thought by the police to be the fourth vigilante slaying in four weeks -- is raising fears that the renewed use of deadly force could infect the 16-month I.R.A. cease-fire.
Ian Williamson, the subdivisional commander of the Woodbourne area, said today that the latest killing, of Martin McCrory, "fits into the pattern" of recent punishment murders widely attributed to the I.R.A.


Aqueduct Stewards Suspend Migliore
The jockey RICHARD MIGLIORE has been suspended for 10 days by Aqueduct stewards for careless riding aboard Joe's Workingirl in the fourth race on Dec.  23.
Migliore's mount finished first but was disqualified and placed fifth in the  10-horse field after being found guilty of impeding Personal Girl in the stretch.


Farmers Welcome the Cold
Three weeks of below-normal temperatures may have posed a hardship for many New Jerseyans, but it has proved beneficial to farmers, agricultural experts said yesterday.
The cold weather kills diseases and insects, and the snow blanket insulates roots and plants, said Michelle Infante of the Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service in Monmouth County.
But orchards and grapes could be damaged if temperatures fluctuate, she said.


The Millennial Countdown
The world approaches this holiday weekend with some angst.
We may have plans  for this New Year's Eve locked in, but what about Dec. 31, 1999?
The Savoy in London is already booked, the Space Needle in Seattle is rented out, and Disney  World is filling fast.
The pressure for millennial party-planning is building, even though no one has officially agreed exactly when the planet will launch itself into the 21st century, third millennium A.D.
Purists point out that just  as a child is not one year old until it finishes its first year, the millennial  page should not flip until Jan. 1, 2001.
This argument is not new.
In 1900, bean-counters insisted that the 20th century could not begin until 1901.
The controversy was so intense that early in 1900, an anonymous poet for Living Age magazine complained in verse:


The Good, The Bad And the Lame
Those who make their living in the advertising industry may well have worked  harder in 1995, but for the most part creativity took the year off.
Few creative executives seemed willing to break rules or take risks, because  failure could mean losing accounts.
Mediocrity may not be a mortal sin, as a character insists in "How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying," but it  certainly results in formulaic, derivative advertising.


Buck Eyes: Nike Says Hello, Columbus
Ohio State will get an estimated $9.25 million deal to outfit more than 800 Buckeyes athletes and their coaches exclusively in Nike apparel and shoes over the next five years.
Ohio State Athletic Director ANDY GEIGER yesterday announced the agreement during the Buckeyes' workouts for their Florida Citrus Bowl game against Tennessee on New Year's Day.
Beginning in August 1996, Nike will provide $1 million per year in footwear and apparel for athletes and staff in Ohio State's 34 men's and women's sports.
Ohio State's coaches will divide $725,000 a year and Nike will also pay  $100,000 per year for marketing and advertising.


Army Hero Enters Russian Race, Posing a Big Threat to Reformers
In what could prove to be a stark political nightmare for Russian reformers,  an immensely popular nationalist figure, Aleksandr I. Lebed, announced today that he would seek the presidency next June, and said he intended to do it "in agreement" with the Communists.
It has long been assumed that the hard-bitten former general would run for President next year.
But if he were to join forces with the Communist Party -- which received more than twice the votes of any other group in this month's parliamentary election -- he would become the instant front-runner.


Free Fall of St. John's and Rise of Iona
After Iona's 70-57 victory over St.
John's Wednesday night, both coaches had  sales pitches to make.
Tim Welsh of Iona had a happy gathering with recruits, while Brian Mahoney of St.
John's had a grim meeting with his players.
It was a  striking sign of two schools, two coaches, headed in opposite directions, on the court and off.
Iona (6-1) will play second-ranked Kentucky (8-1) tonight in the championship game of the Chemical Bank Holiday Festival at Madison Square Garden.
For the Gaels, Wednesday's victory over a Big East team figures to be attractive both in making a play for recruits and a post-season tournament.


America Is Ready for the Original Democracy
To the Editor:
Re "The Lords of Misrule" (Op-Ed, Dec. 27): I am in perfect agreement that after two centuries our creaky political machinery needs an overhaul.
While I have the greatest respect for the Founding Fathers, I am unconvinced that all political brilliance in America died in the last century.
I must disagree that reforming the Senate into a body similar, if not identical, to the House will result in "democracy, supreme and unconstrained." What we will continue to have  is representative democracy with all of its current evils, like lobbyists and pork barrels.


Taxi Plan Won't Restrict Cabs to Designated Stops
The Giuliani administration said yesterday that it would not limit taxis to picking up and dropping off passengers in midtown only at designated stops to ease traffic congestion.
Responding after widespread criticism, city officials said it was never their intent to threaten the New York tradition of stepping into the street and hailing a yellow cab with a wave of a hand.
Their goal, they said, is to enforce existing law, which requires cabbies to pull to the curb if there is open curb space near where a customer wants to be picked up or dropped off.
If there is no opening nearby, the law says, a taxi can double-park briefly, but only if it does not impede traffic.


AST RESEARCH GETS $100 MILLION CREDIT LINE
AST Research Inc. said yesterday that it had secured a $100 million credit line from a consortium of banks led by the Bank of America National Trust and Savings Association, a unit of BankAmerica.
AST, a personal-computer maker based in Irvine, Calif., said the cash would be used for working capital and to repay  a $50 million short-term loan made by its partner, the Samsung Electronics Company of Korea.
"Our new credit line is part of the increased support we recently received from Samsung," said Ian Diery, president and chief executive of AST.
The company has posted five consecutive quarterly losses totaling nearly $196 million.


Cracks Are Discovered in Subway Cars
In a group of subway cars that have been the lemons of the fleet for two decades, an old and potentially serious problem has resurfaced with the discovery of cracks in the undercarriages of five cars used on the F, G and R lines.
A six-inch crack was discovered in a routine inspection of a model R-46 car on Wednesday evening, prompting a check of all 752 R-46's, said Joseph R. Hofmann, the senior vice president of the Transit Authority in charge of subways.


Recurruing Love Triangle in a Castle Garden
The characters in Keith Bunin's play "The Principality of Sorrows" remind one of nothing so much as amusingly bewildered denizens of the Internet who have been stuck for so long in the same MUD (multiple user domain) -- in this case, a Belgian castle's garden -- that eventually their children have to step in and take their places in the shared fantasy.
And at times these people's sense of reality is, at best, virtual; as they wander in the garden in three acts occurring in 1923, 1934 and 1947, they borrow lines from one another, across decades and generations.
This is Mr.
Bunin's first work, and, if he is clearly studying in the school  of Pirandello, then he is an apt pupil.
Pure Orange Productions -- a new company that wants to develop young audiences by keeping ticket prices at $10 -- gives it a polished presentation with a strong cast at the Theater Row Theater.


Job Helps Single Mother Hold Her Family Together
Last January, her life at rock bottom, Cheryl Wilson arrived at the Brooklyn  Bureau of Community Service's Bedford-Stuyvesant Family Center with her two young boys.
After a messy divorce, Ms.
Wilson had been left to cope with two active boys  and the effects of the physical and emotional abuse she had suffered at her former husband's hands.


A Condemned Killer And a Crusading Nun
THE casting of Sean Penn as Matthew Poncelet, the convicted murderer on death row in Tim Robbins's quietly courageous drama about capital punishment, reveals  a lot about this film's exceptional mettle.
Mr.
Penn isn't an actor who prompts  automatic sympathy.
He rarely invites any sympathy at all, and his unrepentant swagger says he wouldn't be caught dead trying.
But his natural aloofness is what this role demands, since "Dead Man Walking" isn't about the effort to rescue a contrite convict from an unfair fate.
It's a hard look at issues raised by the death penalty, and Mr.
Penn's lean, mean performance makes those issues come furiously alive.
Based on an extraordinarily lucid and affecting memoir by Sister Helen Prejean, a nun from Louisiana, "Dead Man Walking" is an account of the author's  eye-opening experiences on death row.
It concentrates on her relationship with a man accused of taking part in the murders of two teen-agers, who were abducted from a lovers' lane.


Stranded, But Not Sorry
A fire in an elevator maintenance closet briefly stranded diners in the elegant Rainbow Room last night, but caused no injuries.
The smoky electrical fire on the 67th floor in the G.E.
Building of Rockefeller Center began about 7:37 P.M. and was under control a half-hour later, firefighters said.


Debaters Give City College Cause to Cheer
AT City College, Prof.
Linford Carey says that officials advised him once to  drop the word "articulate" from his vocabulary when conducting his speech courses.
"It's a double-edged word for many up here," he said, his point being that it is often seen as patronizing in a student body that is predominantly black and Hispanic these days.
It can be interpreted as something of a code, the professor says, a wink signaling not that a person is necessarily a fine orator but that he merely speaks standard English and not street talk.


Under Garden's Gleam, Red Storm Has Lost Some of Its Bluster
When it comes to college basketball, officials at Madison Square Garden have  a motto: "We're as good as St. John's."
"St. John's is our anchor," said Paul Munick, the vice president for athletic and family entertainment at Madison Square Garden.


Lockbox Keys Are Removed
Keys left in lockboxes make it convenient for real estate agents to gain entry to a house by using an electronic card and an access code.
But now the Morris County Board of Realtors has asked its members to temporarily remove keys from the lockboxes at 4,500 homes.


From Sagging Beds to Soap Shortages
Gov.
George E. Pataki's proposed cuts in Medicaid reimbursement to nursing homes would be felt by middle-class New Yorkers as well as the poor, by forcing  nursing home operators to raise rates or cut services, industry spokesmen and consumer advocates warn.
Nursing home owners said they have few other ways of coping with the proposed cuts, which total $656 million a year, or about 3 percent of the amount now paid to nursing homes in state, Federal and local aid.


Naughty and Nice,' Re-Engineered
To the Editor:
Re your Dec. 25 news article on some clever calculations by students at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology for the number of reindeer Santa would need to deliver gifts to all Christian households ("Forget Rudolph. Just Beam It Up."):


TIMES MIRROR TO TAKE A CHARGE FOR STOCK BUYBACK
The Times Mirror Company said yesterday that its net income in the fourth quarter would be reduced by $17.4 million, or 16 cents a share, by a previously  announced repurchase of series B convertible preferred stock.
The charge against earnings reflects the cash paid in excess of the liquidation value of the stock, Times Mirror, the media company based in Los Angeles, said.
The company expects  to buy back 3.48 million of the series B convertible preferred shares; 7.78 million will remain outstanding.


Children's Society Is Split on Taping Interviews
To the Editor:
The American Professional Society on the Abuse of Children (Apsac) was misrepresented in a Dec. 19 Op-Ed piece by Debbie Nathan entitled "Justice in Wenatchee."


S.&amp; P. Lowers Fuji Bank's Ratings
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation cut its credit rating on Fuji Bank Ltd.'s debt yesterday, citing concern about "the length and severity" of the bad-loan problems plaguing the Japanese banking industry.
The credit-rating company cut  Fuji Bank's long-term senior debt, counterparty and certificate of deposit ratings to A- from A+.
Short-term ratings were cut to A-2 from A-1.
Separately, S.&amp; P. lowered its rating outlook to "negative" for the long-term debt of the Industrial Bank of Japan and Sakura Bank, less than a week after it cut its credit rating on four other big commercial banks, citing the same reasons.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Russia Warms Up an Old Romance
Stung by perceived humiliations in its relationship with Washington, Russia is pushing a more energetic Asian policy, deepening relations with China, its onetime ally and longtime rival.
Russian officials deny that any kind of joint policy is in the making against the United States, as in the 1950's.
They say such a policy now would contradict Moscow's foreign-policy aims and Beijing's vow to avoid new alliances.


Market Place;A satellite is successfully launched, and the shares in a direct-to-home television company lift off.
FOR the Echostar Communications Corporation, the future is up in the air. At  last.
The direct-to-home satellite television company launched its first satellite  yesterday, capping a nervous couple of months for management.
The satellite will offer customers 75 channels of entertainment by means of an 18-inch satellite dish at their home.


Tobacco Industry Also Benefits States
To the Editor:
The recent decision by Massachusetts and four other states to sue companies in the tobacco industry for health costs associated with smoking (news article,  Dec. 20) baffles me.
The argument is that the state pays substantial money for Medicaid and other health-care costs caused by smoking and is therefore entitled to recoup these payments.


CHIEF EXECUTIVE ADDS CHAIRMAN'S TITLE AT UNION CARBIDE
William H. Joyce, the president and chief executive of the Union Carbide Corporation, was named to the additional post of chairman, effective Jan. 1, the company said yesterday.
Mr.
Joyce succeeds Robert D. Kennedy, who will retire at the end of this month.
Mr.
Joyce, who was named president in 1993, succeeded Mr.
Kennedy as chief executive earlier this year.
Under Mr.
Kennedy, the company trimmed its operations to focus on petrochemicals, its core operations. (Dow Jones)


Spain's Leader Calls Election for March 3
Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez Marquez called elections today for March 3, signaling what could be the end of his 13 years in office.
The general election, more than a year ahead of schedule, is expected to bring in a conservative government for the first time since Mr.
Gonzalez's Socialists won power in 1982.


The Snowball Thrower Will Plead Not Guilty
Jeffery Lange was a virtually unknown 26-year-old administrative assistant from Bridgewater, N.J., until a fateful photograph was taken at last Saturday's  Giants game and he became the most-wanted snowball thrower in the country.
The picture became a symbol of the hooliganism that marred the Giants-Chargers game as fans hurled snow and ice onto the field.
The Chargers' equipment manager, Sid Brooks, was knocked out by an ice ball, players and officials were repeatedly struck, and at one point referees threatened to call the game.


Fire in a Duplex Kills 7
Seven people, including five children, died today in a fire that gutted a duplex home here, officials said.
The victims' identities and their relationship were not immediately released.
"They didn't have a chance when we got here," said the Battalion Chief, Robert Schmidt.
"The building was too much in flames."


Amstrad Chief to Quit
Amstrad P.L.C. said yesterday that its chief executive had asked to step down as the British consumer electronics maker began a program to cut costs.
David Rogers had been directed to expand Amstrad's primary consumer electronics business.
Last month, the company said manufacturing delays at its Dancall mobile phone unit would hurt earnings for the first half of its current fiscal year.
For the fiscal year that ended on June 30, Amstrad posted earnings of L2.5 million ($3.9 million) after losing a total of L95 million in the three previous years.
(Bloomberg Business News)


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball


Bosnian and Serb Troops Take a Step Back at Front Line
After over three and a half years of shelling and sniping at each other from  high-rise apartments and bunkers, Muslim and Serb forces withdrew from their frontline positions in Sarajevo today.


Drought Aid Expanded
Farmers in six more counties have been deemed eligible for Federal disaster aid because of losses caused by this year's drought.
Secretary of Agriculture Dan Glickman selected Cortland, Fulton, Lewis, Montgomery, Ontario and Washington counties as eligible for drought aid.
He also designated Yates and Lewis counties as eligible for aid because of damage from windstorms.
In all, 31 New York counties have been designated as disaster areas due to drought or windstorms this year.


Struggling Nets Can't Stay With The Rockets
Playing on another team's court has not been a fruitful experience for the Nets this season.
Entering tonight's game in the building that houses the two-time defending champion Houston Rockets, the Nets had emerged victorious in  just 3 of 13 previous road games.
The Summit doesn't offer the type of setting that would change their luck.


Texas A&amp;M Nips Michigan
Kyle Bryant kicked five field goals and Texas A&amp;M's defense was stifling tonight, sending the No. 19-ranked Aggies to a 22-20 victory over No. 14 Michigan in the Alamo Bowl.
Playing without the injured star running back Leeland McElroy, A&amp;M (9-3) generated enough offense behind three freshmen running backs to set up Bryant.


Clinton Vetoes Military Bill
President Clinton vetoed a military authorization bill because he said it would force creating an unnecessary missle defense system, but because he did not want members of the military to lose the pay in the bill, he granted a raise through executive order.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Dec. 12 about the Clinton Administration's proposal to end favorable tax treatment of some corporate fi nancings included a company official's erroneous reference to certain securities being offered by IES Utilities.
The securities are described in the company's prospectus as junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures; they are not shares.


Corrections
A picture caption in the Evening Hours column of the Styles pages on Sunday about the Christmas and Hanukkah party on Dec. 18 at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine misspelled the given name of an actor in the first public reading of  the opening volume of the Schocken Bible.
He is Ossie Davis, not Ozzie.


Derivatives In Proposal From S.E.C.
Responding to a surge in companies' investment losses, the Securities and Exchange Commission proposed yesterday that public corporations supply detailed  information on the potential risks of their holdings in complex financial derivatives.
The details, to be included as footnotes in companies' financial reports, are intended to give shareholders a clearer idea of the risks from derivatives.
These arcane securities, which are derived from, or based on some underlying market value, have produced large and unexpected losses at the Procter &amp; Gamble  Company, Gibson Greetings Inc. and other well-known companies in the past two years.
They were also the holdings that led to the bankruptcy filing by Orange County, Calif.,.


CBS News Chief Confirms He Is Leaving
Confirming reports that have swirled about him for months, Eric W. Ober said  yesterday that he was being replaced as president of CBS News, and will leave on Jan. 12, after five years in the job.
In a memo he distributed at a staff meeting yesterday, Mr.
Ober wrote, "Peter Lund has decided to make a change in the presidency of CBS News," referring to the president and chief executive of CBS Inc.


Restaurants
Restaurant critics make lousy customers.
We sneak into restaurants when they  are too new, make five or six quick visits, and are not seen again for years.
We have work to do, and we seldom visit restaurants for the sheer pleasure of eating out.
But I won't wait three years before going back to Lobster Club.
I'll be there soon, and on my own dime.
I like the casual, easygoing personality of the room, the experimental nature of the food and the innovative wine list.
And I like the menu, which is so varied that you are always certain to find something  you feel like eating.


Judge Bars Plan to Alter Policies in Foster Care
A Federal judge issued a temporary restraining order yesterday preventing New York City from changing the way it pays the private agencies that provide the bulk of foster care services, saying too many questions remained about the plan.
In issuing the order, which remains in effect until Jan. 12, Judge Robert Ward of United States District Court said there were too many outstanding issues that needed to be taken care of, and he barred the city from carrying out the changes as planned on Jan. 1.


The Noise of This Ritual Is Music
Across human cultures, the new year is greeted with noise and revelry.
Whether it occurs as spring begins (like the Chinese New Year), in the fall (like the Jewish Rosh ha-Shanah) or in the dead of winter (like this weekend's Gregorian changeover), the start of the new year is universally treated as something more than the moment to advance the calendar.
There seems to be a primal urge to tote up time's irrevocable motion while recognizing natural cycles.
A New Year's celebration functions to mark another year's survival, to blast away any bad memories of the previous year, to start again with a grin and a dance.
New Year's Eve festivities postpone anxiety about the future with lowered inhibitions and a dedication to pleasure.
Music goes with rituals, formal or informal, and New York's clubs and concert halls plan for the secular observances of New Year's Eve with entrepreneurial glee and calculation.
On a night when great numbers of people are eager to be out on the town, prices go up and, it sometimes seems, room capacities are stretched to their limits.


Alexander Seizes Role of Political Outsider
When former Gov.
Lamar Alexander of Tennessee thanks contributors at Presidential campaign fund-raising events, or woos Republicans likely to vote in the Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary, he often invites them to commit his simple mantra to memory: ABC, or "Alexander beats Clinton."
Mr.
Alexander is determined to convince caucus and primary voters that he can outfox the former Southern Governor in the Oval Office because he is also an articulate, savvy former Southern Governor, and a Washington outsider, but with  the ability to frame a positive Republican vision of America's future.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Tuesday about a debate over the safety of a new gasoline additive known as M.M.T. misstated the  reason for General Motors' recommendation against its use in Canada.
The company is concerned that M.M.T. may damage emission-control systems; the recommendation did not result from a bill in the Canadian Parliament to ban M.M.T.


Bianyang Journal;Oh, He's a Wily One, That Tibetan Medicine Man!
It was market day here and a crowd was gathering around the Tibetan medicine  man, who was trafficking in dreams and other illegal substances.
Like a mystical apparition on the side of the dusty main street, the medicine man's show was spontaneous and played to the crowd.


Communications Bill Opens Up New Rift
Supporters of a sweeping telecommunications bill scrambled to smooth over yet another apparent rift among Republican lawmakers, this one over a provision that Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, attacked as a multibillion-dollar "giveaway" to broadcasters.
Senator Dole's comment was but a brief remark in a news conference Thursday on the budget battle in Washington.
But it threatened to reopen a policy battle  of Bosnian complexity, which at least one Republican senator feared could scuttle the communications bill.


Fiesta Foes Are Keeping the Trash Talk Clean
Where have you gone, Johnny Mitchell?
Long before the Jets' tight end decided he would not speak with the news media this past season, he was one of the few players at the University of Nebraska with the potential to add spice to a week of predictable pre-bowl chatter.
Four years ago this week, when the Cornhuskers were preparing to meet the University of Miami in the Orange Bowl, Mitchell predicted an upset of the Hurricanes with a memorable warning to reporters:


Taiwan's Central Bank Chief Is Impeached
Taiwan's top Government watchdog body impeached the governor of the central bank, Y. D. Sheu, yesterday, a move that could force him out of office.
The agency accused him of shirking his responsibility in connection with one of Taiwan's biggest fraud scandals.
The agency, Control Yuan, said Mr.
Sheu had made mistakes as governor of the  central bank and also in his former post as chairman of the state-run Bank of Taiwan.


A Family in Delicate Balance


Seoul's Jailed Ex-President Put on Life-Support System
Found unconscious this morning and placed by doctors on a life-support system, former President Chun Doo Hwan of South Korea regained consciousness this afternoon.
But his aides said he would continue the 26-day hunger strike that brought him to the edge of death.
Mr.
Chun, who began his fast to protest the Government's decision to put him  on trial for staging the 1979 coup that carried him to power, was put under an oxygen mask and given nutrients intravenously.
By this afternoon, he had recovered enough to speak for a few minutes to two of his sons.
But Mr.
Chun's aides insisted that IV tubes had been inserted without consulting him, and that  the hunger strike would continue.


Destination Tempe: Post-Season Journey Begins
After 17 weeks, the National Football League season has boiled down to its most exciting and entertaining phase -- the 12-team playoff race for Super Bowl  XXX on Jan. 28 in Tempe, Ariz.
The American Football Conference playoff race kicks off with two rematches from two weeks ago -- the Bills (10-6) will play host today to the Dolphins (9-7) and tomorrow the Colts will visit the Chargers (9-7).


A Heartbreaker for Columbia
When University of Miami point guard Kevin Norris launched a desperation heave from half court with 130 seconds left in the game tonight, the Columbia Lions were being tenacious.
They trailed heavily favored Miami by just 60-55.
But Norris's wild fling as  the shot clock was reaching zero became a "proverbial dagger in the heart," Lions Coach Armond Hill said.
The ball slammed off the backboard and went straight through the net.
"I wanted to throw my hands up, put on my jacket and leave," Hill said.
The Hurricanes went on to a 69-62 victory before 1,474 at Miami Arena.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Charities Receive $12 Billion
New Jersey-based charities reported raising $12 billion this year, with $1 billion coming from direct contributions made by state residents.
The remaining  $11 billion was raised through government and foundation grants and other sources, according to a new state report.
Mark S. Herr, director of the state Division of Consumer Affairs, said yesterday that the $12 billion was used this way: $9.3 billion for program services and $2.7 billion for fund-raising and management.


Gain by Islamic Party Shakes Turkey to the Foundation of Its SecularState
The strong showing of an Islamic party in this week's national election has thrown Turkey's politics into turmoil, and posed difficult questions about the future role of religion in national life.
No one here believes that this country, which has been strictly secular since Kemal Ataturk proclaimed the Turkish Republic in 1923, is about to fall under fundamentalist Islamic rule.
But an Islamic party has emerged as a vigorous new  political force to challenge the tired and largely corrupt secular parties that  have run the country for most of this century.


Road Dust Could Turn Nets' Year Into Ashes
When the season began, the Nets fancied themselves a playoff-caliber team.
If all went reasonably well, 40-plus victories did not seem unrealistic.
Certainly, an improvement over last season's 32-50 record was a given.


Mexican? Yes. Elvis? Maybe.
On Wednesday, as pine trees lined Manhattan blocks waiting for a visit from the Sanitation Department, El Vez came to Wetlands with his Christmas revue.
For El Vez, who bills himself as the Mexican Elvis Presley, there is no better time  to celebrate Christmas than after the fact: it gives his show maximum kitsch appeal.
Originally Robert Lopez and formerly a member of the Los Angeles punk band the Zeros, El Vez is not just an Elvis impersonator.
He may look and dress like  a young Elvis Presley (though Elvis never had El Vez's pencil-thin mustache), and he does sing the occasional Elvis song, but El Vez is his own creation.


The Neediest Cases;For Some, Giving Has a Very Special Meaning During the Holidays
For many people, the days between Christmas and New Year's are a ritual period of celebration and self-indulgence, a time to revel and relax in the company of friends and family.
But for others, the merriment of this week can be appreciated only after contributing to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
"The holidays would be incomplete without a small check to help a mother care for a retarded child," wrote Naomi Goldman of Rockville Centre, L.I., in a note  with her $25 donation.


Robert Farber, 47; Known for AIDS Art
Robert Farber, an artist whose installations and paintings dealt with AIDS, died last Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 47.
The cause was AIDS, said his mother, Lillian.


3 Are Arrested on Evidence From an Internet Wiretap
In a case that Federal authorities said involved the first court-approved wiretap of the Internet, three people have been charged in what officials described as an international conspiracy to sell illegal electronic equipment.
The charges were announced yesterday in New York by Zachary W. Carter, the United States Attorney in Brooklyn, the Secret Service and the Drug Enforcement  Administration.
They said the investigation had begun last spring after AT&amp;T officials complained that cellular telephones programmed with stolen numbers and eavesdropping devices were being advertised for sale through a site on the World Wide Web.


Mediobanca Will Bid For Ferruzzi Control
Mediobanca S.p.A., the Italian merchant bank, put an end to market speculation yesterday by announcing that it would begin a public offer for control of Ferruzzi Finanziaria S.p.A., the food and agricultural group.
The announcement followed nearly two months of legal wrangling by Mediobanca in an effort to overturn an order by Italian stock market regulators to start a public offer for Ferruzzi.
Mediobanca bought a 10.7 percent stake in Ferruzzi at the end of October, after the collapse of a plan to merge the troubled company into Gemina S.p.A., a holding company often used by Mediobanca for its financial dealings.
Mediobanca  was seen as wanting to tighten its grip on Ferruzzi, which fell under control of a consortium of Italian banks two years ago after nearly collapsing.
The powerful merchant bank has traditionally been able to take effective control of  Italian industrial companies by holding small stakes and masterminding a web of  cross-holdings by its allies.
(Dow Jones)


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Dynamics Of Playing With Music
A program consisting of a few casually chosen standards played by a quartet of young musicians doesn't always offer much, but during the alto saxophonist Sherman Irby's first set at Smalls on Wednesday night, a group concept blossomed in front of the audience.
Mr.
Irby, a skilled and carefully controlled improviser, likes dynamics.
He and his group first let the music drizzle away to silence and then, with a jolt, jerked it to a shout.
Leading a group of some of the best younger musicians around -- the pianist James Hurt and the bassist John Benitez -- along with the veteran drummer Clifford Barbaro, Mr.
Irby went after tranquillity.
"Body and Soul" and "I Hear  a Rhapsody" opened with Mr.
Irby's solo saxophone, teasing the melodies, accenting different spots or resolving on different notes.
At times he suggested the sort of introspective distance, though not the sound, of a young Lee Konitz.


His Child Welfare Response Was Too Slow, Mayor Says
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said this week that he had not acted quickly enough to address problems at the city's Child Welfare Administration, whose management has come under scrutiny after the death last month of 6-year-old Elisa Izquierdo.
But he said that his administration had inherited the agency's problems from  his predecessors, David N. Dinkins and Edward I. Koch, and he criticized both of them for failing to act forcefully to straighten out the troubled agency.


Forte Expected to Offer A Dividend to Fight Bid
Forte P.L.C., the hotel concern based in Britain, is expected to announce a special dividend on Tuesday that could deal a significant blow to Granada Group  P.L.C.'s L3.3 billion ($5.1 billion) hostile takeover bid for Forte, analysts and investors said yesterday.
Investors expect Forte to use proceeds from the planned sale of its restaurants and budget hotels to Whitbread P.L.C., announced Wednesday, to pay shareholders a loyalty bonus.
The sale is expected to raise L1.05 billion.
Some analysts forecast a special dividend of at least 20 pence a  share and possibly as much as 50 pence.
A special dividend, or, alternatively, promises of greatly increased regular  dividends for years to come, may be what tips the odds in the takeover fight in  favor of Forte, industry analysts said.
Forte also said yesterday that it had increased its 1995 pretax profit forecast, because of strong sales at its hotels in December, to L190 million ($292.6 million) from L185 million.
Forte said the  revised forecast represented a gain of 50 percent over 1994.
(Dow Jones)


Seton Hall Makes Every Shot Count
Playing aggressive defense in the clutch and getting timely scoring from its  playmaker, Danny Hurley, Seton Hall captured its tournament for the fourth time  with an 81-74 triumph over St.
Joseph's of Philadelphia tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Hurley, the senior guard from Jersey City, led all scorers with 24 points in  39 minutes of action and shared the tournament's most-valuable-player honors with Adrian Griffin, the Pirates' senior swingman, who had 11 points but played  only 24 minutes because of foul trouble.


Jacques Schwalbe, Philanthropist, 94
Jacques Schwalbe, a Manhattan business executive who was a prominent supporter of Jewish institutions, died on Tuesday at New York Hospital.
He was 94 and lived in Manhattan.
Among Mr.
Schwalbe's principal beneficiaries were Yeshiva University, where he established a Samson Raphael Hirsch Professorship in Torah to keep alive the  writings of a man considered important to Jewish tradition, and the Wurzweiler School of Social Work, which he helped found.
He was also a financial supporter  of the university's affiliate, the Rabbi Isaac Elchanan Theological Seminary.


AMERICAN PRESIDENT COS. PLANS PRETAX CHARGE
The American President Companies said it would take a pretax charge of about  $48 million in the fourth quarter to cover the costs of dismissing about 950 workers and closing some offices.
The company, which is based in Oakland, Calif., said the after-tax effect of the charge would be about $30 million, or $1.12 a share, resulting in a loss for the quarter.
In the fourth quarter of 1994, American President earned $22.5 million, or 69 cents a share, on a fully diluted basis.
The company, which provides container transportation through rail and truck services in Asia, the Americas, Europe and the Middle East, said it expected to save $48 million in operating expenses in 1996 as a result of the moves.


About New York;Lawn Is Bereft Of a Madonna. It's Time to Go.
THERE aren't many garden Madonnas left in New Lots.
Most of them traded Brooklyn for the 'burbs decades ago, along with the Italian homeowners whose yards they graced.


WELLPOINT AND HEALTH SYSTEMS REACH AN ACCORD
Wellpoint Health Networks Inc. and Health Systems International Inc. said yesterday that they had reached a settlement to end the planned $1.89 billion acquisition of Health Systems by Wellpoint.
The agreement was expected, coming two weeks after the companies said they were conducting talks to end the planned merger.
Apparently, neither company will have to pay a breakup fee to the other.
Company officials could not be reached for comment.


Holiday on Monday
Monday is New Year's Day.


Child Welfare Is Slow to Improve Despite Court Order
Four months after a Federal judge put the District of Columbia's chaotic child-welfare system under the control of an independent receiver, officials here say they are only beginning to come to grips with the depths of its problems.
The receiver, Jerome G. Miller, is still trying to account for all the children in the agency's custody and to determine how its budget is being spent, he said in an interview.


7 Are Charged With Conspiracy in Illegal Gun Trade
A gun-running ring that acquired hundreds of pistols from a dealer in Alabama and brought them to New York City for sale to street criminals has been smashed  with the indictment of seven men, including two convicted felons from Brooklyn,  on firearms conspiracy charges, Federal officials said yesterday.
During a 16-month period in 1992 and 1993, the officials said, the conspirators, who included sellers, secret buyers and middlemen, acquired 366 handguns in Birmingham for as little as $100 apiece, and conveyed them to New York, where they were illegally resold for as much as $500 each.


Relief for St. John's, a Rout for Kentucky
Kentucky got a victory last night that it breezily expected, while St.
John's got one that it desperately needed.
The second-ranked Wildcats are ravenously pressing toward the Final Four, while the Red Storm is slowly climbing up from rock bottom, its season and Coach Brian Mahoney's job dangling in jeopardy.
With 29 points from guard Tony Delk and a suffocating defense in the second half, Kentucky (9-1) turned a 3-point lead into a 106-79 blowout of overmatched  Iona in the championship game of the Holiday Festival at Madison Square Garden.
Delk, who delivered six 3-pointers last night and 53 points in two games, was named the tournament's most valuable player.


More Than $65 Million For Adopted Duke Daughter
The adopted daughter of the late billionaire Doris Duke has agreed to drop several claims against the estate in return for more than $65 million, according to a settlement approved in Manhattan Surrogate's Court.
Under the terms approved by Surrogate Renee Roth on Thursday, Chandi Gail Heffner will receive $800,000 by Monday and $65 million on Wednesday.
Her lawyer, David Keyko, said yesterday that in return, Ms.
Heffner had agreed never to talk about the life of Miss Duke, a tobacco heiress who was one of the  world's richest women.


A Medicaid Compromise
The White House and Republican leaders say they are making progress toward reopening Government offices.
But they must overcome scores of other disagreements if they are to complete the often promised seven-year deficit reduction package.
Many of the disputes will be resolved by splitting differences over money.
But in a few instances, most notably Medicaid, the two sides are battling over principles.
These ideological fissures cannot be entirely closed.
But with enough good will and flexibility, they can be bridged.
Under current Medicaid rules, Washington pays at least half the cost of providing health insurance to the poor.
In return states must agree to provide an enumerated set of benefits, like coverage of hospital and nursing-home bills, to specific groups of poor individuals, including children, pregnant women, the  elderly and the disabled.


BBC Cuts French Service
The British Broadcasting Corporation is about to stop broadcasting to radio listeners in France, who have been receiving its broadcasts in French since World War II.
The programming, used by 100 French stations, is being ended at midnight Sunday because of a $9 million gap in the agency's budget, Andrew Taussig, the BBC's European regional head, said today.


Japan's Big Story: Nomo
The rookie season of the Los Angeles Dodgers pitching star HIDEO NOMO has been selected as the top sports story of the year in Japan by both The Daily Yomiuri newspaper and the Kyodo News Service, a Japanese news agency.


Getting Ready for New Year's Razzmatazz


Mentally Ill Need Support, Not Forced Drugs
To the Editor:
As someone who has been homeless and mentally ill on the streets of New York  City and who now works with others who have had similar experiences, I must respond to "Mental Illness, Public Safety" (Op-Ed, Dec. 23).
Rael Jean Isaac and D. J. Jaffe propose that certain people who have mental illnesses be forced to take medication "as a condition of their freedom."


Lesser Charges for Police in Motorist's Death
Three white police officers accused of killing a black motorist will stand trial on charges of involuntary manslaughter but not on more serious charges, including third-degree murder, a judge ruled on Thursday.
Judge James McGregor of Allegheny County Court of Common Pleas dismissed charges of third-degree murder and official oppression against Officer John Vojtas and Lieut.
Milton Mulholland of the Brentwood Police Department after a preliminary hearing that lasted several days.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Boyfriend Kills Woman, Self
Carmen St.
Denis, 25, was shot and killed by her 20-year-old boyfriend, Jeff  Major, before he committed suicide because their relationship had gone sour, according to the Ocean County Prosecutor's office.


Harrimans Settle Suit With Widow
Ending a chapter in a saga that involved old money, family feuds and some of  the most prominent names in Washington, a settlement was announced yesterday in  the legal battle between Ambassador Pamela C. Harriman and the heirs of her husband W. Averell Harriman, the former Governor of New York.
The heirs had accused Mrs.
Harriman, the Ambassador to Paris who had been the pre-eminent hostess and fund-raiser of the Democratic Party, and her advisers of squandering millions of dollars from the late Governor's estate in a series of ill-conceived investments.


Teen-Ager's Killer Jailed on New Charges
Bail was revoked today for a teen-ager charged with robbing a Brooklyn restaurant while awaiting sentencing for a fatal stabbing last year in Mount Vernon High School.
The youth, Hopeton Minott, 18, was to have been sentenced Jan. 8 for the Oct. 24, 1994, stabbing of Shebuel Jackson, 17.
He was convicted of first-degree manslaughter this October and had been free on bail while awaiting sentencing.


Athletic Director Leaves Temple for Memphis
The University of Memphis filled its athletic director slot yesterday by hiring R. C. JOHNSON away from Temple.


Markets Closed
All financial markets, banks and government offices will be closed on Monday  in observance of New Year's Day.


New, but Not Untested, In Met's 'Queen of Spades'
Wednesday evening's performance of Tchaikovsky's "Queen of Spades" at the Metropolitan Opera introduced a new pair of leads, but the new Ghermann and Lisa were hardly untested.
The Armenian tenor Gegam Grigorian, making his debut, and  the soprano Maria Guleghina are veterans of the Kirov Opera's production with the same conductor, Valery Gergiyev, including tour performances at the Met in 1992.
During the Kirov visit, Mr.
Grigorian also sang a memorable Dmitri in "Boris  Godunov." That normally thankless role ideally suited his dark, even-toned lyric tenor, with its reasonably free top and a distinctive intensity that is built into the flow of the line.


Westinghouse Adopts a Plan Intended to Deter Takeovers
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation said yesterday that its board had adopted a "poison pill" measure intended to deter any takeover offers by making  them punishingly expensive.
Westinghouse transformed itself from a wallflower industrial company into a potential media powerhouse with last month's $5.4 billion purchase of CBS Inc.
Now, analysts say, Michael Jordan, the chairman and chief executive, needs to make the purchase pay off and lift the stock, or else Westinghouse will be in danger of being swallowed by companies that covet its broadcasting acquisition.


Search to Intensify For Some Barings Assets
Authorities have stepped up efforts to locate the lost assets of the defunct  Singapore futures operations of Barings P.L.C., obtaining a court order to interrogate six former executives of the failed British merchant bank.
The search for the assets by the accounting firm of Price Waterhouse had so far focused on the jailed trader Nicholas W. Leeson, who has been blamed for the $1.38 billion collapse of Barings in February.
Armed with a High Court order obtained this week, Price Waterhouse will try to force the former executives to  appear in court for questioning, the firm's lawyer said yesterday.
Price Waterhouse will try to get three of the executives who are out of Singapore -- Peter Norris, Michael Kilian and Roy Johnson -- to return to answer questions.
The other officials who will be questioned are Simon Jones, James Bax and Fu Ya Yin, the lawyer said.
All three live in Singapore.
Also yesterday, a spokeswoman for Mr.
Leeson's lawyer said that Mr.
Leeson had decided not to appeal his 6-year prison sentence for his conviction on charges related to the fall of Barings.
(AP)


Pulling Truants Back to School;Jury of New Haven Peers Discourages Dropping Out
The eighth grader from Jackie Robinson Middle School slouched defiantly.
On the verge of being sent to juvenile court for truancy, she had agreed to appear  before a truancy court made up of students, a jury of her peers, on a recent Friday to discuss what would get her back in school.
But her posture and her answers screamed "attitude." "Not you," she seemed to say.
The problem, she said, was that some days she just did not get out of bed: "If I get up, I go to school. It don't have nothing to do with someone telling me to go to school."


Austrian Phone License
An Austro-German consortium headed by Siemens Osterreich, a unit of Siemens A.G., and Deutsche Telekom has won the license to operate Austria's second mobile telephone network.
The group, O-Call, which also represents Austrian banking, insurance and publishing interests, will pay 4 billion schillings ($400 million) for the license, the state Industry Minister, Viktor Klima, said.
Four  other groups were also in the running to operate the network, which is set to begin operations July 1.
Austria's state-owned postal service also runs a network.
(Reuters)


Hog and Pork Belly Prices Drop On Signal of Abundant Supplies
Live hog and pork belly prices fell their daily trading limits yesterday after an Agriculture Department report showed that the size of the nation's hog  herd rose unexpectedly to a 15-year high, signaling that supplies will be abundant next year.
The report also drove corn prices to a 12-year high on expectations that demand for animal feed would rise.
The unexpected growth in the hog herd comes as corn stockpiles are headed for 20-year lows and export demand is soaring.


Lita Grey Chaplin Actress, 88
Lita Grey Chaplin, an actress and Charlie Chaplin's second wife, died today at the Motion Picture and Television Hospital here.
She was 88.
Mrs.
Chaplin, whose original name was Lillita Louise MacMurray, changed her name to Lita Grey while trying to break into films as a teen-ager.
She worked for Chaplin at his Hollywood studio when she was 12.
She was 16 when she married him in 1924; Chaplin was 35 and near the height of his fame.
Their three-year marriage produced two sons, Sydney and the late Charles Jr.


Hormel and Conagra Settle Catfish Suit
Conagra Inc. and the Hormel Foods Corporation said today that they had agreed to pay a total of $21.1 million to settle a class-action lawsuit contending that they had conspired with other companies for a decade to fix prices on processed  catfish.
Conagra, which sells fish under the Van Camp's brand name, said it would pay  $13.6 million.
Hormel said it would pay $7.5 million.


Bridge
Enthusiasts who can read French should consider a subscription to Le Bridgeur, one of the world's leading bridge magazines.
It costs $88 for 11 issues annually, payable through The Bridge World, 39 West 94th Street, New York, N.Y., 10025. (Add $36.50 for airmail.)
Le Bridgeur is the sponsor of the annual award for the best play, organized by the International Bridge Press Assocation.
The 1995 award, made during the World Championships in Beijing in October, appropriately went to a Frenchman, Philippe Cronier, a member of the French open team that won the bronze medals.
He was honored for the diagramed deal, from the European Pairs Championship, when he was South and played a contract of five diamonds.


Yankees Make Pitch to Finley And Rogers
While lower-level club officials were introducing two Cuban pitchers to New York in hopes of luring them here, the highest-level Yankees official was in Tampa, Fla., yesterday courting two American League pitchers.
George Steinbrenner met several times with Kenny Rogers and his agent, Scott  Boras, but they reached no agreement.
He also met with Randy Hendricks, the agent for Chuck Finley, like Rogers a 30-something left-hander.
No agreement was reached there either.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Meningitis Warning Issued
One family has lost a child and others may be at risk from a deadly brain inflammation, officials warned yesterday.
Bacterial meningitis recently killed a baby who attended the Center day-care program, officials say.
They are urging parents and staff at the Center to contact their doctors or a hospital emergency room.


Grief Over India Fire Turns Into Anger at the State
As Ram Chandra Das waited to officiate at the funeral pyre of a teen-age girl who died of burns suffered in a fire last weekend that devastated a school ceremony here, he offered a homespun version of the philosophy of acceptance that Hindu holy men have been preaching for millenniums.
"Life is like going to the bank: You borrow money, and later you repay," Mr.
Das said, gesturing across mounds of ashes at the Heaven's Land crematorium, where more than 500 fire victims were cremated.
"For these poor people, it was time to repay."


BUSINESS DIGEST
G.O.P.
Plan to Restart Government Dies in Talks President Clinton and top Republican leaders met for nearly four hours in the Cabinet Room of the White House in an attempt to hammer out an accord to balance the Federal budget in seven years.
They did not comment on the talks, which aides said would resume today.


INSIDE
Turkey's Islamic Challenge The strong showing by an Islamic party in Turkish elections this week is a challenge to the secular parties now in power to stop their bickering and to try to achieve unity.
Page 4.


Corrections
Because of a transcription error, an article on Friday about the University of Nebraska football team misquoted the team's coach in some editions.
Commenting on his decision to allow a star running back to rejoin the team after the player had pleaded no contest to assault charges, the coach, Tom Osborne, said: "Just from a pure football standpoint it was a tragic thing. You saw a great athlete have a senior year just destroyed."


DEMOCRATS REJECT A PLAN TO RETURN FEDERAL WORKERS
When high-level negotiations on a balanced budget resumed today with President Clinton at the table, Republican leaders offered a plan that would put all 260,000 furloughed Federal employees back to work immediately without pay.
But the plan fell apart as quickly as others have in the past month as Senate Democrats instantly slammed the door on it.
Arriving at the White House this afternoon, Speaker Newt Gingrich said he was considering supporting legislation proposed in the Senate last week that would declare all furloughed Federal employees "essential" and require them to return  to their jobs.
The Senate bill would not reopen the Government officially.
But it does include a formal, legal guarantee of the back pay that Congress and the  White House have promised the workers will receive after a deal is reached.


Dow Climbs 21.32 Points; Gain for the Year Is 33.5%
The stock market ended its best year in two decades yesterday with one more round of gains.
Despite uncertainties over the Federal budget stalemate in Washington, the Dow Jones industrial average advanced 21.32 points, to 5,117.12.
For the year, the Dow gained 33.5 percent and exceeded two thousand-point milestones.
It also  scored 69 new highs -- the largest number ever in a single year.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Monday about Jim Henson Productions misstated the date of Mr.
Henson's death.
It was May 1990, not 1991.


Man Killed by Truck Near Bus Terminal
A California man was struck and killed by a truck outside the Port Authority  bus terminal yesterday when he ran into traffic to elude officers who were chasing him, the police said.
The Port Authority police said they were called to the south wing of the terminal's main concourse about 5:30 A.M. after several people complained that a man was swinging a pipe and menacing them there.
When the officers approached, the man, identified as Noe Servin, 27, ran out of the building and dashed onto Eighth Avenue into the path of a northbound truck, said D. Joy Faber, a spokeswoman for the Port Authority.


Helen H. Miller, 96, Biographer, Is Dead
Helen Hill Miller, a prolific biographer and journalist, died on Tuesday at George Washington University Medical Center in Washington.
She was 96, and had homes in Washington and Kitty Hawk, N.C.
Mrs.
Miller wrote more than 20 books.
Her biographies included "George Mason: Constitutionalist" (1938), "Captains From Devon: The Great Elizabethan Seafarers Who Won the World for England" and "Colonel Parke of Virginia: The Greatest Hector in Town" (1990).
She also wrote six books on Greece and several works on  foreign policy.


Federal Shutdown Hits Hard In Area Around Yellowstone
A high mountain sun burned brightly, a fresh snowpack crunched underfoot, and, outside the office of Yellowstone Adventures, a row of new snowmobiles beckoned with the latest conveniences -- from foot warmers to heated handlebars.
"This time last year, all 130 snowmobiles were out every day," fretted Ken Takata, manager of the rental agency.
"This week, we are averaging 40 to 50."


Rebuilding, Yes, but G.I.'s Think Too About Hearts and Minds
Capt.
Edwin F. McDaries rode into this deserted this morning on the first NATO mission to assist in the rebuilding of Bosnia.
There wasn't much to see.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about corporate mergers misstated the name of a securities research consultant.
It is the Securities Data Company, not the Security Data Corporation.


A Drought In Spanish Olive Oil;Old-Style Producer Tilts at Modernity
Shoppers looking for extra-virgin olive oil may not think they have much in common with Juan Antonio Armentero Ruiz.
Mr.
Armentero, 75, wears a dirty black beret and has a shiny pink face and a  mouth with only a few teeth, one of which is gold.
And he is convinced that the  United States is exploding nuclear bombs under the nearby Andalusian hills here  in southern Spain.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Lobbying Company Splits Up
Policy Management and Communications, one of the state's best-connected lobbying companies, will shed its public relations arm in a friendly breakup to  focus on government lobbying.
Hazel Gluck, a friend and confidante of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, heads the company; Judith Shaw, Mrs.
Whitman's first chief of staff, is one of its partners.


Optimistic Israeli and Syrian Negotiators Recess Maryland Talks
Negotiations between Israel and Syria recessed in rural Maryland today on an  optimistic note with both sides agreeing to continue meeting informally here until their talks officially resume next week.
"Both sides considered the talks useful and conducive to further discussion," the State Department said in a statement issued after three days of meetings on  an eventual Syrian-Israeli peace treaty.


Frivolous Prisoner Lawsuits Make a Mockery of Legal System;Brutality Begets Crime
To the Editor:
Re your article on violence at New York's Clinton state prison (front page, Dec. 19) and "Crowded Jails Spur New Look at Punishment" (front page, Dec. 25):


Nation's Costly Defense Strategy Doesn't Make Military Sense;Hail Esprit de Corps
To the Editor:
I take great exception to the statement that it "seems out of date" to maintain two National Guard M-1 tank companies on Staten Island (news article, Dec. 26).


Beliefs
Lethal beliefs, the Pope, financial scandals, politics, race and sex (but not, for a change, sexuality).
Yes, religion, too, has its annual lists of top stories, and these were the themes running through most of them.
For the religion reporters in secular media who constitute the Religion Newswriters Association, 1995's top story was the religiously motivated assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel.


Fleury Has Crohn's
THEO FLEURY, the leading scorer for the National Hockey League's Calgary Flames, has Crohn's disease.
Crohn's is an inflammation of the digestive tract that causes abdominal pain and can create difficulty digesting food.
It can cause diarrhea, fever, anorexia and weight loss.
Fleury can control the disease with medication that he must take for the rest of his life.
"But it won't prevent me from playing," he said.
(AP)


Camby's Bad Knee Can't Slow Minutemen
UMass 78, Southern Cal 63


Dollar Ends Tumultuous Year By Rising Against Japanese Yen
The dollar finished a tumultuous year yesterday by rising against the Japanese yen but weakening against most other major currencies in a pre-holiday  session of light volume and technically oriented trading.
On the final trading day of 1995, market participants focused mostly on wrapping up transactions and putting their portfolios in order before heading home early for the three-day New Year's weekend.
By midafternoon, most of the day's activity was complete.


THE CONTENDERS: Fifth article of a series;For Dornan, Keyes and Taylor, Low Polls Can't Dash High Hopes
Every American Presidential campaign draws a handful of candidates whose odds of reaching the White House are too absurdly long to calculate.
But whatever impels these politically impractical hopefuls to dream the impossible dream, they often turn out to be the light ingredient that saves Presidential contests from turning into endlessly bland heavy cake.


AT&amp;T Buyout Plan Seems to Get Tepid Response
A top executive at the AT&amp;T Corporation estimated yesterday that only about 3,600 out of 72,000 managers accepted a buyout offer to leave the company, adding that AT&amp;T will issue "involuntary offers" of termination to thousands of  other white-collar workers in January.
AT&amp;T is racing to reduce its payroll as it prepares to split itself into three companies -- one for communication services, one for manufacturing communications equipment and one for making computers.


MOODY'S INDICATES RATINGS ON $1 BILLION OF ISSUES
Moody's Investors Service will give the Kmart Corporation's proposed issue of $1 billion worth of new stock and bonds an investment-grade rating for one class of securities, and ratings below investment grade for two others, if the struggling retailer goes through with the sale.
The ratings are still subject to a possible downgrade, Moody's said this week.
The credit-rating agency's move came a week after Kmart reached an agreement to immediately pay back $548 million of its real estate debt if its credit rating should fall below investment grade, or to "junk" status.
Mary Lorencz, a spokeswoman for Kmart, which is based in Troy, Mich., declined to comment yesterday on the latest rating.


M. B. Williams, 83, Lawmaker for 49 Years
Marshall Burns Williams, the President pro tempore of the South Carolina Senate whose legislative career of almost 50 years made him the longest-serving  State Senator in the United States, died on Thursday at Providence Hospital in Columbia, S.C.
He was 83 and lived in Orangeburg.
The cause was complications from heart disease, hospital officials said.


Russians Begin to Gild the Communist Past
On New Year's Eve, Russia's largest television network is to broadcast a three-hour special intended to tap into the growing nostalgia for Soviet times.
This slick tribute to Stalinist propaganda films that idealize life on the collective farm stars Russia's best-known pop singers recreating vignettes from creaky classics like the 1950 musical "Cossacks of the Kuban."


Treasury Prices Rise Despite Economic Report
Going into the final session of the year, prices of Treasury securities rallied hard in thin volume, as market perceptions of a weak economy and optimism over budget talks overshadowed a surprisingly strong report on the economy from a non-Government source.
Some profit taking emerged after the Chicago Purchasing Managers index came in at a stronger-than-expected 57.6 for December, up from 49.9 in November, but optimism on the budget talks, which resume today, still overshadowed the report.
Early-morning talks between lower-level aides were expected to lead to a meeting between President Clinton, Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich and the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole.


STOCK RETREATS BY 10% AS PAINE WEBBER CUTS ITS RATING
Barnes &amp; Noble Inc.'s stock fell 10 percent yesterday after an analyst at Paine Webber cut his day-old rating on the book retailer's stock over concern about sales at its bookstores.
Barnes &amp; Noble had risen 5 percent on Thursday after Craig Bibb, the analyst, raised the stock to "buy" from "attractive" based on expectations of strong sales.
Mr.
Bibb did an about-face yesterday, cutting his rating for the New York-based retailer's stock to "neutral" based on calls to other specialty retailers in the Northeast who said sales had fallen because  of the snowstorms leading up to Christmas.


56 Executions This Year Are Most Since 1957
Fifty-six murderers were executed in the United States this year, the highest national figure since 1957.
And with more than 3,000 men and women now on death rows, 1996 may bring an even higher total, experts said.


Dutch Link a Suspect to Oklahoma Inquiry
Dutch newspapers reported today that a man fighting extradition to the United States was linked to suspects in the Oklahoma City bombing.
But in Washington, the Justice Department said there was no connection.
The Netherlands has granted a request to extradite the man, Daniel Spiegelman, on unrelated charges, but three Dutch newspapers reported that the suspect was also linked to Timothy J. McVeigh and Terry L. Nichols, the two men  charged with bombing the Federal Building in Oklahoma City last April.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;First Tougher D.W.I. Case
On a highway just before midnight, a man driving a black 1995 Mercedes Benz crossed the double line while trying to pass the car ahead of him and collided head-on with a 1988 Honda, killing its occupant but escaping injury.
That's how Charles R. Buckley, Acting Prosecutor for Bergen County, described what happened Thursday night on Skyline Drive.
Mr.
Buckley said Joseph Clare, 34, of Ringwood, has been charged with driving while intoxicated and vehicular homicide in the death of Edward A. Mitchell, 46, of Wanaque.
Mr.
Buckley said this is the county's first case under a new state law requiring a three-year minimum prison term for drunken drivers who kill.


Russian Diver Is Found Dead
The Olympic medal-winning diver Yelena Mirochina was found dead outside her Moscow apartment, the police said today.
Mirochina, 21, either jumped or was pushed from a window in her fifth-floor apartment on Dec. 18, said a duty officer for the Moscow city police.


New Jerseyan Settles Suit On Land Deal By Prosecutor
Somerset County will pay $435,000 to settle a civil rights lawsuit charging that a former county prosecutor, Nicholas L. Bissell Jr., bullied a New Jersey resident into signing away valuable real estate.
The resident, James L. Guiffre, said that although the three-year court fight had been financially and emotionally draining, he felt vindicated because his efforts had helped rid Somerset County of Mr.
Bissell's "lawless ways."


Frivolous Prisoner Lawsuits Make a Mockery of Legal System
To the Editor:
"Prisoners Have Rights, Too" (editorial, Dec. 22) and the related news article (front page, Dec. 19) glossed over the critical problem of frivolous inmate lawsuits that clog our courts and waste tax dollars.


Feed the Hungry in North Korea
Grave food shortages worsened by floods have put millions of North Koreans at risk of severe malnutrition.
That could lead to violent political unrest, disruption of a hard-won agreement to contain North Korea's nuclear program and  a tide of refugees streaming into South Korea and China.
What the Kim regime has done already is startling.
Abandoning the cult of self-reliance that has defined Communist North Korea since its creation, the regime asked the world for emergency food assistance.
The United Nations estimates that three million tons of grain are needed.


At Bosnia Post, Gunshots and Friendly Encounters
Who knows if the shots were really meant for them, but the fact remains: the  other night, Sgt.
Robert Register and Specialist Randy Stachewicz were fixing a break in a coil of concertina wire here when they heard a bang.
Sergeant Register said they looked up and another bullet came whistling into the woods over his left shoulder.
"I would say it kind of reminded me, 'Damn, Sergeant Register, you could get  killed over here,' " he said.


Require H.M.O.'s to Provide Emergency Care
To the Editor
"Doctors Say H.M.O.'s Limit What They Can Tell Patients" (front page, Dec. 21) offered an explanation for why -- and how -- health maintenance organizations routinely deny emergency care to their patients despite life-threatening symptoms.


IVAX IS APPROVED BY F.D.A. ON GENERIC ASTHMA DRUG
The Ivax Corporation has received Federal approval to sell a generic form of  the most commonly used version of the asthma drug albuterol in the United States.
The Food and Drug Administration approval is for a small canister, called a metered dose aerosol inhaler, that delivers albuterol into the mouth when the user squeezes it and inhales.
The brand-name version of the product is  called Ventolin Inhalation Aerosol and is sold by Glaxo Wellcome P.L.C.'s Allen &amp; Hanburys unit.
Ivax, which is based in Miami, has sold the inhaler around the world since the late 1980's.
The F.D.A. has approved several other generic forms of albuterol.


In the Absence of Ewing, the Knicks Lack Presence
When the Knicks arrived at the USAir Arena tonight, Patrick Ewing's right ankle was tucked snugly in a brace and Don Nelson was assuring everyone who asked that nothing was psychologically wrong with his team.
When they left the building they were totally drained, losing to the Washington Bullets, 127-120, in an overtime affair that tested their resiliency  for about 60 seconds too long.


Telecom Bill: Another Day, Another Rift
Supporters of a sweeping telecommunications bill scrambled today to smooth over yet another apparent rift among Republican lawmakers, this one over a provision that the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, attacked as a multibillion-dollar "giveaway" to broadcasters.
Senator Dole's comment was just a brief reference in a news conference Thursday on the broader budget battle in Washington.
But it threatened to reopen a policy battle of Bosnian complexity, which at least one Republican senator feared could scuttle the entire communications bill.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY Flyers Get the Bounce


New York Hospital Agency Issues New Rules for Midwife Deliveries
New York City's public hospitals agency has drawn up its first systemwide rules for midwives, as part of an array of changes over the last year that officials say have already reduced injuries to babies and mothers in the delivery rooms of the city's 11 public hospitals.
The new regulations set out in detail what midwives may and may not do on their own and make clear that senior doctors must assume responsibility for difficult deliveries.
The new rules are likely to have a significant impact on a hospital system where midwives, nurses with specialized training in childbirth,  handle thousands of births each year.


Heartbeat Drug Wins Approval
Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn Inc. said today that it had won approval from the Food and Drug Administration to market a drug to treat common heartbeat irregularities that are often treated with electric shocks.
The drug, Corvert, is intended to rapidly convert either of the arrhythmias, known as atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter, back to normal rhythm, the drug maker said.


Independence Bowl Tally: 1 Tiger Victory, 14 Records
In a game filled with big offensive and special-teams plays, it took the Louisiana State defense to finally break the Independence Bowl wide open last night in Shreveport, La.
Gabe Northern's 37-yard fumble recovery for a touchdown put L.S.U. up by 11 points with 9 minutes 20 seconds left in the third quarter.
Less than a minute later, Allen Stansberry's interception set up another score and the Tigers, in their first bowl game since 1988, went on to beat Michigan State by 45-26.


Joel Solomon, 63; Headed Blood Banks
Joel Martin Solomon, former chief executive officer of the American Association of Blood Banks, died on Wednesday at the Shady Grove Nursing Center  in Shady Grove, Md.
He was 63.
The cause was complications from a brain tumor, his family said.


WICKES LUMBER TAKES CHARGE AGAINST EARNINGS
The Wickes Lumber Company said yesterday that it would take an unspecified charge against earnings in the fourth quarter to close 16 stores and to complete other revamping moves.
Up to 350 people will be dismissed.
Wickes Lumber, a building materials retailer, also said it was discussing with bank lenders an extension of its revolving-credit agreement that expires in the fourth quarter of 1996.
The company continues to negotiate a "possible business combination" or sale of newly issued shares to Riverside Group Inc., which owns 35.5 percent  of Wickes Lumber, Wickes said in a statement.
The company is based in Vernon Hills, Ill.


Frosty the Tumbleweed In Battle With Grinches
A decade ago, when a tumbleweed almost as big as his Volkswagen blew across his path, Hank Provost saw a chance to recapture the joy of Christmas he knew from his boyhood in Ohio.
He built a thorny, brittle approximation of a snowman in his yard and decorated the pile, which he called Frosty, with all the love of a small child.


Government to Permit Tax-Free Split of G.M. and E.D.S.
The Internal Revenue Service has granted the General Motors Corporation permission to hand Electronic Data Systems over to the unit's shareholders tax-free, G.M. said yesterday.
The ruling, issued late Thursday, removes the big obstacle to completing a $25 billion deal that would make the world's largest computer services company independent of the world's largest auto maker.


Russia Threatens Stet
Angered by the breakdown of talks to sell a 25 percent interest in its telecommunications company, Russia may exclude Stet of Italy from any future auction of the stake in the company, called Svyazinvest, a spokesman for the Russian Privatization Center said yesterday.
Stet was the high bidder for the 25 percent stake several weeks ago.
But last week, when the deal was to be completed, Stet wanted to put its $640 million payment for the shares in an escrow account.
Russian officials said that was unacceptable, and broke off negotiations.
Stet has insisted that it is still interested in a stake in Svyazinvest, and has said negotiations are continuing.
(AP)


Giuliani's Choice for Judge: A Question of Experience
In explaining why two longtime Criminal Court judges were demoted despite winning approvals from two review committees, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said he  was attempting to improve the quality of the judiciary by replacing them with people who met an even higher standard.
But one of the Mayor's choices, Charles A. Posner, a former Brooklyn prosecutor, has little courtroom experience, having tried just seven cases in his six years as a top aide to the Brooklyn District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes.


BETZ LABORATORIES TO CUT JOBS AND CONSOLIDATE
Betz Laboratories Inc., a maker of specialty chemicals, said yesterday that it planned to cut its staff, consolidate offices and dispose of some assets in an effort to reduce operating costs.
It said it would shut two manufacturing sites, in Compton, Calif., and Cheyenne, Wy.
Betz said the annual cost savings would be about $10 million, which will be fully realized by 1997.
As a result of the revamping, Betz said it would take a pretax charge in the 1995 fourth quarter of about $14 million to $15 million.


Key Official In Japan Quits Finance Post
The Finance Ministry's top bureaucrat resigned today, leaving behind an organization in near turmoil as it struggles to mop up a mess of bad loans and to fend off criticism over financial scandals at home.
Kyosuke Shinozawa, the Vice Minister of Finance, apparently resigned to take  indirect responsibility for a series of scandals in the financial world.
It is a tradition in Japan for officials to resign for mistakes made under their tenure.


Bad Puns, Loud Hissing And Booing. The Usual.
As patrons filed into Carnegie Hall on Wednesday night for the 30th anniversary of the P. D. Q. Bach concerts, they were assaulted by the amplified  sounds of riveting, rumbling dump trucks and screeching air brakes.
Over this din, the oblivious orchestra players onstage warmed up.
"They didn't think we would mind," Peter Schickele, the conductor and promulgator of P. D. Q. Bach, explained when he took the stage and silenced the  "workmen." It seems that more illicit concrete had been discovered beneath the Carnegie Hall stage, Mr.
Schickele said.
Naturally, cracks about the hall's concrete caper became running gags.


Sweeping Inquiry on Airline Is Set After Colombia Crash
Federal regulators said yesterday that they were following the airliner crash in Colombia last week with an investigation into training and operational procedures at American Airlines that will be more thorough than any such review  in history.
The inquiry, which is expected to take several months, will focus on the human factors involved in air safety, ranging from pilot training and cockpit behavior to the way flights are dispatched and procedures are followed.


Nashville Building Sale
The Willis Corroon Corporation said today that it had agreed to sell its main American office building here for $52.4 million to Shorenstein Realty Investors  2 L.P.
At the same time, Willis Corroon said it would sign a 15-year lease to occupy about 57 percent of the building, which is called Willis Corroon Plaza.
The building has 470,000 square feet of office space and a conference center.
Willis Corroon is a unit of the British insurance broker Willis Corroon Group P.L.C.


Stock and Bond Offerings Surged in Final Quarter of '95
Blessed by strong underlying fundamentals, the volume of new stock and bond offerings underwritten by securities firms in the fourth quarter surged nearly 62 percent over the corresponding period a year ago, figures released yesterday  by the Securities Data Company showed.
The comparison is somewhat misleading, since the final three months of 1994 were the bleak end of a very bleak year.


Elaine Limpert Horak Theater Producer, 68
Elaine Limpert Horak, the founder and executive director of the Professional  Theater Wing, died on Dec. 20 at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 68, and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was leukemia, said her brother John Limpert Jr.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-5


Levy and Shula Insist It's Not 'Me vs. Him'
It's not personal, you understand.


G.M. Ordered To Stand Trial
The Indiana Supreme Court has ruled that the General Motors Corporation must  stand trial for not installing an air bag in a 1986 Chevrolet, even though Federal safety regulations at the time did not require the auto maker to do so.
The court's decision overturned two lower court rulings that G.M. should not  be held accountable for the Nov. 10, 1988, death of James Wilson.
Mr.
Wilson, who was not wearing a seat belt, was killed when his car was struck head-on by another vehicle.


Zoo Suspends 2 Guards
Two security guards at the Philadelphia Zoo have been suspended because of a  fire on Sunday that killed 23 rare primates, the zoo said today.
The officials said the guards, whose names were not released, had smelled smoke more than two and a half hours before flames broke out but had done nothing.
The guards told investigators later that they had thought the smoke was from a fire at a nearby railroad yard.
A zoo spokeswoman, Antoinette Maciolek, said she did not know whether the guards would be paid during the suspension, which began on Thursday.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief article yesterday about the crash of a Turkish Air Force jet in the Aegean Sea referred incorrectly to a Greek site near the accident.
The place, Mytilene (also spelled Mitiline), is a town, not an island.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Dec. 7 about synthetic-fuel companies in South  Africa misstated the pretax profits of Sasol, the nation's eighth-largest industrial company, in its 1995 fiscal year.
They totaled $775 million, not $500 million; the company had after-tax profits of $519 million.


Haselrig Lands Back in Jail
Nearly four weeks after he missed his trial date for drunken-driving and weapons charges, the former Jets offensive lineman Carlton Haselrig was back in  the Allegheny County Jail today.
Haselrig, who was missing for several weeks after being suspended for violating the National Football League's substance abuse policy, was arrested in Marietta, Ga., on Dec. 19 on charges of assaulting his estranged wife.
He was transferred to Pittsburgh, where he had failed to appear for a trial on Dec. 4.


A Banner Year for Stocks


Hailing the Cab Plan
New York City is a politically crowded place, where every reform seems to threaten some hitherto unnoticed prerogative.
That is why putting public pay toilets in Manhattan may take longer than digging the Panama Canal.
That is also why the Giuliani administration is going to have a very tough time improving the behavior of taxicabs in midtown Manhattan.
City officials believe traffic would move much more efficiently if cabs stopped where there was room to pull up to the curb.
With that aim in mind, the  Department of Transportation plans to set up special taxi stops at corners between 46th and 53d Streets.
Pedestrians may learn to walk to the corner before they stick out their hands.
Empty cabs will slide into the designated slots quickly and safely.
There will be no more screeching to a halt at a 45-degree angle, with the taxi's rump sticking out across two lanes of traffic.


ALLIANCE SEMICONDUCTOR STOCK FALLS BY 13%
The shares of the Alliance Semiconductor Corporation dropped 13 percent yesterday, a day after the company, a maker of computer memory chips, said manufacturing problems and price pressures would lower its earnings for the current quarter.
Alliance, of San Jose, Calif., said that, for its fiscal third  quarter ending tomorrow, revenue and earnings "would be significantly below the  results" for the quarter ended Sept. 30, but it did not provide specific figures.


From Army Base to a Campus: California State of Confusion
Everyone said that converting an Army base into a state university would not  be easy.
Now that the California State University at Monterey is one semester old, it appears that everyone was right.
The 650 students who arrived last fall to go to college at what was once Fort Ord encountered unfinished classrooms, unplanted lawns and a confused curriculum.
They were warned to expect a rocky time, but after the first few months, some were longing for normalcy.


Company Briefs
HYUNDAI ELECTRONICS INDUSTRIES CO., Milpitas, Calif., a unit of Hyundai Corp. of South Korea, said its agreement to buy Maxtor Corp., San Jose, Calif., for $354  million had been cleared by United States and South Korean regulators.


Rosalind K. Loring Education Consultant, 78
Rosalind K. Loring, a specialist in continuing education, adviser to Federal  agencies and university administrator, died on Dec. 18 at her home in Los Angeles.
She was 78.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


Bulls Teach Pacers a Lesson About Paybacks
Bulls 120, Pacers 93 Michael Jordan scored 29 points, Scottie Pippen added 23 and Ron Harper neutralized Reggie Miller last night as the host Chicago Bulls scored a 120-93 victory in a rematch against the Indiana Pacers.


City Sued Over Program To Curb Welfare Fraud
Advocates for New York City's poor filed a Federal lawsuit yesterday seeking  to end the Giuliani administration's welfare-fraud-detection program, saying that it had unfairly denied assistance to thousands of eligible applicants.
The lawsuit charges that the tough screening program, begun last January, is  so burdensome that it goes far beyond its stated purpose of making sure that only qualified people receive welfare, food stamps and Medicaid benefits.


Potent Heroin Mixture Causes Dozens of Overdoses
A toxic cocktail of high-grade heroin diluted with a medicine for motion sickness that was sold in small envelopes stamped "Polo" has caused dozens of drug overdoses in the Newark area.
"It's a designer drug, a mixture of a regular drug and a new drug we haven't  seen in a while," Dr.
Bartholomew J. Tortella, medical director at University Hospital in Newark, said at a news conference today.
"We have fears that it is a ticking bomb waiting to go off."


PHYSICIAN CORP. TO SELL 2 WEAK HEALTH UNITS
The Physician Corporation of America said yesterday that it planned to sell two weak-performing health-maintenance organizations and concentrate on key markets.
The company, which is based in Miami, said the sale of the H.M.O.'s, which are in Georgia and Alabama, would result in a one-time charge of about $30 million in the fourth quarter.
Physician said it was selling the H.M.O.'s, which incurred pretax losses of about $12 million in 1995, to refocus on its core markets in Florida, Texas and Puerto Rico.
The company said it was in discussions with potential buyers of the H.M.O.'s, but it did not elaborate.


Five Late Goals Beat Devils
The Devils brought their 10-game stretch without a road victory into the wrong place.
The Winnipeg Jets, a mediocre team that turns outstanding at home,  scored five goals in the last eight minutes tonight to win, 5-3.
Ed Olczyk, Teemu Selanne, Dave Manson, Mike Eastwood and Keith Tkachuk scored for the Jets, who improved to 12-4-3 at home.
However, Winnipeg is 4-14-0 on the road.


Warning on Drug Mix
A toxic cocktail of high-grade heroin diluted with a medicine for motion sickness that was sold in small envelopes stamped "Polo" has caused dozens of drug overdoses in the Newark area.
"It's a designer drug, a mixture of a regular drug and a new drug we haven't  seen in a while," Dr.
Bartholomew J. Tortella, medical director at University Hospital in Newark, said yesterday.
"We have fears that it is a ticking bomb waiting to go off."


U.S. Workers Resent Status as Political Pawns
To the Editor:
As an employee of the Social Security Administration, I am one of the political pawns caught in the midst of the battle over the balanced budget.
A partial Government shutdown is political blackmail being used by both parties.


Sports of The Times;Why Can't Wildcats Leapfrog?
IF this Northwestern phenomenon had happened a few years ago, before the unholy bowl alliance took all the romance out of college football, I would currently be racking my brain trying to figure out how Northwestern could become national champion for 1995.
Let's see: The Wildcats beat Southern Cal in the Rose Bowl on Monday, and then Florida and Nebraska get caught in the Arizona traffic sprawls on Tuesday and forfeit the Fiesta Bowl.
Nah.
I'm sure they get motorcycle escorts.


2 to Divide a Reward For Tips on a Killing
Two people whose tips helped solve the murder of a German tourist two years ago have agreed, after some legal haggling, to split the $100,000 reward.
One is a juvenile-justice officer who followed some purse snatchers.
The other is a secretary who, after she got her purse back, noticed a label inside that helped identify the purse snatchers as killers.


Nation's Costly Defense Strategy Doesn't Make Military Sense
To the Editor:
"Rethink the Army National Guard" (editorial, Dec. 27) raised valid questions that have been deferred too long.
As egregious as the waste of national treasure may be in the Guard, it is a side issue compared with the need for a thorough public debate about the 1993 national defense strategy.


Stanford Researchers Report Promising Results in Test of a Treatmentfor Lymphoma
Scientists at Stanford University say they have developed a novel way to generate a powerful immune response targeted specifically against non-Hodgkins lymphoma, a cancer of the lymph system.
Preliminary results among four patients were promising, the research team reported yesterday in the journal Nature Medicine.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;More New Year's Police
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey also wants to make sure everyone safely enters the New Year.
People driving into New York City to celebrate on Sunday night should find every toll booth open at the Holland and Lincoln tunnels and the George Washington Bridge.
George J. Marlin, the Port Authority's executive director, also promises extra police officers at the Lincoln Tunnel to monitor "the post-midnight surge in traffic to New Jersey." Those who opt for mass transit will find additional police officers at the Port Authority bus terminal and on PATH trains.
SUSAN JO KELLER


Hire Artists to Teach
To the Editor:
The news that the Annenberg Foundation is giving New York public schools $36  million to finance arts programs is good (news article, Dec. 22); the possibilities that the money will be wasted is great.
The way to make sure the funds will be used to best advantage is to employ working artists to teach in the schools.


Journal;Goodbye To All That
Maybe it's because I first took in the sizzling lights of the block on the eve of puberty.
Maybe it's because the boozy televised pageantry of a Times Square New Year's Eve countdown was drilled into my brain from birth.
Like everyone else in the country, if not the world, I have never thought of 42d Street -- naughty, bawdy 42d Street between Broadway and Eighth Avenue, that is  -- without thinking of sex.
Until now.
Forget about the new high-tech, strobe-lit glitterball that will welcome 1996 in tomorrow's replay of the annual ritual.
The real news from Times Square is in the shadows just beyond the camera's view, where the new, redeveloped 42d Street is no longer a fantasy but a done deal.
And it will be a 42d Street unlike any that most of us have known -- a de-sexed, partially Disneyfied 42d Street designed to reverse our most ingrained cultural idea of what constitutes the neon heart of the American Century's signature metropolis.


Lynden G. Newland Former Jamaican Politician, 81
Lynden G. Newland, a journalist who helped found Jamaica's main opposition party and went on to become Labor Minister and Mayor of Kingston, died on Tuesday.
He was 81.


A Still Point, Still There
New York is a place where the restaurant you patronized on Monday disappears  by Wednesday, where shops have the life span of mayflies, where many buildings have lived many past lives.
Even nature seems more restless here.
The minute a lot goes vacant, ferns and fireweed and spindly saplings embark on reclamation.
There are few still points in the city, and when one sees them it is with the pleasure that comes of meeting an old friend.
The stretch of Fifth Avenue that starts with Rockefeller Center and ends with the entrance to Central Park at 59th Street is one of those old friends, and never more so than in December.
For eons now, it seems, the Tree has stood swaying in whatever breezes come its way while skaters glide and occasionally fall at its feet.
Visitors and natives aim their point-and-shoots, the Santas jingle their bells, the children -- this chill week especially -- are bundled and scarved to their eyebrows.


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day on Dec. 15, about prospects for the Finnish cellular phone company Nokia, misidentified the financial analyst who began to follow Nokia's stock on Dec. 14 with a "buy" recommendation.
He was Jeffrey Hines, senior wireless telecommunications analyst at Paine Webber Inc.,  not Albert Lin of Cowen &amp; Company.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY


German Inquiry On Mint's Prices
Germany's central bank said today that it was investigating accusations that  the private company that prints the nation's money, Giesecke &amp; Devrient, inflated prices for the notes.


F. Julian Becton, 87, Admiral Whose Ship Repelled Kamikazes
Adm.
F.
Julian Becton, who was at the center of a dramatic two hours of naval history when his destroyer survived a swarm of Japanese kamikaze planes off Okinawa in 1945, died on Monday at his home in Wynnewood, Pa.
He was 87.
The 2,200-ton U.S.S.
Laffey, guns blazing, battled an onslaught by 22 suicide planes, 6 of which struck the ship.
Two bombs also hit the ship; one jammed the  rudder of the Laffey, whose deck was a mass of flame.


2 Men Charged in Chinatown Gang Death
Four years after the execution-style murder of Chinatown tong leader Peter Eng Wong, the police have arrested two suspects who allegedly killed Mr.
Wong to prevent him from testifying against other gang members in a Chicago criminal case, authorities said.
Jang Shaiw Tin, a member of Hong Kong's Big Circle gang, and Tak Fai Lee, a close associate of the powerful Ghost Shadows gang in New York, were arrested Thursday at a pay telephone booth in Chinatown, according to a federal complaint.


Europe's Oil, Our Troops
Concern over who controls the vast Middle Eastern oil reserves makes the large American military presence in the Persian Gulf seem reasonable.
But do the threats to oil justify the high price of our unilateral military expenditures?
The gulf region accounts for $50 billion of the annual $260 billion Pentagon  budget -- possibly more.
Since the gulf war, we have maintained a full wing of aircraft there, extended our naval presence by establishing the Fifth Fleet there and are putting enough materiel on the ground to put a full division in place quickly.
Our concern over the gulf is central to the logic of our military planners' insistence that we be able to fight two regional wars at any time.


3 Broadway Productions Are to Close
Three Broadway productions are to close on Sunday.
"Racing Demon," David Hare's drama, is to close after the matinee at the Vivian Beaumont Theater, 150 West 65th Street, Lincoln Center.
The matinee of the play, directed by Richard Eyre, with Michael Cumpsty, Paul Giamatti, Brian Murray and Josef Sommer, will be its 48th regular performance; it had 23 previews.


Jackhammers Bite Into Historic Bridge


Shakespeare, Icon in Germany
When Claudio Abbado raised his baton to conduct the Berlin Philharmonic's ambitious production of Verdi's "Otello" earlier this month, he was not only giving life to a stirring but seldom-performed opera.
He was also paying tribute to the centuries-old love affair between German audiences and the work of Shakespeare.
The performance, which ended to thunderous applause, marked the opening of a  six-month Shakespeare Cycle during which German audiences are to be treated to more than 150 theater, dance, opera, symphonic and film performances of works either written by Shakespeare or based on his writings.


Iacocca in Land Deal
The California Jockey Club said today that Lee A. Iacocca, the former chairman of the Chrysler Corporation, had agreed to buy 40 acres of land at the  company's Bay Meadows horse-racing track for $30.7 million.


Jazz Label Finds That Innovation Isn't Enough
JMT Records, a small independent label specializing in high-quality jazz and  jazz-related music, recently held a 10th-anniversary party that ended up being the company's death notice.
The label's founder and producer, Stefan F. Winter, stood up in front of the audience at the Knitting Factory and announced that Polygram, the conglomerate that had taken control of JMT, had decided to shut it down.
For the saxophonist and composer Tim Berne, one of the label's most prominent artists, the announcement was a shock.
Mr.
Winter said -- and this is disputed by Chris Roberts, the president of Polygram's classical and jazz departments --  that the company planned to delete the label's back catalogue, taking the artists' work out of circulation.
And record companies rarely return music rights to the creators.


Triton Group Is Reviewing $10 Million Trading Loss
Triton Group Ltd. said today that it was reviewing its dealings of several years ago with a Beverly Hills, Calif., investment firm to see whether $10 million in trading losses resulted from unauthorized dealings.
Triton said it believed the losses, incurred in 1989-90, were similar to losses totaling $36 million that were disclosed recently by Pier 1 Imports Inc.  and by Pair Gain Technologies Inc.
But a Triton executive said he would not be surprised if his company's losses were completely legitimate and resulted from a risky strategy that went awry.


Joyful Reunion


ZENECA GROUP CLEARED IN U.S. ON BREAST CANCER DRUG
Zeneca Group P.L.C. said yesterday that it had won approval to sell its breast cancer drug in the United States.
Zeneca, the world's second-largest maker of cancer drugs after the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, said the Food and  Drug Administration had cleared the drug anastrozole to treat advanced breast cancer in postmenopausal women.
The drug, which is sold under the Arimidex name, could add about $75 million to the company's annual sales by 1999 or 2000, said Edmund Debler, an analyst at Mehta &amp; Isaly in New York.
In 1994, Zeneca had sales of $6.85 billion.
Zeneca's American depository receipts closed up $1.25, at $58.375.
Zeneca is based in London.


Papers Show Smith Barney in Inquiry
Documents filed in a New York state court yesterday showed that lawyers for Smith Barney Inc. said last month in a hearing that the firm was involved in investigations of alleged wrongdoing in the municipal bond market.
The disclosures came in a New York Stock Exchange arbitration hearing on Nov. 27 between the firm and its former managing director, Michael Lissack.


Paribas Confirms Inquiry
Compagnie Financiere de Paribas S.A. said yesterday that its chairman and chief executive, Andre Levy-Lang, faced a judicial investigation in connection with accusations of accounting irregularities at a former unit called Ciments Francais.
Mr.
Levy-Lang, one of France's most respected financiers, is to be questioned by an examining magistrate for reporting in 1992 that Ciments Francais had made a 1991 profit of 401 million francs ($81.8 million), when it actually incurred a loss of 120 million francs.
(Bloomberg Business News)


New York's Medicaid Cuts Will Cost Working Families More
To the Editor:
Re Edwin S. Rubenstein's "More Medicaid Myths" (Op-Ed, Dec. 26):


Bat-Sheva Levine, Lyle D. Mitzner
Dr.
Bat-Sheva Levine, a daughter of Rabbi and Mrs.
Aaron Levine of Brooklyn,  is to be married today to Dr.
Lyle David Mitzner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton Mitzner of Great Neck, L.I.
The bride's father is to perform the ceremony at the Great Neck Synagogue.
The couple graduated summa cum laude from Yeshiva University.


Icy Reception
It was an appalling spectacle.
As the Giants were losing to the San Diego Chargers on Dec. 22, ending their miserable season at 5-11, some Giants fans pelted the field with snow and ice balls.


Passports: Timing Is All
IF you needed your passport renewed the week before Christmas, you were out of luck unless you had imminent travel plans.
The State Department, with many of its employees on furlough because of the budget dispute in Congress, was handling only emergency passport requests.
An earlier four-day shutdown in November, according to Suzanne I. Lawrence, a spokeswoman, created a backlog of  50,000 passport applications, and a similar rate was expected on the second occasion.
However, Ms.
Lawrence said, mailed renewal forms indicating that the applicant planned to travel soon are being handled in the order they are needed, and the portion of the backlog with no travel dates, or later travel dates, are  being dealt with roughly in first-come-first-served order.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
CHRISTINA STEAD: A Biography By Hazel Rowley.
Owl/Holt, $18.95.
The author's subject was a citizen of the world, a novelist whose writing reflects the many places she called home as well as the many personalities she encountered.
Last year our reviewer, Michael Upchurch, said this account has "a  vigorous and unnerving momentum, reminiscent of Stead's own fiction." LEVITATION: Five Fictions By Cynthia Ozick.
Syracuse University, $14.95.
This writer's universe is suffused with the Hebrew tradition and her own imaginative mysticism.
Both elements are at play in these stories, whose characters range from levitating partygoers to a golem, a kind of Jewish genie.
Just restored to print, this collection offers pieces that are "often humorous,  wonderfully quirky and possessed of a Dickensian delight," Leslie Epstein wrote  here in 1982.
Syracuse University has also reissued BLOODSHED: And Three Novellas ($14.95), a volume of works by Ms.
Ozick that ponders the difficulties  of Jews who want to embrace modernity without renouncing their culture and history.
"Ozick's imagination is adventurous, with a feeling for life as mystery and riddle," Julian Moynahan said in these pages in 1976.


Geography of Gambling
It used to be that a gambling vacation meant either Nevada or a cruise-ship casino.
Not anymore, which is why the 1996 American Casino Guide is a 192-page paperback.
It covers 30 states and has information on casinos and hotels that includes the games each offers, room rates, buffet prices and how to play the odds -- and casino promotional deals -- to best advantage.
The guide sells for $12.95 at bookstores or for $15.95 by calling (800) 352-6657.


For Boomers, The Culture Clock Is Ticking Too
MANY NOTABLE figures in the arts will turn 50 next year.
In interviews, six of them speculated on how the maturing of their generation might affect the arts.
MARTHA COOLIDGE Film director, "Three Wishes," "Rambling Rose," "Angie" Born: Aug. 17


4 Nigerian Activists Arrested and Released
Four campaigners for democracy have been arrested in Nigeria, but were released on bail, newspapers reported today.
Pressure on Nigeria's military rulers to restore democracy has increased since last month, when they executed nine minority rights activists despite appeals from around the world.


The Lives They Lived: With Children in Mind
IN 1995, AS IN EVERY OTHER YEAR, IT WAS CRIMES AGAINST CHILDREN THAT made the headlines.
But there were also guardian angels, not generally as visible, whose  intercessions on behalf of children ended up making a crucial difference.
Some of these special friends of children did what every parent knows is the hardest thing of all: they kept kids entertained.
In the baby boom generation of the 50's and 60's, when Americans were typically having three and four offspring per family, the country started paying unusual attention to its children; millions learned to sing "I don't know why she swallowed a fly" with Burl Ives, or squeal "What's Up Doc?" with Isadore Freleng's Bugs Bunny, or sit in front of a television mesmerized by the antics of Joan Thayer Hupper on Romper Room.
Godtfred Christiansen, and endless young architects, thrived on the knowledge that there is something satisfying about fitting snap.


Resignation of Thruway's Chief Gives Pataki Ability to Revamp
The chairman of the State Thruway Authority, a holdout from the administration of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, has resigned, opening the way for Gov.
George E. Pataki to reshape its management.
Peter Tufo's term on the authority's three-member board runs out today, and on Friday he sent Governor Pataki a brief resignation letter.
Most Cuomo appointees stepped down soon after Mr.
Pataki became Governor last January.


Whom Wrote That College Application?
To the Editor:
If me had been interested in admission to the University of Pennsylvania, me  would have lost such interest upon discovery that its admissions office was in need of remedial English.
A command of one's own language is believed by I to be an important aspect of being educated.
How can them educate I whom evidence an abysmal ignorance of the very rudiments of grammar?


Christina Gleason, Francis Redican
Christina Jane Gleason, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Gleason Jr.,  of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Francis Warren Redican Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Redican of Tarrytown, N.Y.
Msgr.
Charles Stubbs performed the ceremony at the First Church of Round Hill in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Redican, 27, is a human resources coordinator at American International  Group, the insurance company in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father, now a lawyer in Greenwich, retired as the senior vice president and general counsel at the Continental Corporation, an insurance company in New York.
Her mother, Jane Gleason, is an owner of Davenport &amp; Company, an interior design firm in Greenwich.


Yo-Yo Ma May Be a National Institution, But He Continues to ReinventHimself
YO-YO MA LIKES TO ASK questions a man in his position isn't supposed to ask.
"How many of us who make music today, soloists and conductors, can honestly claim that every time we go out on the stage, we're doing it because we're dying to play?" he said recently here over breakfast at the St.
Botolph Club, to which he belongs.
"In England, the word 'amateur' is still glorious. They think that if you do it as a profession, it's somehow tainted. We professionals should learn from amateurs."


The Lives They Lived: J. William Fulbright;The Scholar's Senator
A POET TOOK A SWING AT ME IN A DUBLIN PUB for arguing that barristers looked  stupid in wigs; I hit a sheep with my car in Connemara.
I probably was not what  J. William Fulbright had in mind when he thought up the Fulbright scholarship program in 1945 to create intellectual good-will ambassadors.
Luckily, there have been about 250,000 worthier grantees to bring up the average -- among them Alfred Kazin, Derek Bok, Eudora Welty and Aaron Copland.
Of all the valuable things that Fulbright did with his life, including getting the United Nations started and standing up to Joseph McCarthy, the invention of  the Fulbright program gave him the most satisfaction, and best represented his view of America's role in the world.
At Fulbright's memorial service on Feb. 17, President Clinton, his Arkansas friend and disciple, quoted Fulbright as saying  he wanted to build in people what he called "a capacity for empathy" and "a distaste for killing other men."


Who Decides What Is True?
To the Editor:
How convenient of Richard Reeves, in his article about Oliver Stone's new film, "Nixon" ["Nixon Revisited by Way of the Creative Camera," Dec. 17], to point out that there is no such thing as historical drama but rather only fact,  as presented by mainstream journalists like himself, and entertainment -- the realm of playwrights, novelists, film makers and the like.
Now we can get rid of all that Shakespeare that the children hated anyway.
Who was Slick Willie to think he could get inside the minds and conversations of all those English kings?


On the Internet: Complaint Central About the Federal Shutdown
A World Wide Web site called Shutdown '95, intended to offer tourists alternative places to visit while the Federal budget impasse lasts, has become a boisterous bulletin board for complaints, queries and diatribes.
Among the suggested stops around Washington are a Franciscan monastery and four historical statues in public places, which stand immune to even the most partisan bickering.


L.I. VINES
2 Chardonnays


Confidence Rose, Wariness Prevails
Widespread confidence in the state's economy prevailed last January as many businesses celebrated their most robust gains since the recession.
But the beginning of 1996 will be marked by uncertainty in New Jersey as a recent series of mergers and restructuring threaten thousands of jobs in banking, insurance and communications.
Probably the most significant business development to affect New Jersey came  in September, when AT&amp;T, based in Basking Ridge, announced that it would break into three smaller companies to cut costs and simplify its operations.
By 1997,  the communications giant is to divide itself into a long-distance telephone company, an equipment company and a computer manufacturer.


A La Carte;A Banner Year for Interesting and Inexpensive Restaurants
It has been a banner year for interesting, inexpensive, everyman restaurants.
Authentic little ethnic spots, humble eating places with talented, gifted chefs  and unusual restaurants that combine excellent food and budget prices proliferated.
The 10 restaurants and honorable-mention selections represent the  best of the spots that stress exceptional value and outstanding food.
The Borderline Cafe


2 Faces of '95: The Stellar and the Flat
FROM an economic vantage, 1995 was a year of mixed reviews for Westchester.
Some, like Geoffrey Thompson, a partner in Thompson &amp; Bender, a marketing firm, saw it as a stellar 12 months.
"Things were definitely on the uptick," Mr.
Thompson said.
"They're finally happening here."


The Sublime Save
Vermeer died 320 years ago, having created just 35 paintings that we know of  -- paintings often called miraculous for the way they bring simple scenes to life.
At the National Gallery in Washington, 21 of those paintings have been rounded up for a "once in a lifetime" show (a once in six lifetimes show might be more like it.)
The exhibit, like many Federal institutions, had to shut down because of the  budget deadlock among the people who run the Government, circa 1995.
But last week the gallery danced past the battling politicians and reopened the exhibit,  at least temporarily, with private money.
HUBERT B. HERRING


London Hotels Dismay Visitors, Survey Finds
Visitors to Britain are unhappier with hotels in London than with those elsewhere in the country, according to a recent survey by the British Tourist Authority.
Of the 2,500 people interviewed for the Overseas Visitors Survey, 597 of them had stayed only in London hotels, and 50 percent of them found the hotels to be of poor value, compared to 24 percent of the 1,231 who had stayed only in hotels outside London.
Most complaints were about levels of cleanliness and lack of space, according to Sheena Gibson, accommodation services manager for the London Tourist Board.
She suggests that visitors stick to hotels that are either members of the tourist board or part of its Crown Classification program.
Member establishments are inspected regularly and have to guarantee a certain wide-ranging level of standards; Crown classified hotels are more rigorously inspected and pay a fee for the annual assessment, which places them in categories ranging from "listed" to "five crowns" for facilities, and "approved" to "deluxe" for quality.
Ms.
Gibson estimates that approximately 700 of the roughly 2,000 London establishments offering accommodations are either members of the tourist board or Crown classified.


With U.S. Closed, Travelers Without a Passport Just Stay Home
A half dozen Americans missed a papal audience at the Vatican.
Tearful newlyweds had to pass up their honeymoons in Europe.
And Brazilian soccer players weren't able to play a game in Pensacola, Fla.
They were some of the hundreds of thousands of travelers who have been unable to obtain passports or visas because of the United States Government's shutdown  for lack of a new budget.
The offices that issue passports here and provide visas abroad have been closed, or are barred by law from performing their duties, since the money for their operation has not been appropriated.


Program Helps Elderly Receive At-Home Care
DORA BALLARD can't push a wheelbarrow around the gardens and fruit trees on her five-acre property here the way she used to with her husband, Charles.
The Ballards built a three-bedroom ranch by themselves in the 1940's.
They wished for children, but none came.
There are none to visit now.
Mrs.
Ballard is 85, and Charles died 11 years ago.
The only wheeling Mrs.
Ballard does is in a wheelchair.


Judge Urges World to Heed Rwanda Crisis
A South African judge who signed the first indictments for genocide issued by an international panel investigating massacres in Rwanda in 1994 says that a lack of cooperation from African nations is hampering efforts to bring the accused to justice.
"I feel a sense of urgency in Rwanda," said Navanethem Pillay, a defense lawyer and the first black woman to be appointed to the South African Supreme Court.
Ms.
Pillay is one of six members of the panel on Rwanda, part of the International War Crimes Tribunal in The Hague.


Corrections
An article on page 4 of the New Jersey section today, about New Year's Eve celebrations, lists an incorrect telephone number for First Night Ridgewood.
It  is (201) 447-1739.


POSTINGS -- Russian Tea Room's New Look: The Kremlin, an Acrylic Bear and Maxwell's Plum; The Colors of the Czars
The Russian Tea Room closes tomorrow with the dawn of the New Year.
But when  it reopens in the spring of 1997, its principal new owner, Warner LeRoy, hopes to have fulfilled his own fertile imaginings in the design of an entirely reconstructed building on West 57th Street near Seventh Avenue.
The facade and much of the interior of the rebuilt nine-story building -- with double-height second- and third-floor dining rooms -- will reflect Mr.
LeRoy's concepts of "the Russian Futuristic and Constructivist periods, which were basically in the 1920's and 30's, but melded with the Czarist period," he said.


Sports of The Times;The Measures of Miami: Shula's Jaw, Cox's Police
THE disappointment was in Don Shula's jaw.
Instead of being thrust up and out as if it were on Mount Rushmore, his jaw just hung there, above his white turtleneck with the Dolphins logo and below his silver hair.
"This is the one we're going to have to remember and think about," the old coach was saying.
"In a game that meant so much, not challenging, not competing, that's what's so disappointing."


Couple Is Charged in Child Abuse Case
Officers arrested a Bronx couple last night on child abuse charges after finding their three small children in a feces-strewn apartment, starving, suffering from severe diaper rash and possible burns, the police said.
The children, two boys age 4 and 1, and a 2-year-old girl, had gone for several days without having their diapers changed and were badly blistered with  diaper rash, said Officer Tim Deevy of the 48th Precinct.
The youngest may have had burn marks, possibly from a cigarette, Officer Deevy said.


Bills Win the Old-Fashioned Way: They Run It
Running like throwbacks to the era of the leather helmet, the Buffalo Bills showed today that, in their defiant words, "We're baaack."
They charged over the Dolphins with one of the greatest rushing attacks in league history, amassing 341 yards and producing a 37-22 victory in their wild-card game.
Now, it's on to Pittsburgh and next Saturday's divisional playoff.
And who knows down the road?


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN


The View From: Old Lyme;Would a Beach Be Better Without Its Bars?
FORTY years ago, a nonprofit group in Old Lyme started efforts to change the  character of the Sound View neighborhood, where five beachfront bars attracted an often rowdy summertime crowd.
"The hope was we could acquire some of the more difficult properties, and change the tone down there," said Timothy C. Griswold, a banker who was one of the founding members of the Old Lyme Community Development Corporation and now is chairman of the town's Board of Finance.


Lucette Lagnado, Douglas Feiden
Lucette Matalon Lagnado, the executive editor of The Forward in New York, and Douglas Michael Feiden, the weekly newspaper's national editor, are to be married today in New York.
Rabbi Rafael Benchimol is to perform the ceremony at  the Manhattan Sephardic Congregation.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is the author of "Children of the Flames: Dr. Mengele and the Untold Story of the Twins of Auschwitz." She graduated from  Vassar College.


INSIDE
INVESTING IT /Page 4/ It's time to revisit our favorite stock stories of 1995 and see how the companies have done since we last checked in.
By Kurt Eichenwald.


BROOKLYN BEAT: Mo More She-Crab Soup
Some of the new faces and places that appeared and disappeared in Brooklyn in 1995:
IN...


The Lives They Lived: Evelyn Wood;Finger Reading
THE TRUTH MAY WELL BE SELF-EVIDENT THAT ALL humans are created equal, but one thing our Maker did not endow us with equally is the speed at which we take in words on the printed page.
This seems not so much a function of brains as of how efficiently the machinery works.
A few of us are industrial vacuum cleaners, able to suck up "The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire" in a matter of hours.
At the other extreme are the lint-pickers, those who must lip-read even Danielle Steel.
The rest of us are left to carpet-sweep at the rate of three or four words at a glance, and dream of the hours that would be saved if only we were better endowed.
Onto this uneven playing field charged Evelyn Wood back in the late 1950's.
She was convinced that with a little pushing, all of us, even the lint-pickers,  could be transformed into vacuum cleaners.
All we had to do was stop saying the  words out loud in our heads -- "subvocalizing," she called it -- and to stop pausing to reread words as our minds drifted away.
The point was to start consuming print in bites instead of nibbles.
To do this, Wood wanted us to drag  our fingers down the middle of the page to act as pacers, to be rabbits for the  greyhounds of our eyes.
She promised that the words wouldn't blur; the faster we went, the more we would take in.


Matthew Miller, Penelope Squiers
Penelope Carol Squiers, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James E. Squiers of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married last evening to Matthew Ian Miller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel A. Miller, also of Chappaqua.
The Rev.
Douglas Phillips performed  the ceremony at the Mount Kisco (N.Y.) Presbyterian Church.
Rabbi Mordecai Genn  took part in the service.
Mrs.
Miller, 25, teaches in the nursery program at the Brick Church School in New York.
She graduated from Skidmore College and is a candidate for a master's degree in speech language pathology at Hunter College.
Her father is an associate vice president at Prudential Securities in White Plains.
Her mother, Carol Squiers, is the principal of the Mount Pleasant Blythedale School in Valhalla, N.Y.


Mrs. Whitman So Far: Good, With an Asterisk
Today is the last day the state may legally withdraw money from the Unemployment Insurance Trust Fund to help pay the hospital costs of the working  poor, and it also brings to a close the first half of Christine Todd Whitman's remarkable term as Governor.
Charity care is an obscure issue, but one anchored  in the muck of the law, while the anniversary is evanescent.
It is too bad that  the legal problem is likely to overshadow the celebratory one as we go into the  new year.
When the Governor began her campaign in the early summer of 1993, she disdained the idea of pledging a tax cut.
The idea was raised by some Republicans who were aware that, by then, the "no new taxes" promise had begun to lose some of its strength as a philosophy and that more potent medicine was needed.


Anne Craig, Richard Tobin
Anne Beatrice Craig, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Francis Craig of Jupiter, Fla., was married yesterday to Richard Patrick Tobin, a son of Mr. and  Mrs.
Richard J. Tobin of Randolph, N.J.
The Rev.
Timothy Kelleher performed the  ceremony at the Roman Catholic Cathedral of the Holy Cross in Boston.
The couple graduated from Villanova University.


Big Day for Eagles, Bills and Scoreboard
The Philadelphia Eagles crushed the Detroit Lions, 58-37, and the Buffalo Bills trounced the Miami Dolphins, 37-22, in the first round of the National Football League playoffs yesterday.
The Eagles' 58 points was the third highest  by one team in a playoff game, and the combined score set a playoff record.
Meanwhile, the loss by the Dolphins raised questions about the future of their longtime coach, Don Shula.
SportsSunday, section 8.


New Year's Eve, Minus the Angst
NEW YEAR'S EVE angst is an experience as traditional as the celebration at Times Square.
There seem to be only two options: try to get a date, find a babysitter, pay $200 for dinner and get shoved around by drunken rowdies in Times Square, or just stay home.
But there is a third alternative.


Swedes End Long Union Of Church And State
Each Sunday, church bells peal from Lutheran churches across Sweden, and magnificent old granite and iron cathedrals can be seen against the modern skylines.
But inside, many pews are empty, symptoms of apathy and falling membership, and a growing number of immigrants who are bringing more religions to Sweden.


Melissa Hecken, James B. Curtin Jr.
Melissa Beth Hecken, a daughter of Audrey and Kenneth Hecken of New Preston,  Conn., was married yesterday to James Bernard Curtin Jr., a son of Jeanne and James Curtin of North Haven, Conn.
The Rev.
Haig J. Nargesian performed the Episcopal ceremony at the New York Athletic Club on Travers Island off Pelham Manor, N.Y.
Mrs.
Curtin, 32, owns Elysian Fields, a bath and skin-care shop in New Preston.
She graduated from the University of Connecticut.
Her father retired as a vice chairman of Johnson &amp; Higgins, the insurance company in New York.


I Have Been Sound-Bit
Nailing the media as "thin-skinned" is like calling a cinched-up Brahma bull  "ornery." They bristle up like a porcupine every time I take them on, and I do love to take on the media since I believe the First Amendment belongs to me, too.
I did just that during my retirement speech here in my home town early this month.
My remarks lasted 70 minutes, the longest I've ever rambled on in public.
And during that rather lengthy oratory, I spent about three minutes describing various shortcomings of the news media.
I could well have spent longer.
Now, oddly enough, that is often the very first subject I am asked about whenever I do an interview with any reporter about my retirement.
Think about that.
These are the very same folks who are ruminating around Washington in pursuit of the "news" and the first thing they want to talk about is -- themselves!
Interesting craft, journalism.


Pulp Fiction
1916-1995 Founded in a New York loft in 1939, Ian Ballantine's Penguin U.S.A. imprint - the precursor of Bantam and Ballantine Books - started a paperback revolution, hawking books on special desplay racks and making the covers more enticing.


The Lives They Lived: Nat Holman;No Passing Fancy
NAT HOLMAN MAY BE REMEMBERED SOLELY AS THE coach of the best and most infamous team in college basketball history -- the 1950 City College squad, which won both the National Invitational Tournament and the N.C.A.A. tournament  but was shortly thereafter embroiled in a point-shaving scandal.
This would be not only unfair -- Holman was cleared of any wrongdoing -- but also uninformed.
In what Westbrook Pegler termed "The Wonderful World of Nonsense" -- the glamorous, clamorous 1920's -- Nat Holman was to basketball what Babe Ruth was to baseball, Louis Armstrong to jazz, Houdini to handcuffs and the Charleston to Terpsichore.
Holman was born on Manhattan's Lower East Side in 1896, just five years after basketball was invented by Dr.
James Naismith in a Springfield, Mass., Y.M.C.A.  as a more interesting way to exercise in wintertime.
Well built at 5 foot 11, with black hair slicked back in matinee-idol fashion, Holman became a star player on some of the greatest barnstorming teams -- this was before there was a professional league -- including the finest of them, the Original Celtics.
And from 1921 to 1927, Holman was billed by the Celtics as "the best player in basketball."


Carol Dillingham, Michael Rowe
Carol Lynn Dillingham, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Dillingham of Wilton, Conn., was married yesterday to Michael Eugene Rowe, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Rowe of Wilmington, N.C.
The Rev.
Daniel O'Brien, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Wilton Episcopal-Presbyterian Church.
The  Rev.
David Graybill, a Presbyterian minister, assisted.
Mrs.
Rowe, 27, is an account executive with Electronic Data Systems in Miami.
She is a graduate of Gettysburg College.
Her father is the publisher of Popular Mechanics magazine and is a vice president of the Hearst Corporation in  New York.


In a Soaring Market, Looking for Good Luck at Low Altitudes
AFTER a year of dizzying new heights for the market, investors may despair of finding any good stocks left.
One natural strategy for these worried rummagers is to look among the year's most disappointing equities.
And, despite the stellar market, there were disappointing stocks in 1995, and they included many large and well-known companies.
According to an analysis done by Standard &amp; Poor's last week, the 15 worst performers in the S.&amp; P. 500-stock index this year lost between 28 percent and 57 percent of their value.
Among them are Stride Rite and Tandem Computers, which disappointed shareholders with sharply lower earnings; Advanced Micro Devices and Reebok International, which failed to introduce the right products, and Inland Steel and Navistar International, which seemed to run smack into slowing demand for their goods.


Jane C. Farley, Thomas von Oehsen
Jane Campbell Farley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward R. Farley Jr. of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to Thomas Weld von Oehsen, a son of Barbara K. von Oehsen of Lawrenceville, N.J., and the late William H. von Oehsen.
The Rev.
Edward J. Dougherty, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Aquinas Institute.
The Rev.
Nancy Early von Oehsen, a sister-in-law of the bridegroom who is an Episcopal priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs. von Oehsen is the human- resources manager at the Franklin Mint in Franklin Center, Pa.
She graduated from Vassar College.
Her father retired as the chairman of the Atlas Corporation, a holding company in New York.
Her mother, Irene D. Farley, is the chairwoman of the Eden Institute Foundation for  autistic children and young adults, in Princeton.


Rhode Island Ballot Closed to 5 in G.O.P.
Five of the major Republican Presidential candidates failed to qualify for the ballot in Rhode Island, one of five states participating in the Yankee Primary on March 5, officials said on Friday.
Patrick J. Buchanan, Representative Robert K. Dornan of California, Steve Forbes, Senator Phil Gramm of Texas and Alan L. Keyes failed to collect the required signatures of 1,000 registered voters, the Secretary of State's office  said.


Joey Fariello, 58, Boxing Trainer
Joey Fariello, a New York boxing trainer who handled several champions and sent Buster Mathis Jr. into the ring against Mike Tyson two weeks ago, died on Wednesday after suffering a stroke on Christmas Eve.
He was 58.
He died in St.
John's Hospital in Elmhurst, Queens, near the Maspeth house of an aunt he stayed with during the week.
Even though he had a home in Rhinebeck,  N.Y., he lived at his aunt's home to be closer to his base gym, Gleason's in Brooklyn.
He was at her house when he collapsed.


The 61-Second Minute
BY joint decree of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures in Sevres, France, the International Earth Rotation Service at the Paris Observatory, the Time Commission of the International Astronomical Union in Paris, the Sub-Bureau for Rapid Service and Predictions at the United States Naval Observatory in Washington, D.C., and the National Bureau of Standards in Boulder, Colo., tonight's New Year's Eve celebrations will be one second longer.
A single leap second must be appended to the final moments of 1995 to keep the rotation of our planet and the march of time in synch.
Representing as it does a cosmic conflict between the original clockwork universe and the modern atomic clock, this smidgen of legislated bonus time must give one pause.


A Stretch (45 Minutes) In a Tough Old Prison
The last inmates of the West Virginia Penitentiary were relocated in March.
Last month it reopened -- for tours.
The maximum security prison was ordered closed by the West Virginia Supreme Court following a 1981 lawsuit over conditions.
Officials in Moundsville, W.Va., began the tours to make up for some of the loss to the local economy.


The Year's Champions;Of Mickey, Mikey and Our Demons
Of all the fouls I have committed this year, from describing how sports has lost its moral resonance to suggesting that what's-his-name take a day off before he broke Lou Gehrig's record, nothing has caused as surprising a number of flags and whistles as the simple mention of Mike Tyson and Mickey Mantle in the same paragraph about crossover sports figures.
Oh, the calls and the letters, a veritable drizzle of disgust and fury.
It is an affront to humanity, went the cant; the Mick is an American hero, Iron Mike is a thug.


You Say 'Soul Train' is How Old?
They held auditions for dancers only once on "Soul Train," the rap and rhythm-and-blues dance party that takes place every Saturday morning at 11 on Channel 11.
That was 25 years ago, when the show first went on the air.
The same dancers aren't shimmying on the the show today, of course.
But their friends are.
The only way to become a dancer on "Soul Train" is to be recommended by a dancer who's already on the show.
"People who dance well, dress well, are well groomed and know how to behave seem to know others who dance, dress and behave well," said Don Cornelius, the show's 57-year-old producer and longtime host.


ENDPAPER - The Lives They Lived: Patric Walker and Linda Goodman;Supernovas
IF THEY SAW IT COMING, THEY DID not say, and so the shock of their deaths is  somehow more unsettling for being undivined.
It's like chess champions missing a trick mate in the first few moves.
How can romantic breakthroughs and career gambits and travel advisories be augured so plainly in the stars and death steal a march with no warning?
But then, as Ionesco once said, and as any number of howlingly wrong forecasts have proved, you can't predict the future until it happens.
Godspeed Patric Walker (Libra, 64, food poisoning) and Linda Goodman (Aries,  around 70, complications from diabetes).
He departed Oct. 8 while baleful Mercury was still in retrograde; she exited on the 21st, just after Mars had entered Sagittarius and three days before a gnarly eclipse of the sun.
Anyone will tell you October is a frightful month.


Is Your Portfolio Out of Control?
After making a toast to the stock market tonight, mutual fund investors will  undoubtedly hope for a repeat performance in 1996.
The furthest thing from their minds may be adjusting portfolios that have proved to be winners.
But a soaring market can mask problems -- problems that will become all too clear if the market stalls or falls.


E-Mail
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review


No More New Year-Birthday Blues
ODETTA doesn't recommend having New Year's Eve for a birthday.
The deeply inspirational folk and blues singer, who will perform a cappella at the "New Year's Eve Concert for Peace" tonight at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, was born 66 years ago today.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Books in Brief: NONFICTION
SIXTY MILES FROM CONTENTMENT Traveling the Nineteenth-Century American Interior.
By M. H. Dunlop.
Basic Books, $24.


Coddle the Everglades, Not Sugar
It has been almost 50 years since Marjory Stoneman Douglas sounded the alarm  in "The Everglades: River of Grass," her environmental classic.
"There are no other Everglades in the world," she wrote, at a time when that unique preserve had shrunk to one-quarter of its original sweep.
Even now, the river dies a little each day.
The Federal and state governments are making efforts to reverse the decline,  but environmentalists call them inadequate.
Under the new Federal highway act, tolls on a southern Florida interstate will be used for environmental projects, including the Everglades.
Every little bit helps, but this one is too  small to make any real difference.


Researchers Pursue An Atomic Mystery
Fifty years after the fact, historians and other researchers are still studying the possibility that uranium from a captured Nazi submarine went into the mix of raw materials used to make the atomic bombs that the United States dropped on Japan at the end of World War II.
The reason for the mystery is that Government records available for public scrutiny are silent on what happened to the radioactive cargo of the U-234.
Now, a former official of the Manhattan Project, which built the first nuclear weapons, says he has no doubt that the United States used the explosive material.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL 1995


Elizabeth Maupin And Jay E. Yellen
Elizabeth Thatcher Maupin, a journalist, and Dr.
Jay Edward Yellen, a professor of mathematics, were married on Friday in Milford, Ohio.
The Rev.
Noel Julnes-Dehner, an Episcopal priest, officiated with Rabbi Solomon Greenberg at the Terrace Park Country Club.
Ms.
Maupin, 44, is keeping her name.
She is a fellow in the national arts journalism program at the Graduate School of Journalism at Columbia University.
She is on leave as the theater critic for The Orlando (Fla.) Sentinel.
She is a graduate of Wellesley College and received a master's degree in journalism from the University of California at Berkeley.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Addison Maupin of Terrace Park, Ohio.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
NEW YEAR'S IN NYACK


Land Mine Wounds Soldier, the First U.S. Casualty in Bosnia
An American soldier was wounded when his vehicle hit a land mine in northeastern Bosnia today, becoming the first American casualty of the NATO-led  peacekeeping mission, military officials said.
The soldier, Spec.
Martin John Begosh of Rockville, Md., was injured when an  anti-tank land mine exploded beneath a vehicle carrying military police officers on a surveying mission to mark roads in the American sector, said Maj.
Ryan Yantis, who was driving the vehicle.


A Well-Planned Patch Is a Gift to Wildlife
THE recent snows and cold weather have left local wildlife scurrying around for sustenance.
White-throated sparrows and juncos scratch at the ground in search of nourishing seeds.
Squirrels diligently scrape at the snow to find tasty morsels and, if they do find something worth their hunting, often pose on  a handy limb or fence post to nibble their find.
It's winter theater at its best.
Lucky indeed for both wildlife and property owners if landscapes have been planted to accommodate these needs.
There also is something rather comforting in knowing you have at least tried to help the wildlife along.
As suburbia and its  developments spread, food sources for wild creatures become scarcer, and places  for a cozy home are disappearing.


Field Goals and Turnovers Help East Carolina Win Liberty Bowl
Chad Holcomb kicked a career-high four field goals and East Carolina's defense forced four turnovers as the Pirates defeated Stanford, 19-13, today in  the Liberty Bowl.
The Pirates (9-3) never trailed, but didn't seal the victory until Marcus Crandell directed an 11-play drive that ate up 5 minutes 13 seconds on the clock, setting up Holcomb's fourth field goal, a 34-yarder, with 1:15 to go.


William Prochnau's War
To the Editor:
I greatly admire H. D. S. Greenway's work as a journalist, so when I read his review of William Prochnau's "Once Upon a Distant War" (Nov. 19), about young American correspondents in the early days of the Vietnam War, I was startled to  find him ascribing to me beliefs and motives I never entertained -- so startled  that I bought a copy of the book and read it.
My suspicion was confirmed.
It is  not so much Mr.
Greenway who has erred as the author himself.


Captured Cargo, Captivating Mystery
The Nazi submarine U-234, which surrendered to American forces in May 1945, was found to be carrying a surprisingly diverse cargo bound for Tokyo as part of a secretive exchange of war materiel between Hitler and Hirohito.
The payload represented the pride of German technology and included parts and blueprints for proximity fuzes, antiaircraft shells, jet planes and chemical rockets.
But nothing the U-234 concealed in its warrens was more surprising than 10 containers filled with 1,200 pounds of uranium oxide, a basic material of atomic bombs.
Up to then, the Allies suspected that both Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan had nuclear programs but considered them rudimentary and isolated.


When Gasoline Was Scarce, Milkman Relied on Horses
I grew up in Bayonne, and your article hit the nail on the head ("Christmas in Bayonne, Circa 1950," Soapbox, Dec. 17).
As I travel around the country, I find few towns its size that are as friendly, where you can go into a store or restaurant and be greeted in such an open, inviting way.
Though I moved out 18 years ago, I still visit often because my father has stayed there.
He was a milkman, and everybody knew him and knew that he could be counted on to deliver the milk no matter what.
In World War II, when gasoline was in short supply, he got the job done with a horse and carriage.
JAY CAMPBELL Hillsdale


Sooners to Hire Blake as Coach
Oklahoma has chosen JOHN BLAKE, an assistant with the Dallas Cowboys, as its  head coach, The Associated Press confirmed yesterday.
A university source said that Blake's hiring would be announced today.
He will succeed HOWARD SCHNELLENBERGER, who resigned Dec. 18.
The Cowboys' BARRY SWITZER, a former coach at Oklahoma, had pushed for the hiring of Blake.
The 34-year-old Blake, who played football at Oklahoma, skipped Dallas's practice to meet with Sooners officials on Friday. (AP)


Taxi Fare-Gouging Watch
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said undercover police officers would be deployed tonight to deter cabdrivers from the New Year's Eve tradition of overcharging passengers.
The medallion numbers of drivers who ask for exorbitant fares can be reported to the police or through the Taxi and Limousine Commission's complaint  line at (212) 302-TAXI.


THE SINS OF THE GRANDFATHERS
When I began reading "The Sins of the Grandfathers," by Peter Schneider (Dec. 3), I was not prepared to relive the very painful period in my life following my liberation from the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp on April 15, 1945.
I was sick with bleeding dysentery and pleurisy, with my weight down to 88 pounds.
Medical help was not available, as the liberating British forces had moved on.
I decided to leave the camp (as weak as I was) to find a German hospital.
A passing jeep dropped me off in the city of Celle, in front of a hospital, which  turned me away.
I still wore my striped prison tunic and pants, with nothing underneath.
I tried another hospital, to no avail.
As I walked the streets not knowing what to do, I was approached by a kind Frenchwoman who took me to her house, gave me a bath and called a doctor, who had me admitted to a German field hospital in a vocational school (Berufschule), which Schneider mentions.
It was  another two days before a German doctor, still in uniform, came to examine me.
Instead of speaking to me, he kept hitting my chin to make me turn my head. (I guess he was afraid of infection.) I received no treatment or medication, except for one fluoroscopy, which confirmed the pleurisy.
Six weeks after liberation, at the end of May 1945, I was picked up by the British Red Cross and put in one of its hospitals.


Visions of New York's Future
Of course, New York isn't the only city that attracts dreamers.
But having organized its port a century-and-a-half ago with a savvy and ruthlessness that left Boston and Philadelphia dazzled in defeat, New York perhaps has a birthright to predict the future.
Ask for visions and themes emerge.
The computer is a major focus, as if it were a torpedo thrust at our vanity and our reason to be -- physical proximity.
There is fascination with the future shape of the city.
Will it be vertical?
Will our waistline center remain the inland of Manhattan, or will development move toward the rivers, or even skip over the waters, into Queens and the South  Bronx?


Rockets Fired Into Israel
Guerrillas fired about 12 rockets into northern Israel today, in the second such attack in less than 24 hours, security officials said.
Party of God guerrillas fired Katyusha rockets into northern Israel on Friday after Israeli shelling killed a civilian in southern Lebanon.
Earlier today, two Israeli soldiers were wounded in an attack by Party of God members on their  patrol inside the zone in southern Lebanon that Israel occupies.


Bermuda Highs and Lows
Bermuda's temperature-guarantee program provides a 10 percent refund on regular room rates on any day when, according to Bermuda's national weather service, the temperature fails to reach 68 degrees during January, February and  March. (The discounts do not increase the colder it gets, so hoping for snow is  pointless.)
Twenty-six hotels participate in the program, which also provides passes for  free bus and ferry transport as well as admission to Bermudan cultural attractions the day after any sub-68 day.


They Know What They Don't Like


Challenging The All-Too Rational
WHO SAID THE enlightenment is dead?
That's like saying minds are dead.
In 1995, a few minds pressed on, challenging 18th-century rationality with the discoveries that reason has led to.
The Neurosciences Institute, a new division  of Scripps Institute in La Jolla, Calif., was the most inspiring new American building I saw all year.
Designed by the New York architects Tod Williams and Billie Tsien, the institute renders calm out of complexity and makes you subtly conscious of the mental processes that the Institute was founded to study.
Landscape and water, cool glass and warm fossil stone, are organized precisely but not systematically, as if to demonstrate the inseparability of reason and emotion.


Why Towns Should Be Free To Leave Out Street Curbs
To the Editor:
The new state guidelines about development sites ("Is Simpler Better? State Readies New Rules for Building," Dec. 17) should include giving communities the  option not to require street curbs.


BROTHEL BATTLES: Not What the Sign Says
They pose as legitimate businesses -- hair salons, manicure parlors, even a computer store.
But a steady stream of men pulling up in taxis and limousines is usually the tipoff that despite what the sign says, the business is a brothel.
And it's a good bet neighbors and the police want no part of it.
Here are a few  fights they won:
For years, Dong Keun Yoo ran a bunch of midtown massage parlors, thumbing his nose at court orders to clean up his act, which the police say included an interesting sideline -- serving as plastic surgeon to his staff.
His specialties: breast enlargements and eye-roundings.
When the courts fined him $2.2 million, Mr.
Yoo vanished.


The Meadowlands, by Any Other Name, Will Still Be the Meadowlands
In "Othello," Iago comments that a man's name is worth more than any sum of money, but he never bargained with the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority.
In a deal with Continental Airlines said to be worth perhaps $2 million, the  sports authority is near an agreement to slap the company's name across the Meadowlands arena, the home of the New Jersey Devils hockey team and the New Jersey Nets basketball team, an official who spoke on condition of anonymity said yesterday.


Some Old Friends Are All Grown Up
Eloise" is 40. What? Everyone knows that Eloise is 6. She's been 6 as long as you can remember, but that turns out to be longer than you thought.
Should old acquaintance be forgot?
People possibly, but not children's books.
If there are books Americans love, it is the ones they read as children,  or the ones they read to their children.


Speed Catches Up With Crack
Starting with home-grown marijuana and black tar heroine and later moving on  to selling cocaine made in Colombia, Mexican drug traffickers have been fighting for a bigger share of the American market for three decades.
Now, they have taken a major new step by seizing control of the production and distribution of methamphetamine, or speed.
Mexican mafias have imported tons of ephedrine, the main ingredient in speed, from the Middle East and Asia,  and they are now cooking up methamphetamine in laboratories throughout the Sierra Madre.


Emotional Overload, Emotional Lift
MIXED, SOMETIMES clashing emotions were stirred by the year's hard-to-forget  television images from Oklahoma and Tel Aviv, Washington and Los Angeles.
The horrifying scenes of the explosion at the Federal Building in Oklahoma City were followed quickly by pictures of rescue workers and volunteers searching for the dead, aiding the injured and comforting the grieving.
An act aimed at tearing the country apart had managed, with some assistance from the network anchors, those personifications of national concern, to bring people together.


The Mission Not Accepted
THE Clinton Administration apparently does not want Congress to hear the words Eastern Slavonia.
Relieved that the dispatch of American troops to Bosnia  got Congressional backing, Washington is determined to palm off peacekeeping next door in Eastern Slavonia, the last holdout of Croatian Serbs, to a reluctant United Nations.
Logically, the operation there could be part of the NATO mission.
The preferred route for American supplies from Germany and Hungary to the Pentagon's headquarters in Tuzla runs right through Eastern Slavonia.
At one point it passes within five miles of territory known as Sector East, at the tip of Croatia's northern fork, which is controlled by Serb militias not party to Balkan peace agreements.


After Rapid Growth, B.I.D.'s Enter a Time of Turmoil
After taking hold in the 1980's, business improvement districts were most often touted as about the best thing to happen to New York since the elevator.
B.I.D.'s changed the face of the city -- banishing litter and graffiti from their fiefdoms, hiring guards to discourage crime and erecting ornate lampposts  and lush planters.
Bryant Park was transformed from a forbidding drug market into a respite with al fresco dining, free concerts and mingling singles.
As municipal services shrank, B.I.D.'s grew, spreading from midtown to the far reaches of the boroughs.
In the last decade, the number citywide went to 33  from 7, with 39 others under consideration.
Existing B.I.D.'s expanded their boundaries.


The Double-Edged Molecule
Call it the classic case of the left hand not knowing what the right hand is  doing.
When Dr.
Robert Gallo, the director of the Institute for Human Virology at the University of Maryland, discovered a new natural defense against the virus that causes AIDS, he thought he had found something entirely new to science.
But it turned out that he'd found chemokines, a class of molecules so powerful and so intimately involved in many diseases that virtually every major  drug company has set up a crash program to try to block them.
Chemokines lead immune system cells to sites of inflammation, acting like a sort of chemical perfume that draws cells as they push their way through blood vessels and tissues to the area where they are needed.
But when chemokines are overactivated, they can lead to diseases as diverse as multiple sclerosis, asthma, arthritis, toxic shock and atherosclerosis, and can cause the body to reject transplanted organs.


A District That Wasn't: No Private Police Here
The concept was staggering: create a special district whose property owners would be taxed to pay for up to 500 security guards to patrol the entire Upper East Side, from 59th to 96th Streets.
The major proponent was Howard Milstein, owner of the Douglas Elliman real-estate company, which manages many local properties.


SWEATER GIRL
My mother has forgotten a lot of things, but not how to knit.
She and my sister and I knit four-inch squares and sew them together to make crib blankets.
This project gives Mother purpose, comforts my sister and me during our nursing-home visits, provides an activity we all can share and helps a woman born in 1903 and her middle-aged daughters bless with their handwork babies who  will live most of their lives in the 21st century.


Books in Brief: NONFICTION
THE ROAD TO WEST 43RD STREET By Nash K. Burger with Pearl A. McHaney.
University Press of Mississippi, $25.


A Wrapped Reichstag: That's the Spirit
IT BEGAN WITH DE KOONING AND Impressionism shows winding up their stays at the Metropolitan Museum of Art and ends with the magnificent Mondrian show at the Museum of Modern Art, Brancusi in Philadelphia, Vermeer in Washington.
How bad a year could it have been?
Not bad at all.
One image keeps coming to mind, the wrapped Reichstag in Berlin, by Christo and his wife, Jeanne-Claude, its silvery-gray fabric rustling in the cool German summer breeze, huge crowds gathered around the building and turning the event into a celebration.
A celebration of what?
Maybe nothing in particular for many  simply curious onlookers.


Nixonesque Paranoia Lives On;History's Villain
To the Editor:
Re "When History Is Up for Grabs" by Charles W. Colson (Op-Ed, Dec. 28):


Kathryn Richer, James Collins Jr.
Kathryn Simonne Richer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice R. Richer of Palm  Desert, Calif., was married last evening to James Robert Collins Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Collins of Dallas.
The Rev.
William Bergen performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
Mrs.
Collins, 33, is the public relations and national bridal manager at the  Ralph Lauren Home Collection in New York.
She graduated from the University of Southern California.
Her father retired as a shipping consultant in Palm Desert.


For China's Girls, Rural Schools Fail
One way to calculate the lamentable state of rural education in China is to tally up the number of girls who are not in class.
Liang Bangfen, who at 16 has only finished the second grade, is not among the 100 students who leave Youyan, or Greasy Smoke Village, on foot each morning for the 40-minute walk over a desolate landscape to the Dongwang School in Guizhou Province in southwestern China.


Nixonesque Paranoia Lives On
To the Editor:
Re "When History Is Up for Grabs" (Op-Ed, Dec. 28): To see one of Richard M.  Nixon's criminal co-conspirators assail the veracity of Oliver Stone and accuse  the film maker of working with historians to "destroy the very character of America" is to realize that Nixonesque paranoia did not die with its creator.


ROBERT RIGER;Pros
Mickey Mantle (1931-1995) was the Boomers' boomer, but pain was the dark twist in the golden promise of his power.
Robert Riger (1924-1995), the great sports photographer, captured it in the 1961 World Series.
Mantle's bones were fragile, and so was his psyche; he carried the dreaad of the Hodgkin's disease that killed his father and uncles young, and he seemed disappointed that he wasn't an even better player.
He became a alcoholic, a joke-a-stroke golfer for rent.
But during his sober, gallant, public death he made this image symbolic: the Mick went down swinging.


The Lives They Lived: Harvey Penick;Driving Force
GOLF INSTRUCTION HAS lately fallen into the hands of the gurus and the "swing doctors" -- experts who mess with your mind and micro-manage your swing.
Harvey  Penick, who died in April at the age of 90, after 48 years as the head pro at the Austin Country Club in Texas, wasn't a techie so much as a teacher, someone  who approached golf as a branch of the liberal arts.
Penick coached more than his share of champions, including Tom Kite, the pro  tour's leading money winner, and Ben Crenshaw, who last April, just days after serving as a pallbearer at Penick's funeral, won the Masters in his teacher's memory.
But Penick also worked with countless duffers and slicers, preaching the virtues of a sound grip and a delicate short game.
He built new swings for middle-aged guys whose bellies were starting to get in the way of their follow-throughs, and he devised ways to put the pop back into the drives of Seasoned Citizens, as he liked to call them.


Michelle C. Lowe, Geoffrey Marshall
Michelle Cleland Lowe, a daughter of Judith M. Lowe of Katonah, N.Y., and William C. Lowe of Concord, Mass., is to be married today to Geoffrey Guy Marshall, the son of Cristina G. Marshall of Riverside, Conn., and George B. Marshall of Vero Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Colin Leitch, a Unitarian Universalist minister, is to perform the ceremony in the Middlesex School Chapel in Concord.


Sports of the Times;Postcards Alive With the Sound of Jerry's Music
In the darkness of early winter, the past year looms dreaily: A weasel named  Medell began taking the Browns out of Cleveland.
Mickey Mantle died.
Duke Snider pleaded guilty to tax evasion from autograph shows, giving the distinct impression that many old heroes take the money and run.
George Steinbrenner basically dismantled an enjoyable Yankee team.
Not pretty memories.
But I might as well be up front about this.
When I sat down to review the year, my first memory was a call last August to my son, the journalist.
We chatted about baseball and newspapers for a few minutes, and then he said: "Gee, Dad, I thought you were calling about Jerry. It just came over the wire."


The Lives They Lived: Les Aspin;Vietnam's Student
AT ONE TIME OR ANother during the mid-1960's, most of the best young talent in the State Department and the Pentagon found its way to Saigon and the provincial capitals of South Vietnam.
Many of the names are household words today, at least in households inside the Beltway: Anthony Lake, now President Clinton's national security adviser; Richard C. Holbrooke, who has been struggling to bring peace to Bosnia; Peter Tarnoff, the No. 3 man at State; Frank Wisner, Ambassador to India; John Negroponte, Ambassador to the Philippines, and Les Aspin, who became the Clinton Administration's first Secretary of Defense.
They all learned lessons from Vietnam.
On my first foreign assignment, in my  first war, I did, too.
Everyone did, including military people like Colin L. Powell and John McCain, who shook off the effects of five years in an enemy prison to win election to the House and the Senate, and journalists like Frances FitzGerald and Stanley Karnow, who wrote histories of the war, and Ward Just, who wrote novels about it.
Impatient with if not contemptuous of the Washington  crowd that David Halberstam derisively called the best and the brightest, we were sure we could do better if we ever got the chance.


Ann Thayer, Robert Mulshine
Ann Wharton Thayer, a mortgage broker, and Robert Anthony Mulshine, a financial executive, are to be married today on the grounds of the Lyford Cay Club in Nassau, the Bahamas.
Jackson L. Lowe, a justice of the peace in Nassau,  is to officiate.
Ms.
Thayer, 53, is keeping her name.
She is a vice president of the Manhattan Mortgage Company and also is the president of the Vocational Foundation, a nonprofit employment-training and placement organization, both in New York.
She graduated from Duke University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.


After the Ball
SINCE 1990, the entertainer and media mogul Merv Griffin has taken up Guy Lombardo's big-band baton and returned to television in an hourlong, post-ball-drop New Year's Eve party featuring old acquaintances, like singers Tony Bennett and Harry Belafonte, and some new ones, interspersed with long, lingering glances at happy high rollers guzzling champagne in the front row, waving to the folks back home.
Each year, the Merv Griffin New Year's Eve specials grow in popularity, said  Bob Chambers, the harried entertainment director at Merv Griffin's Resorts, who  has coordinated all five broadcasts.
Although Mr.
Chambers described the show's  yearly ratings as inconsistent, he said: "What matters is that we're going into  close to every major media market. When we started out five years ago, we didn't have this kind of market penetration. So now, at 1 A.M., you can see Merv and Atlantic City on TV, in just about every city in the country."


New Animal Rights Cause Urges, 'Free the Lobsters!'
Ofelya Rotunda will never forget the day last spring when she took a listless 12-pound lobster recently purchased at a Texas store and let it crawl back into  the Atlantic.


Cuttings;May the Spirit of Gardening Seep Into Your Soul
I helped a friend return a baby lamb to a farm in Columbia County, New York,  last Monday, and it put me back in touch with something.
The lamb was one of the animals in the Christmas pageant the day before at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, on Amsterdam Avenue and 112th Street. (I played a shepherd, which is easy. Just tie a rope around a burlap robe and follow the sheep.)
The lamb spent the service in the arms of a young woman named Vivian, and the two of them were actually more adorable, I thought, than the woman who played Mary, with her real baby, who played Jesus.
They were fairly convincing, especially when his mother had to burp him, because this is the sort of thing you never think of Jesus or his mother doing.
I wish Mary hadn't worn red lipstick, but then that's me.


Boxing Up a Life and Moving It Requires Caution and Cash
MOVING is seldom easy, but changing addresses can become a nightmare when a moving company presents a bill that is miles off its own estimate or when some possessions fail to turn up at the end of the trip.
About 16.5 million households move every year, with 1 million of those across state lines.
Few of them realize at the outset just how much faith they are putting in their movers and how little they have to fall back on in case of a serious problem.


Budget Crisis Emptying Idled Workers' Pockets
There were fewer gifts under Gloria Miles's Christmas tree this year, and her family did without some of their usual Yuletide treats.
Now, Ms.
Miles is watching New Year's Day approach with little sense of celebration.
That is when the next mortgage payment on her small, red-brick house is due,  and Ms.
Miles, one of more than a quarter-million Federal workers who have been  furloughed in the partial shutdown of the Government, has not seen a paycheck since Dec. 18 and has no idea when she will get another full one.


Chrysler Building
To the Editor:
I am a lifelong New Yorker who always considered the Chrysler Building the smaller -- yet worthy -- brother of the Empire State Building ("Skyscraper's Place in the Sun," Dec. 17).
But a new day is dawning, literally.
I recently moved into an office with a spectacular view of the Art Deco masterpiece just three blocks away.


Camby's Status Still Uncertain
The status of the junior center Marcus Camby of top-ranked Massachusetts for  tonight's Rainbow Classic championship game against No. 13 Syracuse will be decided at game time.
The 6-foot-11-inch Camby was injured two minutes into the Minutemen's 78-63 semifinal victory over Southern Cal on Friday night.
He did not return to the game and X-rays were negative.


From One Year to the Next, the Subject Is Still Education and Money
Education officials forged ahead this year with plans to reinvigorate New Jersey's public schools, intending to end longstanding disparities between the state's richest and poorest districts.
Although the effect will not be felt for  months or even years, officials say they will continue refining the plans in 1996.
In November, Education Commissioner Leo F. Klagholz introduced a long-awaited proposal to equalize the education provided in the state's 600 school districts.
The proposal came in response to a 1994 Supreme Court ruling that New Jersey must bring up the spending level of the 30 poorest districts to that of the 120  richest by 1998.


Patricia Siegel, Joseph Sullivan
Patricia Garcia Siegel, a project director at the Mount Sinai Medical Center  in New York, was married on Friday to Joseph Edward Sullivan, the chief information officer at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
The Rev.
Dr.
Gary Wilburn, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Roger Sherman Inn in New Canaan, Conn.
Mrs.
Sullivan, 39, is a registered nurse who graduated from Hunter College and received a master's degree in public health from Columbia University.
She is a candidate for a Ph.D. degree in health policy and management at New York University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Louie Garcia of Carteret, N.J.


The '95 Tax Guides Cometh. But Are They Too Early?
THEY'RE perennial best sellers, the guides to income tax preparation now appearing on bookstore shelves, harbingers of a season to come as surely as the  crocuses that push their way through the snows of winter.
But this year, with proposed changes in the nation's tax law bogged down in the budget debate that has shuttered Washington and reduced its leaders to the level of playground bullies, is there any reason to buy the books?
Won't the Washington muddle be sorted out before April 15 and the tax laws revised, outdating the books?


At the Casinos
What's happening onstage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.


Irene Corbally Kuhn, 97, Reporter and Columnist
Irene Corbally Kuhn, a journalist who traveled on five continents and wrote books as well as newspaper and magazine articles and columns, died yesterday at  the Briar Crest-Deaconess Nursing Home in Concord, Mass., where she had lived for the last year.
She was 97 and had spent all of her earlier life, when she was not traveling, in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Kuhn's many writings included a volume of memoirs, "Assigned to Adventure" (1938), which Augusta Tucker, writing in The New York Times Book Review, called "the story of an unafraid woman who has seen a lot of the world as a newspaper reporter" and added that it "has pace, it has interest, it has color, and the woman who wrote it has sense: a quality not consistently present  in the kiss-and-tell books of some of the male correspondents.".


Lawmaker Will Not Retire
Representative Herbert H. Bateman said last year that he would not seek an eighth term, but he announced on Friday that he had changed his mind because last year's Republican takeover has given him more influence in the House.
Mr.
Bateman, 67, is best known for his advocacy of maritime and shipbuilding  interests, particularly for Newport News Shipbuilding, the largest private employer in Virginia.


Knicks Have No Trouble Expressing Themselves
It began innocuously enough, with Patrick Ewing strongly indicating that he would not mind taking more shots in the low post.
It picked up steam when Anthony Mason said his Knicks teammates need to worry about more important things than themselves and reached a low boil when Charles Oakley wondered aloud why everyone does not just pipe down and play basketball.
One of America's most combustible teams is percolating again, looking for a common thread to hold it all together before it blows up and everybody goes home from Madison Square Garden disappointed and disillusioned.


Getting The Drift On Snow
IT'S winter.
Winter means snow.
"When it snows in the east there's always a panic," said Michael Thuecks, vice president of sales and marketing for the Ariens Company, a snow-thrower manufacturer in Brillion, Wis.
"We can feel it here in our factory. The number of phone calls we get is tremendous."
The easiest way to clear a sidewalk or driveway, of course, is to get a machine to do most of the work.
Accordingly, in the middle of every heavy snowfall, homeowners fall into two general categories: those who already own a snow-thrower and those who wish they did.


4 Top Choices From a Rewarding Year
THIS has been a rewarding year for Long Island food lovers.
Four restaurants  reviewed in 1995 received a rating of excellent.
The years 1994 and 1993 saw one and two, respectively.
The exceptional four include two sparkling newcomers and  a pair of worthy veterans that warranted a second look.
Tupelo Honey arrived in late summer, and it not only enlivened the sleepy village of Sea Cliff, but it also had all of Long Island buzzing.
The lighthearted decor that stars a beehive-shape pizza oven crowned with a jaunty sand castle, a giant stained-glass bee chandelier and a mosaic that features octopuses, dolphins and other sea creatures sparked many a dinner debate.
Was the whimsical look worth the high noise level?


Optimism Tempered by Uncertainty
PROSPERITY or peril?
At year's end, seven business leaders peering at the economy through a crystal ball, see reasons for optimism, tempered by a shadow of uncertainty.
Here are their answers to the question, From your vantage as an industry leader, how would you rate Westchester as a place to do business in 1996?


His Lease Ran Out
Thirty years ago, a 47-year-old man named Andre-Francois Raffray bet that he  would outlive Jeanne Calment, a 90-year-old woman with a great apartment in Arles, France.
He agreed to pay her about $500 a month for the right to move into her apartment when she died.
Mrs.
Calment, who is now 120 years old -- the  world's oldest person with the records to prove it -- is living in a nursing home.
Her apartment is vacant.
And Mr.
Raffray is dead at the age of 77.
His widow is required to continue sending Mrs.
Calment checks until she dies.
So far, Mrs.
Calment has collected $184,000 on the bargain, more than twice her apartment's market value.
On her 120th birthday last February, Mrs.
Calment said, "In life, one sometimes makes bad deals."


Rooms Running Low For Atlanta Olympics
The company designated by the Olympic committee to handle travel services for the Olympic Games in Atlanta says its inventory of hotel rooms within a radius of 80 miles is "virtually sold out."
This does not mean all hotel rooms there are gone, because the travel company designated by the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games was given access to only part of the supply in the area.
It does mean, according to Jonathan Hartzer of World travel Partners, the official company, that people who want to stay closer in, that is, within 45 miles of downtown, should now be asking about private homes.
Laurie Olsen of the Atlanta Olympic Committee said ticket-holders should consider a hotel room in Social Circle, Ga., "a real possibility." Social Circle is about 50 miles east of Atlanta.


On Sunday;A Trove Of History Shuts Its Doors
The papers were signed on Wednesday morning, a last-minute denouement with dignity for a battle more sad than fierce.
The movers showed up within hours.
A  bibliophile with a camera snapped away in a kind of photographic last rite for the University Place Book Shop.
The store at 821 Broadway, at 12th Street, first opened its doors in 1932 when the Greenwich Village neighborhood was the city's center for secondhand books.
It had gained an international reputation as a treasure trove of African, African-American and Caribbean history and literature.


Let's See Tom and Huck Get Out of This One
Waiting to Exhale Whitney Houston, Angela Bassett, Loretta Devine, Lela Rochon Directed by Forest Whitaker R 123 minutes


The Lives They Lived: Martin Bucksbaum and Max H. Karl;Settling the Surburban Frontier
ARCHITECTS LIKE TO think they control the future of the landscape.
Martin Bucksbaum and Max Karl knew better.
Each had an impact on the American landscape that was more transforming, in its way, than that of nearly any architect or city planner practicing today.
Focusing on the aspirations of the middle class,  Bucksbaum and Karl helped to shape the world of suburbia -- changing the nature of the American town and proving that the physical form communities take  does not just happen but is brought into being by conscious decisions.
It's not quite right to say that Martin Bucksbaum invented suburban sprawl, either in his native Iowa or anywhere else.
But when Martin and his brothers, Matthew and Maurice, decided in the early 1950's that, instead of putting their  family's fourth supermarket in someone else's building, they would become landlords themselves, it marked a turning point in the growth and development of the Middle West.
The Bucksbaums' first shopping center, the Town and Country, opened in Cedar Rapids in 1956, and they went on from there to become one of the largest builders of shopping malls in the United States.
They shed their family's grocery business before the Cedar Rapids center even opened, decisively staking their future on erecting what Matthew Bucksbaum would later call "the new downtowns."


Think Smaller: Bounty Beyond The Megahits
HOME VIDEO THRIVES ON large numbers of popular movies to rent, but this year  there weren't so many to choose from.
Video, as one trade publication drily noted, suffered from "Hollywood's inability to come up with a consistent supply  of movies people want to see." All year long a few megahits -- "Forrest Gump," say, or "Disclosure" -- had to carry the load, and after a particularly lean summer all of video was waiting for "Pulp Fiction," released in September.
Scarcity at the top, however, in no way dampened other activity on the home screen.
Times were never better for that category of video called "smaller films that people may have missed in theaters." (Three recommendations: "L'Enfer," Claude Chabrol's psychological thriller about jealous obsession; "Before the Rain," Milcho Manchevski's stunning and horrific portrait of ethnic violence in  Macedonia, and "Exotica," Atom Egoyan's troubling study of erotica and loss.)


California Begins Easing Its Once-Strict Laws on Rent Control
New Year's Day will bring a loosening of rent control in this bayside city and four other California cities, under a state law that takes effect on Monday.
Santa Monica, whose nearly 90,000 residents are nearly 80 percent renters, has offered cheap apartments with cool breezes and ocean views since voters approved a 1979 ordinance that controlled the rents of 31,600 apartments here.


Takeover Looms: Roosevelt Board Faces State Regents
ALMOST six years after the state first said that the Roosevelt school district was poorly serving its students, using dilapidated classrooms and offering students scant hope of academic success, the district may become the first to be taken over by the state.
On Tuesday the State Board of Regents is scheduled to take the first step required by law to oust the Roosevelt school board.
At a hearing at 11 A.M. in Manhattan, the board will be required to respond to charges by state officials that the district has allowed its schools to founder, standing by as the district plunged into debt and continued to deprive its 2,600 students of decent educations.


A Course to Fulfill Students' Dreams
THE notebooks and briefcases of the half-dozen adults sitting in a Westchester Community College classroom here weren't merely filled with homework.
What was on display in presentations to their instructor and colleagues were their dreams.
Visions of selling Mary Kay cosmetics danced in their heads as did visions of computer learning centers for children or starting a collectibles store.


Sri Lanka Guerrillas Offer to Resume Talks
Sri Lankan guerrillas said today that they would resume peace talks with the  Government if Sri Lankan troops would leave the rebels' longtime stronghold.
The rebel Voice of Tigers radio said the offer by the leader of the Tamil Tigers guerrillas, Velupillai Prabhakaran, was made in a statement on Friday.
The Government troops took the town of Jaffna, the rebels' longtime stronghold,  in early December after a siege over several weeks.


Rampant Signs of Life At a Legendary Studio
ON A COLD, gray winter's day a few weeks ago, a lone figure trudged through the German snow.
Blood trickled down his face, and the back of his jacket bore the chilling letters "KG" for Kriegsgefangener: prisoner of war.
John Malkovich was on his way to work at the historic Babelsberg film studio  here, a few miles from downtown Berlin.
After applying his bloody makeup and donning a wet suit under his prisoner's outfit, he walked toward the hall where  classics like "The Blue Angel" and "Metropolis" were filmed decades ago.


The Lives They Lived: Innovators


Ellis Island May Have Been Made for You and Me, but Who Owns It?
Judith T. Kramer has a lot of dirt on her mind these days. So does Joseph L.  Yannotti.
They are both lawyers, and they are girding for the New Jersey-versus-New York showdown before the United States Supreme Court for control over the dirt in question -- Ellis Island.


Golan to West Bank, Definition Is Crucial
To the Editor:
"Prospect of Losing Golan Heights Saddens Settlers and Skiers Alike" (front page, Dec. 26) contrasts the Israeli residents of the heights, known as mityashvim (settlers), with the generally more religious ones of the West Bank.
You say the term used to describe the latter, mitnachalim, has "the ring of occupation."


Anne A. Gilbert, Gordon M. Goldstein
Anne Ashby Gilbert, a writer, and Gordon Mitchell Goldstein, a foreign-policy consultant, film producer and writer, were married last evening in Pennington, N.J.
Presiding Judge Virginia Long of the Appellate Division of the Superior Court of New Jersey in Trenton officiated at the home of the bride's mother, Lucy James, and stepfather, Karl Light.
Ms.
Gilbert, 31, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Barnard College and  the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Arts and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.
She was until recently a staff writer at the New York Center for Visual History, a television film production company in  New York.
She is also a daughter of the late Richard Gilbert.
Her stepfather owns the residential real estate company that bears his name in Princeton, N.J.


Party Politics (but Where's the Party?)
PRESIDENT and Mrs.
Clinton arrived here in 1993 in a blaze of inaugural panache.
There were balls and there was glamour.
There was a young crowd and there were Hollywood overtones, with stars like Barbra Streisand staying overnight at the White House.
Hostesses took out their gowns and dusted off their jewels.
There was a whiff of excitement going around that hadn't been engendered by President and Mrs.
George Bush, who, though well-liked, made no distinct mark on the city's social  scene.


Elisabeth Aronow, Robert Landeck
Dr.
Elisabeth Amy Aronow, a daughter of Nila and Dr.
Phillip Z. Aronow of Haddonfield, N.J., is to be married this evening to Robert Charles Landeck, a son of Manfred Landeck of Hartsdale, N.Y., and the late Else Landeck.
Rabbi Howard B. Kahn is to perform the ceremony at the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts in Philadelphia.
Dr.
Aronow is an obstetrician and gynecologist in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Dartmouth College and received her medical degree from Albany Medical College.
Her father is a surgeon in Marlton, N.J.
Her mother is the director of arts and cultural programming for NJN, New Jersey's public television network in Trenton.


Shanghai
Shanghai is the New York of China.
Its pace of life is palpably faster, its sense of style more flamboyant, and its inhabitants' opinion of themselves noticeably higher than anywhere else in the nation.
Chinese from smaller cities  sometimes fear Shanghai's fast-talking and quick-changing ways, but for those who like big-city life, Shanghai is the place to be.
For the American visitor, Shanghai offers an antidote to the rest of China.
You can get a good Western meal here.
You can rub elbows (on many crowded streets there is no alternative) with an urban elite.
You can stop for coffee and find a nice French pastry to go with it.


Haven Forbid! Deportations Rising
America has often thought of itself as a haven for the world's poor and oppressed, a place where there is always a welcome mat.
But in keeping with the  rising tide of anti-immigration sentiment, increasingly the Clinton Administration is showing the door to illegal immigrants.
Last week, the Immigration and Naturalization Service, long considered one of the least efficient Federal agencies, reported that in 1995 it deported a record number of foreigners who were in the United States illegally -- 51,600, a 15 percent increase over 1994 and a jump of nearly 75 percent since 1990.


The Suspect on the Couch
THE NEW INFORMANTS The Betrayal of Confidentiality in Psychoanalysis and Psychotherapy.
By Christopher Bollas and David Sundelson. 215 pp.
Northvale, N.J.: Jason Aronson. $22.
IN 1976, in the landmark case of Tarasoff v.
Regents of the University of California, the California Supreme Court held that when a psychotherapist determines "that his patient presents a serious danger of violence to another, he incurs an obligation to use reasonable care to protect the intended victim against such danger." Although the privilege of nondisclosure is still sanctioned by law in most states, in the years since Tarasoff the screen of confidentiality governing what patients tell therapists has been increasingly perforated.
In the private sphere, managed health care systems keep tabs on the  course of psychotherapeutic treatments and medical insurers obtain the psychiatric records of clients seeking reimbursement for therapists' bills.
In the public one, all 50 states now legally require therapists to report to suitable authorities patients who give evidence of abusive behavior, especially  toward children.


Music to Swiss Ears
The Swiss did not invent the cuckoo clock (although that hasn't stopped them  from selling millions of them).
The music box, however, was created there -- in  the village of Ste.-Croix by Antoine Favre in 1796.
Throughout 1996, the bicentennial of this gift-shop standby will be celebrated with exhibits, factory tours and special events in Ste.-Croix, which is 22 miles north of Lausanne, near the French border.
From Feb. 2 to June 2, for example, the Music Box Museum will have an exhibit of hundreds of music boxes.
Information: Lake Geneva Region Tourist Office, Post Office Box 164, 1006 Lausanne, Switzerland; telephone (41 21) 617-7202.


It's the Era of Nostalgia With Legs
NOT many new cars can stir the kind of emotion swirling around the Concept One.
When a prototype was unveiled in Detroit two years ago, the media showered  the subcompact with tributes, would-be Concept One owners flooded dealerships with inquiries and auto industry analysts anointed the car the Next Big Thing.
The Concept One isn't even scheduled to hit the road until sometime around the millennium, but Volkswagen of America is still being inundated with calls and letters asking: Is it here yet?
Is it here yet?
Turns out the car of the future is a nostalgia trip -- it's a Volkswagen beetle, looking just a bit more aerodynamic than the old model.
And, not surprisingly, a great deal of the interest in its new incarnation comes from baby boomers.
The beetle practically steered the Woodstock generation through its protracted adolescence.
Until Japanese competition and pollution-control requirements hounded it from the American market in 1978, the beetle was everybody's favorite first car, an anti-establishment emblem, a tubby Joe Schmo  with the soul of a starving artist.


The Year in Venting: Why It's Good to Blow Off Steam
YOU live in a city where the Mayor has the courage to raise his own salary while cutting services to the barely coping.
The least you can do in return is stand up for quality of life amid quantity of despair, as he does.
Resolve in the new year to be one of Rudy's Rangers.
Get out and be a monitor in your own nabe.
I will continue my own meager efforts, waving delivery bikers off the sidewalks and barking at dog owners who let their furry toys run loose or do not clean up behind them.
I have been sustained in this mission by a trickle of whiny, defensive letters and calls accusing me of being misguided, stupid, hateful, racist, specie-ist and, worst of all, cranky.
Like Rudy the Role Model, I gain strength from such criticism, especially since I believe that being cranky is a virtue in this city.


SWEATER GIRL
I have never identified more with anything in print than I did with Susanna Rodell's Hers column, "Sweater Girl" (Dec. 10).
Knitting is my release, too, at  the end of a stressful day as a lawyer, a substitute for the cigarettes I gave up 18 years ago.


Howard Stern's Sales
To the Editor:
I am writing in regard to the New York Times best-seller list of Sunday, Dec. 10.
On the hard-cover nonfiction list, Howard Stern's "Miss America" was listed  as second in sales to Colin L. Powell's "My American Journey." From all I have heard from other sources, Mr.
Stern's book has been outselling Mr.
Powell's book by margins of 2 to 1.
It is indeed disturbing that an editorial decision may have been involved in the placing of these books rather than a strictly objective reporting of total sales.
Additionally, it calls into question the supposedly "objective" reporting throughout the paper.
Please go public about this situation to allay a queasy feeling that The Times is playing games in order to remain politically correct.


Of Capital and Rewards
To the Editor:
In "Reward Genuine Capital Investment" (Viewpoint, Nov. 19), John D. Shilling seeks, among other things, a tax break for teachers as an incentive to develop America's human capital.
I would instead propose two reward systems:


Moon Goddess


Egyptian Editor Gets Jail Term for Article Criticizing Militants
An Egyptian magazine editor has been sentenced to two years' hard labor for an article that criticized Muslim militants for bringing cases against artists and intellectuals, Cairo court officials said today.
Mahmoud Tohami, editor of the weekly Rose al-Youssef magazine, who was sentenced to jail, was also ordered to pay $147 compensation to the plaintiff.


Books in Brief: FICTION &amp; POETRY;Nowhere Land
This formidably weird collection of paintings by Timothy C. Ely has its origin in a journal kept by the artist's grandfather during a 16-week journey to Egypt in the 1920's, but any resemblance to a conventional travelogue ends there.
Pyramids, circles, serpentine lines -- even depictions of the journal itself -- are embedded in colored maps and landscapes, with an occasional snapshot thrown in the mix.
Indecipherable hieroglyphical writing appears alongside English words and baffling phrases ("concertina guard + coptic w/ beads"), bookbinding instructions, cartographic markings and snatches of the journal.
None of this makes any sense, but that may be beside the point, since Mr.
Ely seems to be more interested in providing a mandala than a Rosetta stone.
"What I'm trying to do is assemble symbols in such a way that a shift occurs in  the viewer . . . a heightened awareness, like getting a whiff of a strange smell and suddenly getting just a little bit of clarity," he says in a not entirely helpful interview at the end of THE FLIGHT INTO EGYPT: Binding the Book (Chronicle, $25).
Speaking of whiffs of strange smells, Terence McKenna, a noted advocate of hallucinogenic drugs, suggests in an entertaining foreword stuffed with New Age blarney that the best way to approach this material is from a skewed angle, perhaps (surprise) through mind-altering substances.
There is undeniable craftsmanship in "The Flight Into Egypt," which employs a relentlessly geometric -- if impenetrable -- logic and has an obsessive quality  in its detail.
At best, these moodscapes have genuine power, evoking M. C. Escher and the hidden tracks spreading out across Australia that Bruce Chatwin described in "The Songlines"; at worst, they resemble a wacked-out version of "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
SCOTT VEALE


Seduction by Art and Style
WHEN GOOD OR GREAT theater comes along, it makes you lose your bearings: it lures, hurtles or compels you into another world.
And I don't just mean a world  of heightened emotions and happily suspended disbelief, I mean a world that to your surprise and possibly against your will, expands the range of your thoughts and responses.
When I was a child in Chicago, I believed that this transformation began when the chandeliers in old theaters rose and grew dark, giving off bright glints of color just before they went out.
Let the chandeliers go.
Transformation was what drove Ingmar Bergman's ravishing productions of Shakespeare's "Winter's Tale" and Yukio Mishima's "Madame de Sade" at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
They weren't productions, really; they were visions -- "Madame de Sade" especially.
I can still see fans being flung open and snapped shut.
I can still remember how voices compressed the Swedish vowels and drew out the consonants; how every gesture had meaning; how abstractions like freedom and honor became matters of life and death.


Tracking the Dow, but Trailing Its Gains and Lacking Investors
GIVEN the popularity this year of index funds, several dozen of which mimic the broad United States stock market, an index fund linked to the Dow Jones industrial average sounds like a sure hit.
And an entrepreneur with that slice of the market almost to himself sounds lucky indeed.


Once Upon a Time, a Budget Surplus
EVEN if Congress and the President actually balance the budget in seven years, the Government will still owe $4.3 trillion in outstanding public debt, according to the Congressional Budget Office.
But suppose that in succeeding years, the national debt were paid off and the Government even ran a surplus.
This wildly improbable scenario happened once, and only once, in American history.
From 1835 to 1837, the United States was not only free of debt, it actually had a surplus in the Treasury.


What Is Public Investment?
To the Editor:


Arafat Exults At Takeover Of Ramallah
Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, officially extended Palestinian self-rule to this city abutting Jerusalem today, triumphantly capping a rapid handover of much of the West Bank to his control.
"Let us, every individual, woman and man, make a pledge together to liberated Palestine -- to Palestine, the independent state," Mr.
Arafat shouted to a cheering crowd of thousands from the roof of the former Israeli military headquarters here.


Let's See Tom and Huck Get Out of This One
Tom and Huck Jonathan Taylor Thomas, Brad Renfro Directed by Peter Hewitt PG 96 minutes


The Blood of Martyrs
ANCESTRAL VOICES Religion and Nationalism in Ireland.
By Conor Cruise O'Brien. 221 pp.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Paper, $13.95.


The Networks Struggle To Stay in the Picture
THE COMMERCIAL NETWORKS weren't all bad this year.
An NBC movie, "Serving in  Silence," offered Glenn Close's uncompromising portrayal of Margarethe Cammermeyer, a woman whose promising military career was ended when she revealed that she was a lesbian.
NBC's smash-hit weekly series "E.R." and initially less  successful but gaining, CBS's "Chicago Hope" deftly tapped into the nation's anxiety over the precarious future of medical care.
On ABC, "N.Y.P.D. Blue" climbed into the top 10 with Jimmy Smits, as Detective Bobby Simone, elegantly replacing David Caruso.
ABC also stretched admirably with Steven Bochco's "Murder One," which, despite a brilliant debut, proceeded to falter and is now in "hiatus" (i.e. limbo).
But on the whole, the networks hardly flourished.
Dozens of new weekly series suffered from an overexposure to "Friends" and its 20-something obsessions.
Outstanding quality was too often limited to specials.
Oddly enough, the bottom-rated CBS led the pack with presentations like the fine adaptations of two plays: August Wilson's "Piano Lesson," with Charles S. Dutton, and Tennessee Williams's "Streetcar Named Desire," with Jessica Lange and Alec Baldwin.
And in the mini-series "Larry McMurtry's Streets of Laredo," CBS gave James Garner another opportunity to demonstrate that he is television's quintessential actor.
Still, as the year came to a close, the share of viewers tuning into ABC, CBS and NBC, once well over 90 percent, shriveled to 54 percent.


A Gift for Little Critters in a Well-Planned Patch
THE recent snows and cold weather have left the local wildlife scurrying around for sustenance.
White throated sparrows and juncoes scratch at the ground in search of nourishing seeds.
Squirrels diligently scrape at the snow to find tasty morsels and, if they do find something worth their hunting, often pose on  a handy limb or fence post to nibble their find.
It's winter theater at its best.
Lucky indeed for both the wildlife and the property owners if landscapes have been planted to accommodate these needs.
Something wonderful happens when the creatures visit the yard and put on their winter foraging show.


Sunshine and Snow


Beware Efforts to Change U.S. Drinking Water Act
To the Editor:
Far too much of our nation's water is not safe to drink or to fish or swim in.
In New Jersey, 9 of 11 major water companies draw our drinking water from unsafe sources.
One out of four New Jerseyans are served by a water system that  violates the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act.
Nearly a million Americans get sick and 900 die each year from drinking contaminated tap water.


Yashin Returns to Practice After Ending His Holdout
Center ALEKSEI YASHIN has ended his holdout and come to terms with the Ottawa Senators, The Canadian Press has learned.
Yashin made a surprise appearance yesterday, joining his teammates at practice.
"I can't give you anything else than that he skated with the club this morning and we're going to have a news conference," LAURENT BENOIT, the club spokesman, said.


A Resignation Is Rejected, Easing Italy's Political Deadlock
Italy's protracted political stalemate inched closer to a resolution today when President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro refused to accept Prime Minister Lamberto Dini's long-scheduled resignation, and invited him instead to go back to Parliament for a new and broader mandate.
With Italy's main political parties showing increasing reluctance to go to early general elections, Mr.
Dini will mostly likely win another turn in office, charged this time with initiating constitutional reforms to break a self-perpetuating political deadlock.


BELITTLED BIG MEN
Many apprenticeships are difficult and emotionally trying -- medical residency programs, beginning associate positions in large law firms.
These college football players are doing nothing more than serving apprenticeships.
And they do so while getting a free college education.
Jordan offhandedly refers to mandatory attendance at Baptist church services, "pressure to be devoutly Christian," being "handed prayer cards for today's sermon." Religious freedom, or rather a disregard for it, at a public institution seems to be the real story in Tallahassee.
RICHARD HOCHHAUSER Woodcliff Lake, N.J.


MANHATTAN MOVES: Curtain Going Up and Coming Down
A smattering of people, places and things that appeared, disappeared or took  on new roles in the '95 Manhattan scene:
The Makkos Brothers, Tom and George, toppled Donald Trump from his reign as operator of the Wollman and Lasker skating rinks in Central Park, grabbed the brass ring and outbid Sal Napolitano to run the park's carousel, and were crowned the city's concession kings with 57 food carts, including two outside the Metropolitan Museum.
Richard Lipsky assumed the mantle of David as he led Hispanic bodega owners in their fight against the East Harlem Pathmark.
They lost, but Mr.
Lipsky came away with a prize: greater visibility.


Buchanan, in Unfamiliar Role, Is Under Fire as a Left-Winger
Those who support Patrick Joseph Buchanan for President find themselves warding off unloved labels these days: "protectionist," "isolationist" and some  that are a lot more unexpected.
"I'm no socialist, God knows," said Roy Luxemburg, a former supporter of Ross Perot, explaining that he had nevertheless relished listening to Mr.
Buchanan rip into big business during a holiday gathering of Republican voters at an antebellum-style mansion here recently.


The Face of a Culture Long Since Vanished
THE Olmec culture lasted roughly from 1500 to 600 B.C., beginning in the Isthmus of Tehuantepec and spreading throughout what is now Mexico.
It produced, among other things, basalt heads twice the height of a man and,  posthumously, a major schism among Mesoamerican scholars.


William Prochnau's War
To the Editor:
As H. D. S. Greenway correctly noted in his review of William Prochnau's "Once Upon a Distant War," the book contained some inaccuracies.
As one of the subjects of the book, I would like to note a few others.


Foreign Affairs;14 Big Macs Later . . .
This ends my first year as foreign affairs columnist, a wonderful job for which The New York Times actually pays me to be a tourist with an attitude.
Reflecting on this past year (during which I ate McDonald's in 14 different countries and can report that they all REALLY DO taste the same), I have a few impressions:
Free trade and an integrated global market are inevitable, but they spread their blessings unevenly: When I was last in Mexico City, I kept seeing a man and his two children dressed in clown outfits, entertaining motorists at a stoplight and begging for handouts.
I wondered: What could be more degrading?
That man represents for me all of the "left-behinds" -- all those who have not shared in the benefits of the global marketplace.


Holiday Tomorrow
Tomorrow is New Year's Day.
NEW YORK


Times Change. Times Square, Too.
The ball that drops above Times Square at midnight to mark the New Year will  be sparkling new for this occasion.
Down below, America's best-known intersection is undergoing a renewal of its own, from run-down seedy to modern glitz.
Mayors and urban esthetes have yearned for years to spruce up the area -- where Broadway intersects with Seventh Avenue in mid-Manhattan -- but only now is the transformation visible to the naked eye.
Some people, no doubt, regret the passing of the tawdriness and sleaze, but even those elements survive in limited quantity.
More people will be attracted to the brighter lights, bigger spectacles and cleaner, safer streets.


Books in Brief: NONFICTION
THE LIFE OF ADAM SMITH By Ian Simpson Ross. Clarendon/Oxford University, $35.


Bob Woolger Bodybuilding Trainer, 83
Bob Woolger, who helped shape the career and muscles of the bodybuilder-turned-actor Arnold Schwarzenegger, has died, The Daily Telegraph reported today.
He was 83.
Mr.
Woolger, who suffered a stroke in April, is recognized as the founding father of British bodybuilding.
Mr.
Woolger, a former Olympic referee and British Royal Air Force physical training instructor, was a pioneer of bodybuilding in the 1930's.


Brighter Lights and Brighter Promises Light Times Square
If it comes as a surprise that the organizers of tonight's celebration in Times Square have added more voltage to the ball that rings in 1996, as they announced last week, consider what has happened on the surrounding blocks.
The Great White Way is now so bright that the old ball dropped to mark the start of the New Year might have been drowned out by the neon glare.
And the city's best-known crossroads is blazing with the promise of new stores, theaters and investment.


The Calm Before The Frenzy
YOU think you have problems on New Year's Eve?
Donna Lieberman has problems, and they're not of the existential variety, either.
As the executive producer of First Night New York, Ms.
Lieberman oversees 22 events run by 500 people at nine Manhattan venues.
They begin this morning and end after midnight.


In Trenton: Cut Now, Pay Later?
Governor Whitman began 1995 with a triumph: she delivered on a campaign promise to cut state income tax rates by 30 percent in two years instead of three.
By doing so, she bolstered her standing in the Republican Party and surprised some New Jerseyans by becoming a politician who keeps her word.
By year's end, however, Mrs.
Whitman was confronting some of the fiscal perils that her adversaries had warned lay ahead.
To help replace the state's present system of using unemployment insurance funds to pay for hospital care for the poor, she proposed a tax increase on cigarettes.
The tax, which the Governor calls a "user's fee," failed to win support in the Legislature, and in  the last few weeks Mrs.
Whitman has found herself portrayed in an anti-tax group's radio campaign as just another tax-and-spend politician.


The Year's Champions;Seles Versus Graf: A Pinnacle, a Footnote
ONE was stabbed in the other's name.
Yet Monica Seles came back this year from unspeakable horror, while Steffi Graf stood firm under incalculable duress.
These two victims of male machinations met on the Stadium Court in the United States Open final last September and produced a match that somehow lived up to all of its hype.
It was a wonderful day for women in sports, in what otherwise was a frightening year.
It was a day when these two great tennis champions did all the slugging, momentarily reversing the shameful climate of women being slugged.
Put into the context of this ugly subtext, Seles versus Graf, a story of angles and  anguish, of twists and turns, was the pinnacle of sports in 1995.


It's 1945 at the Brasserie Lipp in Paris And Picasso, a Seducer, Is inCharge
THE BRASSERIE LIPP'S last diners had barely shuffled out into the chill of a  strike-bound Paris at 1:30 one morning this month when the famous Left Bank hangout suddenly came alive again.
Tables were quickly reset, wine bottles were opened, and new guests arrived, this time 75 movie extras, the men dressed  in dashing corduroy and tweed suits, the women in fur coats and satin dresses, with flowery hats balanced precariously on headfuls of curls.
The large clock in the brasserie was turned back to read 8:30 P.M.
It was also turned back 50 years to postwar Paris.
On cue, Pablo Picasso, the reigning Prince of St.
Germain-des-Pres, appeared, accompanied by two of the many women who peopled his life, Dora Maar and Francoise Gilot.
The Lipp was noisy and crowded, and Picasso, in the stocky shape of Anthony Hopkins, clearly enjoyed being recognized. (Mr. Hopkins began filming "Picasso" soon after completing Oliver Stone's "Nixon.")


A Switch In Time
I AM IN THE DIRECTORATE OF TIME.
Naturally, I am running late.
I hurry past a climate-controlled vault in which the world's No. 1 clock is silently assembling each second from nine billion parts.
I am ushered into the presence of Gernot M. R. Winkler, who recently retired as director of the Directorate of Time. (The Government has not been able to find a replacement.) He looks across his desk -- sharp blue eyes, craggy features, white hair -- and says, "We have to be fast."
In the era of the nanosecond, timekeeping is serious business.
The Directorate, a division of the United States Naval Observatory, has scattered its atomic clocks across a colorfully manicured hilltop near the Potomac River in Washington -- the Master Clock and 53 others.
This ensemble, consulting continuously with counterparts overseas, has achieved a precision in measurement that surpasses anything else in science.
The seconds pass here with a margin of  error each day that is smaller than a hairbreadth in the distance from the Earth to the Sun.
In a million years, the Master Clock might gain or lose a second.


Scott W. Schoelzel: Idex II Growth Fund
TO Scott W. Schoelzel of Janus Capital, the choppy stock market in mid-December was a great gift, a chance to scoop up his favorite growth stocks at bargain prices.
That's because the stocks he owned had become expensive by the end of November, and so he sold some shares to lighten his load.
As a result, his cash position swelled to 22 percent of assets from his usual target of 15 percent.
"As a general rule, I like to keep a fair amount of cash available because there is so much volatility in these markets," he explained in a recent  interview.


Julie A. Lynch, Martin R. Bridson
Julie Ann Lynch, a daughter of Mary and Peter Lynch of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Martin Robert Bridson, a son of the late Lilian and Gerald  Bridson.
The Rev.
Robert Drinan, a former Congressman from Massachusetts, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Immaculate Heart of Mary Church in  Scarsdale.
Mrs.
Bridson, 30, is an associate at Whitman Breed Abbott &amp; Morgan, a law firm in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Georgetown University, from which she also received a law degree.
Her father is the president of Lynch &amp; Associates, a real estate development and consulting firm in Darien, Conn.
Her mother is the business manager of Teachers' College Press, the textbook publisher at Columbia University in New York.


How to Set a Peace Table
WHEN Syrians and Israelis sat down last week to try to make peace, they did without the traditional trappings of diplomatic discourse -- a formidable table  separating the sides, name plates, microphones and an opening photo-op.
Instead, their American hosts seated them cheek-by-jowl in a cozy room around a circular mahogany table, with only a centerpiece of white tulips dividing them, while a wood fire glowed in the hearth.
Outside, cows grazed on a snow-streaked pasture and a few white-tailed deer scampered from a copse of bare trees in the frosty Maryland countryside.


Iona Runner's National Title Quest
WHEN the pressure of training for a national championship gets overwhelming,  Martin McCarthy always returns in his mind to his favorite run.
It is a 15 miler that winds through the countryside around his hometown of Halfway-Ballinhassig in southern Ireland.
He is known by the farmers there simply as the Runner.
Mr.
McCarthy is a nationally ranked cross-country runner from Iona College whose goal is to become the first All-American and national champion to come out of Iona College.
The goal that is equally important to the 22-year-old senior is to represent Ireland in the 1996 Olympics.


Next Stop, the Statehouse
NOW for a few words about the limits of federalism.
Capping one of the most successful lobbying campaigns in the history of the Republic, the accountants and high-tech companies of America received the ultimate Christmas present this month.
Congress passed into law -- over President Clinton's uncertain-trumpet veto -- their beloved "tort reform" as it  applies to stockholders' lawsuits contending securities law violations.
The accounting firms and high-tech companies asserted that they had been beaten down by meritless lawsuits, and their stupendously effective campaign has resulted in changes in Federal law that largely undo the disclosure requirements and antifraud rules of the last 62 years.


Alexander Lists Names of Those Donating a Total of $4.5 Million
Lamar Alexander disclosed today the names of 255 contributors who gave $4.5 million to a television network that kept his name before party members as he prepared to seek the Republican Presidential nomination.
Mr.
Alexander's network, the Republican Exchange Satellite Network, raised a  total of $4,509,219 to help him beam his own monthly television show by satellite into the homes of party workers.


Elizabeth O'Leary, Douglas Lovell 3d
Elizabeth Pershall O'Leary, the daughter of Mary and Robert O'Leary of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to Douglas Gordon Lovell 3d, the son of Sandra Lovell-Blaine of Cambridge, Mass., and Douglas Gordon Lovell Jr. of Villanova, Pa.
The Rev.
Daphne Hawkes performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in Princeton.
Mrs.
Lovell, 28, teaches second grade at St.
Patrick's Episcopal Day School in Washington.
She graduated from Bowdoin College.
Her father is a financial consultant in Princeton.
Her mother is the director of development at New Jersey Seeds, a Princeton organization that places disadvantaged students in private secondary schools.


Snow Thrower Has a Record
The New Jersey man who received front-page notoriety for participating in last weekend's snowball barrage at Giants Stadium was convicted in 1991 of assaulting two Middlesex police officers, The Daily News reported today.
Jeffrey Lange pleaded guilty to aggravated assault in 1991 and was sentenced  to five years' probation and ordered to enroll in an alcohol-treatment program.


Name That (State) Tune
Earlier this month, the State Assembly was considering whether to allow the State Council on the Arts to choose three candidates for a state song.
Which song would you suggest?
Springsteen, of Course . . .


On Safari With a VCR
Safari tours offer great opportunities for adventure -- sometimes the wrong kind, as travelers may learn when they first see their accommodations.
To help eliminate unwelcome surprises, "Look Before You Book" video guides offer glimpses of game preserves and accommodations in Kenya and Tanzania.
Deborah Doelker, a travel agent who makes frequent trips to the two countries, compiled  the video guides, and she rates each national park and game reserve and its accommodations.
Although the narration includes lines like "Masai Mara is paradise on earth. It has it all," the tapes do offer unvarnished (if slightly fuzzy) looks at the  type of furnishings, bathrooms and safari vehicles available.
Each country's tape costs $49.95 plus $7 for postage and handling ($10.50 if you buy both).
Information: (800) 882-5537 or (212) 888-7596.
JOSEPH SIANO


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: December 31, 1995
Weeks This
On Week  List Fiction


Familiar Things as Never Seen Before
IN 1995, THERE WERE NO REVOLUTIONARY changes in the decorative arts.
But many objects were introduced in museums and the marketplace that transformed the familiar into the memorable.
Three Swatch watches were brought out by a Swiss corporation that used bold graphics and sleek materials creatively.
The watches were designed by celebrated film directors to help commemorate the 100th anniversary of the invention of the motion picture: Robert Altman's minimal number shimmers with mirroring, Akira Kurosawa's witty timepiece is a face filled with a thickly lashed eye and Pedro Almodovar's romantic model is lush with flowers.


No, Thanks
Life always gets harder toward the summit," Nietzsche wrote. "The cold increases; responsibility increases."
Do you know someone who, in sympathy with this idea, did not climb the corporate ladder -- even when offered that coveted higher rung?
Maybe a person who preferred a poetry class to that big promotion, or just favored relaxation over riches?


Tooting in the New


F.Y.I.
Subway Cars' Trek


Palestinian Christians Feeling Like a Minority
MAJOR events in Bethlehem traditionally carry a message, and the glad tidings that Yasir Arafat wanted to broadcast to all mankind when he went to church for  Christmas mass was that his Palestine is open to all those of good will, whatever their religion.
Though there were a few whispered gripes that in so doing, Mr.
Arafat took the spotlight off the Nativity, most Palestinian Christians seemed to take heart at the sight of the Palestinian Muslim and his Christian-born wife sitting in the front pew of a church and issuing pledges of peace and tolerance.


Brooklyn's Small Plants Filling Industrial Gap
The shutdowns of big businesses in Brooklyn this year were well publicized: A. &amp; S., Pechter Field's bakery, KB Electronics, each gone, along with hundreds  of jobs.
The economic base of Brooklyn, it seemed, was draining away fast.
But behind the headlines is a bit of hope.


Cheap and Tasty Lamb Shanks
LAMB shanks are a very inexpensive cut of meat, and they make delicious winter stews.
They are especially good baked with white beans or lentils, which  absorb their flavor, or braised in white wine with orange peel and rosemary and  served with soft polenta.
Osso buco, the hind shank of veal, is more often sawed into thick pieces, tied with string to keep the meat from falling off the bone and cooked with vegetables and herbs.
The marrow inside the bones is a great delicacy.
Long, narrow silver spoons are made for extracting it, but a small knife or coffee spoon will work just as well.
The meat, however, should be tender enough to eat  with a fork.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
ALL ABOUT HOLOGRAPHY


Books in Brief: NONFICTION;Almost Useless
If the use of tools is what first set mankind on the road to civilization, what does the new "art and philosophy" of Chindogu -- Japanese for "odd or distorted tool" -- reveal about our prospects at the dawn of the 21st century?
We "have the luxury to build that which we can't really use," explains Kenji Kawakami, a former cartoon scriptwriter, bicycle museum designer and home shopping magazine editor who now devotes himself to subverting the Japanese obsession with gadgets and technology.
His latest book, 101 UNUSELESS JAPANESE INVENTIONS: The Art of Chindogu (Norton, paper, $10.95), may also subvert the American notion that he and his countrymen are conformist robots, lacking the genes for whimsy and anarchy.
A Chindogu, as Mr.
Kawakami puts it (with the help of his translator, Dan Papia), is an almost useless invention, something that looks as if it's going to make your life easier -- and only succeeds in making it more ridiculous.
Like the hay fever hat, a roll of paper tissues that sits snugly on the sufferer's head, fresh sheet dangling handily just above eye level.
Or the golfer's practice umbrella, equipped with a club head at the tip,  perfect for chip shots on a subway platform.
Admittedly, some Chindogu may speak to distinctly Japanese social needs: consider, for example, the sweetheart's training arm, an extra appendage that attaches to a coat or jacket, recommended  for "the early stages of courting" to avoid "the worry of sweaty palms, inappropriate pressure or when to disengage." Then again, what married woman of  any nationality hasn't yearned for the back scratcher's T-shirt stamped with a handy "itch-locater grid," the perfect garment for a demanding mate?
Or, better  still, the dust and shake, a combination duster and martini shaker that rewards  vigorous cleaning, providing a truly fine incentive for tackling room after room after room.
Mr.
Kawakami may have strayed from his absurdist mandate on that one.
It seems to me the height of civilized invention.
ALIDA BECKER


Mediated Divorce May Be the Healthiest Option;Ease the Bloody Battle
To the Editor:
"Needed: A Not-So-Fast Divorce Law" by William A. Galston (Op-Ed, Dec. 27) answers a bad problem with a worse solution.


Turns of the Ethnic Kaleidoscope in Queens
It seemed to be a routine issue.
The city's Landmarks Preservation Commission proposed guidelines for a landmarked shopping district in Jackson Heights that would restrict storefronts to certain colors and eliminate signs that hang out over the sidewalk.
Residents who favored the guidelines called it a matter of esthetics.
Immigrant shop owners who opposed them called it racism.


Hawaiian Hula School to Dance an Epic
Halau o Kekuhi, a seven-generation hula school whose honors include the 1993  National Heritage Fellowship Award from the National Endowment for the Arts, will present a dance epic called "Holo Mai Pele" ("Pele Travels") in Honolulu at the Neal Blaisdell Concert Hall on Jan. 10 and 11.
The dance epic will also be staged at the University of Hawaii-Hilo Theater in Hilo on Feb. 3, and at the Kahilu Theater in Waimea on April 19 and 21.
The school, which is based on the Big Island of Hawaii, has also danced at the Smithsonian Institution, at President Clinton's inauguration and at folk festivals from Los Angeles to Kiev.
The myth of the volcano goddess Pele was chosen, say the hula school's teachers, Nalani Kanaka'ole and Pualani Kanaka'ole Kanahele, because it is the most complete, and arguably the most notable, of the three migratory poems of Hawaii.
Presented in five acts, the 49 mele hula (dances) and mele oli (chants not accompanied by dance) uses centuries-old material that is staged, choreographed, costumed and presented in a strikingly contemporary way.


Spent Bosnia Now Tries to Make Its Peace
In the winter mists of this battered country, there is a silence deeper than  the mere absence of gunfire.
People seem muted, hushed, as war recedes and anguished retrospection meets fragile hope.
Peace has brought no joy.
There is a flatness to everything.
So much emotion  had already been expended.
"Laughter is strangely absent," said Zeljko Trograncic, a psychologist at Kosevo hospital in Sarajevo, the scene of repeated horror through 42 months of siege and war.
"We spent everything."


Liberties;Ascots For Everyone
All through college, we wore the same thing every day: Indian cotton shirts and bell-bottom jeans.
As the 70's wore on, the unisex uniformity palled on me.
I began to dream of pink marabou feathers and silver lame and red taffeta and white voile. (Whatever voile is.)
So imagine my chagrin, once I finally got in a position to afford a decent set of marabou feathers, to find the nation once again swept up in dressing down.


The Lives They Lived: Victor Riesel and Walter Sheridan;In Defense of Honest Labor
WHEN THEY DIED within days of each other in January, Victor Riesel and Walter Sheridan seemed like figures from a lost America.
In their separate ways, they were shaped by that brief, romantic time when millions of Americans still believed that the labor movement would serve as the cement of the social contract.
The theory was relatively simple.
Unions -- not government -- would establish hard limits on the powerful.
Braided together into a mighty national force, unions would guarantee lives of security, decency and personal pride to ordinary citizens.
Unions would provide a sense of community.
And unions would be the ethical watchdogs of the society, casting cold eyes on slippery politicians and  predatory businessmen.
Those ambitions were paid for with the blood of union members, from Ludlow, Colo., to Flint, Mich., and in hundreds of other places where a picket line was seen as a moral necessity.


Greener, Saner ,Simpler
1904-1995 Helen Nearing lrft the hard life of New York City more than 60 years ago with her husband, Scott, to do what many only dream of - live off the  land.
Together, in the rocky, depleted hills of Vermont, they built their house  and garden walls of stone, knowing nothing of stone or building, because stone was what lay on the land.
They learned to make maple syrup, knowing nothing of the art, because sugar maples were a ready crop.
When tourists began to flock to Vermont, the Nearings moved to Harborside, Maine, to continue the good life on Forest Farm.
Small wonder that their most popular book, "Living the Good Life," first published in 1954, is still a moder-day "Walden" for human beings bone-tired of the city life.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
It has been a year of oddities, even for "Long Island Journal" and "About Long Island." A tiger-liger was found living in a house in Dix Hills.
A mummy had a CAT scan at Huntington Hospital.
And a high school announced that it would allow its students to go to the bathroom only in odd or even periods, depending  on the date.
What has since happened to the oddest stories of the year?
How About Another Cat?


Who Started It All?
To the Editor:
In his article on Harrison Ford and the risky business of reviving a romantic comedy of a gentler time ["Facing His Biggest Risk of All, Romantic Comedy," Dec. 10], Trip Gabriel covered the history of "Sabrina" pretty exhaustively, but he failed to mention Samuel Taylor.
In the beginning was the play, and it was created by Mr.
Taylor, called "Sabrina Fair," and produced on Broadway in the 1953-54 season.


Miss McCredie, Mr. Winter
Meredeth Black McCredie, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James R. McCredie of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to Mark Jay Winter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Steven J. Winter of Newbury, N.H.
The Rev.
Andrew Kline performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in Hanover, N.H.
Mrs.
Winter, 27, is a candidate for a master's degree in child development at Tufts University.
She graduated summa cum laude from Dartmouth College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father, a classical archeologist, is a professor of fine arts at New York University, where he is also director of the  Institute of Fine Arts and director of excavations at N.Y.U.'s dig in Samothrace, Greece.


A Winter Favorite in Paris: Tasty Alsatian Choucroute
STEAMING and fragrant, with a gentle hint of smokiness, a faint scent of cumin, redolent of purplish-black juniper berries, and the fresh and mildly acidic aroma of freshly cured sauerkraut, it's a favorite winter dish in Paris:  choucroute garnie a l'alsacienne, a hearty mound of braised sauerkraut paired with a parade of sausages and meats.
This time of year, the city's market stalls and neighborhood charcuteries are alive with the sound of merchants hawking "choucroute nouvelle," often sold from steaming buckets and platters at open-air stands.


Let the Good Times Roll
From formal (a debutante ball) to casual (a skating party).


Habitats/1723 Townsend Avenue;A Bronx Sale: 3-Bedroom Duplex Co-op for $3,000
ON the ground floor of her co-op building in the Mount Hope section of the Bronx, Susan Attzs-Mendoza was speaking with one of her neighbors.
"Well, he'd better hurry up -- there are only three apartments left," said the slim woman in blue jeans and crisp striped shirt.
"And he'd better have good credit."


MOVIE THIS WEEK
Italy, Middle America and Broadway provide background for some colorful screen offerings on television this week.
Indeed, PRINCE OF FOXES (1949), Henry King's drama of Borgia intrigue, brims with such opulence -- landscapes, villas, palaces, costumes, battles -- that it's a shame the picture wasn't shot in color.
It brims anyway -- and moves, as  drama laced with history (from Simon Shellabarger's novel).
Tyrone Power is the dashing lead, opposite Wanda Hendrix; but Orson Welles as Cesare Borgia and  Felix Aylmer as a wise elder stand out.
Coating it all, like caramel, is Alfred  Newman's luscious music.
Quite a show -- Saturday at 9 P.M. and Saturday/Early Sunday at 4:40 A.M. on American Movie Classics.


A Year to Remember, for Better or Worse
YEAR-END reflections and recollections, musings and meanderings.
The bests, the worsts, the wish lists, the newly dreamed-up categories.
It's that time.
And it's time to reiterate that the professional theater in New Jersey does not require validation from New York as much as New York, where home-grown theater is history, is sustained by the creative flow across the Hudson.
Here's an up-to-the-minute sampling:


MAKING MICROSOFT SAFE FOR CAPITALISM
A footnote in "Making Microsoft Safe for Capitalism" (Nov. 5) discloses that  the author, James Gleick, founded the Pipeline, an Internet service and software company.
The article fails to disclose, however, that Gleick is today a major stockholder in a Microsoft competitor.
Gleick sold his interest in the Pipeline  to Performance Systems International (P.S.I.).
According to P.S.I.'s most recent financial proxy statement, Gleick owns 5.5 percent of the company, which is an ownership stake of more than $32 million.
P.S.I. is in direct competition with Uunet, an Internet-access provider in which Microsoft is a substantial investor.
Uunet provides the Microsoft Network  (MSN), our on-line service, with full Internet access.
Recently, The Washington  Post described P.S.I. and Uunet as "two of the nation's hottest access providers to the Internet."


Sir Colville Deverell, Planned Parenthood Executive, Dies at 88
Sir Colville Deverell, who became the first full-time secretary general of the International Planned Parenthood Federation after a career as an administrator of British colonies, died on Dec. 18 at Wokingham, west of London.
He was 88, and his family home was nearby in Henley-on-Thames.
His death was reported on Thursday by The Times of London.


Word for Word/The Italy That Cheats;How Do I Bilk Thee? Let Me Count the Ways
AN Italian research institute, the Eurispes, put out a book earlier this year called "The Italy That Cheats." While Italians have become accustomed to seeing  their dirty laundry washed in public, the book, by Bruno Taralletto, came as a surprise to many because it did not deal with political corruption, terrorism, the Mafia, drugs or any of the crimes that have made regular headlines in Italy.
Rather, the study exposed the petty crimes of the average citizen.
In 80 chapters, the book, published in Italian by Koine Edizioni, addresses the different ways in which some Italians cheat, including absenteeism, impersonating invalids, contraband, tax evasion (a long chapter), false advertising and various swindles.


A Gift for Little Critters in a Well-Planned Patch
THE recent snows and cold weather have left the local wildlife scurrying around for sustenance.
White throated sparrows and juncoes scratch at the ground in search of nourishing seeds.
Squirrels diligently scrape at the snow to find tasty morsels and, if they do find something worth their hunting, often pose on  a handy limb or fence post to nibble their find.
It's winter theater at its best.
Lucky indeed for both the wildlife and the property owners if landscapes have been planted to accommodate these needs.
Something wonderful happens when the creatures visit the yard and put on their winter foraging show.


Cheap and Tasty Lamb Shanks
LAMB shanks are a very inexpensive cut of meat, and they make delicious winter stews.
They are especially good baked with white beans or lentils, which  absorb their flavor, or braised in white wine with orange peel and rosemary and  served with soft polenta.
Osso buco, the hind shank of veal, is more often sawed into thick pieces, tied with string to keep the meat from falling off the bone and cooked with vegetables and herbs.
The marrow inside the bones is a great delicacy.
Long, narrow silver spoons are made for extracting it, but a small knife or coffee spoon will work just as well.
The meat, however, should be tender enough to eat  with a fork.


BEST SELLERS: December 31, 1995
Weeks This Last
On Week Week  List Fiction


The Lives They Lived: Louis Malle;Our Dinner with Louis
How did the three of you wind up doing "My Dinner With Andre"?
WALLACE SHAWN: When the script of "My Dinner With Andre" was finished, we were very enthusiastic and high on the whole thing and thought we should not be too modest in thinking of who might direct this piece.
We talked about absolutely everybody and decided that of any director we could think of, the person who was both a great storyteller and also had a great sense of humor was really Louis.
ANDRE GREGORY: I remember it totally differently.
I remember that Diana Michener, a photographer who's a friend of ours, had given Louis the script without asking us, and he called me up with tears in his voice.
He said it was a great script and even if he wasn't the right director for it, he would help us find the right director.


Ethiopia Deals With Legacy of Kings and Colonels
Twenty years after his death, Emperor Haile Selassie still does not have an official resting place.
His coffin lies in the crypt of the Bhata Church, an Ethiopian Orthodox church here, next to the marble tomb of his great-uncle, Emperor Menelik II.
It is behind glass in what appears to be the crypt's closet, draped in maroon, gold-brocaded velvet, his picture leaning near the metal coatrack just above the coffin.


The Lives They Lived: Elizabeth Montgomery;The Good Witch
AS SAMANTHA STEPHENS, the witch-turned-suburban-housewife in "Bewitched," Elizabeth Montgomery, a sunny, spunky, vaguely tomboyish blonde, was a transition from Doris Day, the marriage-minded virgin of 1950's movies, to Mary  Tyler Moore, the independent but vulnerable career woman of 1970's television.
The series ran from 1964 to 1972 and has won new fans through its current broadcasts on Nick at Night.
Like "I Dream of Jeannie," which premiered a year later, "Bewitched" shows women as uncanny superior beings who renounce their magic powers to fit into their narrow domestic role in postwar America.
Barbara  Eden's Jeannie is far more overtly sexual than Montgomery's Samantha, who has the breezy, androgynous nickname Sam.
But even Jeannie ends up cozy and cuddly,  unlike Kim Novak's eerie witch in the 1958 film "Bell, Book and Candle."
In "Bewitched," Samantha struggles to be merely human, defending her bland domestic zone against a meddlesome clan of witches and wizards.
Her battle-ax mother, Endora, ruthlessly heaps primeval scorn on Samantha's hopelessly square  mate.
On the show, men are oafish but endearing and must be manipulated for their own good.
Montgomery's Samantha still resonates because sexual relations remain turbulent -- romance is witchcraft for which no one knows the rules.cw-2


Zoo Officials Assess Damage To Primate Gene Pool by Fire
Many of the melancholy bouquets delivered to the Philadelphia Zoo this week are adorned with little bananas and apples, symbolic gifts to the 23 gorillas and gibbons, lemurs and orangutans that perished on Christmas Eve in the country's worst calamity for zoo animals.
Not quite human, the simian families that perished from a smoky fire have left behind not only an aching grief, but also potentially irreparable holes in  the gene pool for the country's primate population.


1995 Refrain: It Was a Moan Over Manhattan
At times it seemed as if Manhattan in 1995 was an isle of jousting, not joy.
Though crime fell throughout the city, some neighborhoods pressed for more police officers; others sought fewer sidewalk cafes.
Street repairs seared tempers, especially on Columbus Avenue.
In East Harlem, residents wanted Greenthumb gardens to be gardens, not trash heaps or parking lots .
In TriBeCa,  they sought the heave-ho for a huge billboard advertising Ponte's restaurant.
A  few clearly got their kicks from kvetching.
These are some memorable tugs-of-war:
One that went down to the wire was over the Pathmark superstore planned for East Harlem.
Supporters pointed to jobs and shopping opportunities; bodega owners saw their livelihood threatened.
In the end, the Council gave the green light. . . .
In Hamilton Heights, Hispanic shoppers found what they needed in Amsterdam Avenue bodegas.
Blacks did not, and pushed for more upscale stores.


From Austen to Eszterhas
IN 1995, HOLLYWOOD ASKED audiences to believe that Hugh Grant was too shy to  be propositioned by a woman in a car ("Nine Months"), that our Chief Executive had no idea what to do on a first date ("The American President") and that Clint Eastwood didn't know whether it was all right to pick flowers for a lady ("The Bridges of Madison County").
It also asked them to believe that Jane Austen was the way coolest writer in  town, which proved by far the most sensible of these ideas.


Stephanie Charvat and Robert Flatley
Stephanie Charvat looks like Audrey Hepburn, and friends say she wears clothes as gracefully as Ms.
Hepburn did.
Ms.
Charvat, who walks as if a pile of books were balanced on her head, is a  "fit model" for the designers Marc Jacobs, Oscar de la Renta, Anne Klein and Carolina Herrera.
She stands still for hours while the designers and their assistants drape, pin, wrap and zip their latest designs on her.
They circle her, they stare at her, they draw inspiration from her.


Yanks Give Rogers Rich Deal For 4 Years
Evidently opting for age over economics, the Yankees yesterday added Kenny Rogers to their starting pitching rotation in an attempt to keep pace with the busily building Baltimore Orioles.
The Yankees announced no terms, but they are believed to have given Rogers a  package in the neighborhood of $19.5 million for four years plus an option for a fifth year.


'Let 'Er Rip' Is Game Plan For Harbaugh and the Colts
In each of the first two games of the season, Colts quarterback Jim Harbaugh  came off the bench to ignite rallies.
He came up short in the season opener against Cincinnati.
The next week, down by 21-0 against the Jets, Harbaugh guided Indianapolis to a 24-21 victory.
After that, Coach Ted Marchibroda made the decision that more than likely put his team in the playoffs.
Marchibroda asked Harbaugh if he wanted to start.


Molly Solomon, Geoffrey Russell
Mary Anne Solomon, an associate producer at NBC Sports in New York, and Geoffrey Holden Russell, a magazine editor, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Daniel Mode performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Historic Catholic Church in Fairfax Station, Va.
The bride, 27, is known as Molly.
She graduated magna cum laude from Georgetown University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a daughter of Mary Jane and John Solomon of Fairfax Station.


FIESTA BOWL: THE BATTLE FOR No. 1;Cornhuskers Defend Title And Image
The pedestal had been placed on the west sideline of Sun Devil Stadium, where Lawrence Phillips, as productive and controversial a running back as the University of Nebraska has had, stood uncomfortably in the Arizona sunshine.
Behind him, on the fenced-off grass field, a corporate logo had already been painted in seven places in preparation for a Fiesta Bowl that will pay a record  $26 million.
By Tuesday night, the barriers will come down and Phillips and the Cornhuskers will attempt to win a second consecutive national championship, against the University of Florida.


A Victory for UConn, A Milestone for Coach
Connecticut 102, Hartford 63


Nichele M. Jackson, Eddie Hill
Nichele Marie Jackson, the daughter of Ira Jackson and Roderick Hirsch, both  of Cleveland, was married there on Friday to Charles Edward Hill, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Hill of Freeport, L.I.
The Rev.
Michaela Brown officiated at Mount Zion Congregational Church.
The couple graduated from Georgetown University.


IN SEARCH OF . . .


Chechnya's Bloody Year
In Chechnya, the year ended as it began: with horrific carnage.
Last New Year's Eve, the Russians started their assault on Grozny, Chechnya's capital, in a battle that destroyed the city, killed thousands of innocent civilians and ruined the reputation of the Russian army.
Last week it was Gudermes, the secessionist southern republic's second biggest city, that was destroyed.
After a 10-day siege, the Russian army drove several hundred rebel soldiers out of the smoking ruins from which they were fighting.
The thin hopes for peace that seemed real only this summer have disappeared into the mountain air.


Wider Benefits in Building New Schools
To the Editor:
Re "Record Cost Cited to Fix or Rebuild Nation's Schools" (front page, Dec. 26):


Spirituality as a Business: Rabbis Are Standing By
WHEN Evan C. Radler was growing up in Long Beach, L.I., his parents gave him  some advice: Go to college.
Go to some kind of graduate school.
And stay away from business.
So he went to Yeshiva University in upper Manhattan.
He was ordained an Orthodox rabbi.
He became spiritual leader of the First Hebrew Congregation of Peekskill, N.Y., a Conservative synagogue.


Nets End Year Not With a Bang, but With a Whimper
The Nets had hoped a stretch in which they play 8 of 10 games at Byrne Meadowlands Arena would be just the thing to end their recent tailspin.
"The month of January could be quite nice," Nets President Michael Rowe said  before tonight's game with the equally struggling Golden State Warriors.


New Throat Cancer Treatment Attacks With Beams of Light
Patients dying of throat cancer will soon be able to use light to help them swallow on their own.
The Food and Drug Administration on Wednesday approved Photofrin, the first of a new type of treatment that uses special drugs to make tumors light-sensitive and then sends beams of light to kill the cancer cells.


INSIDE


Let's See Tom and Huck Get Out of This One
Dracula: Dead And Loving It Leslie Nielsen, Mel Brooks, Peter MacNicol, Amy Yasbeck, Lysette Anthony Directed by Mel Brooks PG-13 90 minutes


The Week That Was
Shaky Federal finances.
Police scandals.
Conniving politicians.
Moral decay in the arts.
A holdup in the South Bronx.
Sound familiar?
Such was life in New York City 100 years ago last week, according to The New York Times.


Heiner Mueller German Playwright, 66
Heiner Mueller, one of East Germany's most prominent and debated playwrights, died today at a Berlin hospital, a spokesman for his theater company said.
He was 66.


The Year in Sex Zones
To judge from the relative ease with which the new sex-zone regulations sailed through the Council this fall, one might think that the city had undergone some kind of puritanical transformation.
But critics of the new zoning, which restricts sex-related businesses to certain neighborhoods, say that the success of the legislation is more reflective of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's political mastery than the public's personal morality.


Recollections of a Year Of Highs and Lows
IN preparing for the new year it seems useful to look back at some of the high (and a few low) points of the last year.
The Longest Musical Day: The Manhattan String Quartet, having earlier recorded the complete quartets of Shostakovich, decided to play all of them in concert at Eastern Connecticut State University.
The first quartet began shortly after 10 A.M. on Feb. 2; the 15th ended just about 12 hours later.
There were no encores.


Funeral for Plane Crash Victims


Dana L. Glazer, Olivier P. Gers
Dana L. Glazer, a daughter of Dr.
Linda B. Glazer and Richard J. Glazer of Alpine, N.J., was married last evening to Olivier P. Gers, a son of Marie-Therese and Jacky Gers of Chennevieres-sur-Marne, France.
Rabbi Nathaniel  Benjamin officiated with the Rev.
Michel Calamy, a Roman Catholic priest, at the Essex House in New York.
Ms.
Glazer, 29, is keeping her name.
She works in New York as the director of United States public relations for Guerlain Inc., the French perfume and cosmetics company.
She is a graduate of Cornell University.
Her mother is a psychologist in Englewood, N.J.
Her father is the director of information systems for Financial Administrators Inc., a pension-management company in Englewood Cliffs, N.J.


Q and A
Collecting A Rent Refund


Taking the Measure Of Another Year
A CRITIC'S year-end list is as arbitrary as anyone's pleasure and pain recollected, with a smattering of observation and the sighting of promise.
In this one, there are even a few bests and worsts.
Best Lesson in Getting Shakespeare Right: The luminous "Romeo and Juliet" at  Hartford Stage.
She was Calista Flockhart.
He was Robert Petkoff.
The director, Mark Lamos, inspired an exemplary ensemble of pros to have it all: the tragedy, the comedy, the tragicomedy, the action.
The words sang.
The audience wept.


An Era Ends for a Hub of the Real-Estate World
IT was "the usual" for Larry Maran on a melancholically unusual day.
As he had so many times before, day after day and year after year, Mr.
Maran, a real estate broker, strode to his regular table at the 60 East Club, warmly greeted his regular waiter, Anthony Diaz, and, with a wordless nod, ordered his  regular lunch: egg-white omelet with onion and tomato, vegetable on the side, dry rye toast and coffee.


Baby Boomers Hit 50. Now What?
THE roughly 76 million baby boomers, raised to expect lives of unlimited possibilities, start turning 50 tomorrow.
And as their future becomes their now, the older boomers are beginning to gray and wrinkle, to wear bifocal contact lenses, to marvel at how young the police are -- and to discover that while many of them will live long, few will prosper.
As a group, boomers earn so much that whole industries -- cars being the most expensive example -- made themselves over to win their business.
But as individuals, most boomers struggle from paycheck to paycheck, even when there are two breadwinners.


Norwegian Gives Up Antarctic Crossing
A Norwegian who tried to cross the Antarctic has abandoned the effort because of severe frostbite, his spokesman said today.
The Norwegian, Borge Ousland, 33, reached the South Pole on Dec. 21 after a 44-day ski trek covering about 800 miles.
He said then that he would not be able to make the transcontinental trip unsupported, carrying his own supplies, but would continue on after replenishing supplies.


A Gift for Little Critters in a Well-Planned Patch
THE recent snows and cold weather have left the local wildlife scurrying around for sustenance.
White throated sparrows and juncoes scratch at the ground in search of nourishing seeds.
Squirrels diligently scrape at the snow to find tasty morsels and, if they do find something worth their hunting, often pose on  a handy limb or fence post to nibble their find.
It's winter theater at its best.
Lucky indeed for both the wildlife and the property owners if landscapes have been planted to accommodate these needs.
Something wonderful happens when the creatures visit the yard and put on their winter foraging show.


Streetscapes/The Green-Wood Cemetery Gatehouse;Restoring an Explosion of Brownstone Gingerbread
WANT some fireworks on New Year's Eve?
Try the brownstone pyrotechnics of the astonishing gatehouse at Brooklyn's Green-Wood Cemetery, at 25th Street and Fifth Avenue in Sunset Park.
A $400,000 restoration is under way that is aimed not at concealing but uncovering its age.
Green-Wood Cemetery was established because, even in the 1830's, the city was running out of room.
Continual expansion uprooted old houses of worship and their graveyards.
In 1839, a diarist, Philip Hone, yearned for a place "where a  man may lay down to his last sleep without the anticipation of being tossed out  of his bed in the course or a year or so to make way for a street or big store."


The Lives They Lived: Thomas A. Harris;'Ich Bin O.K., Du Bist O.K.'
OVER 15,000,000 LIVES WERE CHANGED BY 'I'M O.K. -- You're O.K.,' " boasts the paperback cover of the book's sequel, "Staying O.K." I have no way to verify whether the claim is true, though the fact that a sequel had to be written indicates that a potentially profitable number of those changed lives eventually lapsed back into NOT-O.K.-ness. But let's grant that this layman's guide to transactional analysis, which became a best seller in 1972, helped many, many people feel better about themselves.
A comparatively obscure psychiatrist in Sacramento, Calif., Thomas A. Harris  became a dysfunctional household name when his book was translated into 25 languages ("Ich Bin O.K. -- Du Bist O.K.") and earned a then-record $1 million for paperback rights in 1972.
Though the fickle self-help audience eventually moved on to Peter Pan complexes and women who love too much -- and Harris was often confused with the Thomas Harris who wrote "Silence of the Lambs" -- the doctor's influence continues to be felt.
Among his more lasting achievements:


Tracy A. Hagan, John V. Mallory
Tracy Ann Hagan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George B. Hagan of Simsbury, Conn., was married yesterday to John Vollertsen Mallory, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph S. Mallory of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Stan Moseley performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mr. and Mrs.
Mallory, both 25, work for Brown Brothers Harriman, the private  bank.
She is a trade finance officer in New York and he is the resident investment specialist in Brown Brothers' Hong Kong office.
The bride graduated from Dartmouth College; the bridegroom, from Harvard University.


Sarah E. Bird, William A. Kent
Sarah Elizabeth Bird, a sculptor and installation artist, and William Alan Kent, a film director and writer, both in Brooklyn, are to be married today at the Art Club TriBeCa, an exhibition space in Manhattan.
Rabbi Ari Fridkis is to  officiate.
Ms.
Bird, 30, will keep her name.
She graduated from Amherst College and received a master's degree in fine arts from the California College of Arts and  Crafts.


The Lives They Lived: Harry Lipsig;A Legal Precedent
TO APPRECIATE HARRY Lipsig's skills, suppose for one horrible moment that he  is cross-examining you.
You're on the witness stand, being sued for hitting a child with your car.
You were driving below the speed limit when the child dashed from between two parked cars.
You know it wasn't your fault.
But try answering this question from Lipsig:
"As you were driving, were you aware that little children frequently played on that street?"


No Headline
I can read, I can read!
Sometimes I pick up the Bible and read and read and  read.
I sure do.
Glory hallelujah." -- RUBY S. WILLIAMS, 84-year-old student in  a Georgia literacy program. [16:1.]


Them's Fightin' Words, Pardner
To the Editor:
In her essay "The Outer Limits of Cable Create a Comfort Zone" [Dec. 10], Caryn James stated that Nickelodeon "will start a channel called TV Land, showing only old series like 'Gunsmoke' and 'Hill Street Blues.' "


The Lives They Lived: Hannes Alfven;A Northern Light
1908-1995 Beginning in 1939, the Swedish physicist Hannes Alfven proposed a theory that auroras, like the aurora borealis at left, arise from charged particles emitted by the Sun as they spiral along the Earth's magnetic field lines into the atmosphere, radiating light.
But, like many of Alfven's theories, this one was dismissed -- only to be proved right decades later.
Again defying conventional wisdom, Alfven was also the first to argue that interstellar space  is not a vacuum but a sea of ions -- a plasma -- interlaced with magnetic field  lines.
He shared a Nobel Prize in 1970 for his work on plasmas.
Deemed a heretic by many physicists, Alfven considered the big-bang theory a myth -- stars may come and go, he believed, but the cosmos is eternal.


McVEIGH'S MIND: A special report.;Oklahoma Bombing Suspect: Unraveling of a Frayed Life
He rented movies, playing one about a Colorado football team over and over.
He wore a favorite T-shirt with a quotation from Thomas Jefferson.
He once changed cheap motels so he could watch the X-rated Spice Channel.
He always washed the dishes.
These seemingly ordinary activities are little pieces of the puzzle that is the greatest remaining mystery of the case charging Timothy J. McVeigh with blowing up the Federal Building in Oklahoma City, killing 168 people:


New Orleans Ponders A Casino's Bankruptcy
IN an era of expansion for legalized gambling, last month's bankruptcy of the Harrah's Jazz casino in New Orleans raised a troubling new question for the gaming industry: Can casinos succeed in cities where there are other things to do?
Gambling opponents and some Wall Street analysts contend that a major reason  the New Orleans casino failed was that visitors simply preferred to spend their  time and money on the many attractions that have long made New Orleans such a popular destination.


First Night
LIKE every other First Night -- the New Year's Eve celebration that includes  all things festive except alcohol -- First Night Red Bank will have all kinds of music playing.
It will have dancing, from ballet to line dancing.
Naturally, it  will have face-painting and clowns for children.
But Red Bank will also have the quintessential little-town-that-can finale.
A ball will be dropped, but not just any ball.
Red Bank's has a circumference of 10 feet -- 4 feet larger than New York City's vastly more famous one.
Furthermore, the Red Bank ball will drop a longer distance: 88 feet, as opposed  to New York's 70 feet.


MARKET TIMING
Government reports on economic statistics scheduled for release this week will not be available because of the partial shutdown of the Federal Government  stemming from the budget stalemate.
Monday


The View From the Outside
The somber all-black minimalist style prevalent today has not corralled some  young people, who enjoy creating their own looks and expressing their personalities through the clothes they wear.
Surely, the young men below in eight-inch-high multicolor platform sneakers are not about to be intimidated by fashion dictates.
Nor are the young couple, bottom left, who are dressed in a colorful version of the flower-child look.


Friendship as a Global Force
WHEN Bernie Lipsky vacationed in Japan, he didn't stay in a Hyatt.
He stayed  with a Japanese family that had two teen-age girls and one bathroom.
You had to wait your turn, Mr.
Lipsky, of Deer Park, said.
"And I had to remember to take my slippers off and put them on when I went in and out of the bathroom."


ON THE TOWNS
Music


Tall Machines
To the Editor:
In his essay "Of Mondrian, Street Grids and Cities Transcendent" [Dec. 10], Herbert Muschamp asks, "Didn't Cass Gilbert, Woolworth's architect, once call the skyscraper 'a machine for making money'?" Not exactly.
What Gilbert actually wrote was that the skyscraper is "a machine that makes the land pay." There is an important difference between Mr.
Muschamp's version and the original.
Virtually every commercial building can be said to be a machine for making money.
Only the skyscraper, however, is conceived to make very expensive land profitable by building to extreme heights above it.


What Really Tickled the Palate in 1995
TWELVE months have slipped away, making it time for a recap of the changes that 1995 brought to the table.
Gone are clams casino, Cajun blackened this or that, and chocolate decadence.
This year's trendy dishes included duck confit, seared tuna, grilled portobello mushrooms and two dishes that have leaped from Italian to mainstream menus: polenta and risotto.
On dessert lists, tiramisu and creme brulee seem to have vanquished the chocolate creations recently so dominant.
Among restaurants reviewed in in 1995, only 2 rated Excellent: La Colline Verte (French) and Baang Cafe and Bar (New American-cum-Asian).
Of 11 Very Good  awardees, 5 were Italian (Cafe Lafayette, Il Falco Ristorante, Per Bacco! Ristorante, Piccolo Arancio, Tre Scalini), 3 were New American (The Brewhouse, 64 Greenwich Avenue, Tavern on Main), 2 French (Brookside Bistro, Le Petit Cafe) and 1 Hawaii-Asian (Splash Pacific Rim Grill).
But sometimes what evokes the most vivid memory is a particular dish.


Balancing the Budget, L.B.J. Style
With Speaker Newt Gingrich nuking the Great Society at just about every opportunity in the budget debate and with President Clinton omitting Lyndon B. Johnson in just about every list he recites of great Democratic Presidents, both might be surprised to learn that the last time the Government collected more money than it spent was in fiscal 1969, the year of L.B.J.'s last budget.
How Johnson and Congress got there might be instructive to today's balanced-budget gladiators.


Home From Rwanda, Couple Recall Gorillas
THERE are hints of more rugged times in Dr.
William Weber's comfortable office at the Wildlife Conservation Society here.
Tacked above his desk are pictures of his family's nine-year sojourn in Africa.
One shows his wife, Dr.
Amy L. Vedder, communing with a family of mountain gorillas; another depicts, in portrait-like fashion, a row of muddy field boots.
Dr.
Vedder, who oversees more than 80 projects in 20 African countries for the Wildlife Conservation Society, now works across the hall from her husband, whose job is also wide ranging.
He heads the organization's new North American program, which is involved in 20 wildlife-preservation projects on this continent.


Better Than Sex
1911-1995 Though she had other roles and he had other leading ladies, Ginger  Rogers has been enshrined in our memories as Fred Astaire's partner.
A kind of spontaneous combustion took place when they danced together; they enhanced each  other, as all good souples do.
Other actresses cast opposite Astaire were invariably drawn into his orbit, overwhelmed by his charm.
Only Rogers held her  ground.
Hollywood today congratulates itself on its hard-won ability to depict lovemaking explicitly, without resorting to metaphor.
But this assumption fails  to take into account one semmingly obvious fact: sex was never this good.
The rapid-fire exchanges, the tenderness, the playfulness, the mutual respect, the shared delight - Fred and Ginger's union transcended the mechanics of intercourse.
In a recent essay, in response to Freud's famous question about what women want, John Updike concluded thatt women want to dance.
Well, of course.
We want to do what Ginger did.
She danced for us all.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about a proposal to convert the estate of the Johnson  &amp; Johnson heiress Barbara Piasecka Johnson into a golf course misidentified her  late husband.
He was Seward Johnson Sr., not Seward Johnson Jr.


Happy 1996 (Or 5757, Or 1417, Or 4694)
At midnight tonight, a lighted ball will complete its descent in Times Square and it will be Jan. 1, 1996.
Well, not exactly.


CUTTINGS PAGE 34
We need to remind ourselves of living lambs and the taste of fresh eggs, by Anne Raver.


Police Takeover of School Safety Is Urged
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's Commission on School Safety will recommend next week that the Police Department take over the school system's scandal-plagued security division, the commission's chairman said yesterday.
The recommendation is no surprise, since it supports the Mayor's longstanding position, but it could set the stage for the first major rift between the Mayor  and Schools Chancellor Rudy Crew, who has steadfastly maintained that school principals, not police officers, should have ultimate control over school safety.


Texas Steals Victory Away From No. 11 North Carolina
Texas 74, North Carolina 72


Paper Reports Blast Followed Aid Delay
More than two dozen utility technicians on call declined a summons from the Peco Energy Company to check reports of leaking gas in Norristown on Dec. 19, and two houses blew up, killing two people, a newspaper reported today.
The Philadelphia Inquirer, citing people it did not name, said that some of the technicians called at home had begged off by saying they had been drinking the night before.


On the International Ski Circuit
IN recent years, when I worked in a children's camp in the Swiss resort of Morgins, I used to conduct a torchlight walk on the darkest evening of the week, taking the kids down a trail in a deeply wooded valley where a mountain stream ran through the forest.
Along the way I would tell a ghost story, of smugglers who met a grisly end trying to bring in contraband from France, building up to a climax I somehow always managed to blow: no poker face, I guess.
The story was entirely invented, but smugglers did for a time operate here, in the Pas de Morgins, a mountain pass on the French-Swiss border.
During World  War II there were further problems along the frontier, where neutral Switzerland was confronted by German-occupied France.


At the 401(k) Forefront
MUTUAL fund companies have become the dominant force in the 401(k) retirement plan market, accounting for about 37 percent of plan assets, according to a recent study by Cerulli Associates, a Boston firm specializing in marketing to financial services companies.
Insurance companies are now second in the 401(k) market, followed by banks.
Although Cerulli did not have numbers from past years for comparison, it pointed to a survey by the Investment Company Institute in 1993 that showed insurance companies leading the market with 34 percent of assets, followed by banks at 27 percent and mutual funds at 26 percent.


Top Toastmaster's How-To Guide
THIS is the season of the toast, attempted by many but mastered by few.
Even  Mark Brown, voted the 1995 best speaker in the world by Toastmasters International, rarely does them.
But in the genial spirit of the season he took  time recently to offer a few tips on how to give terrific New Year toasts.
First of all, Mr.
Brown said in his mellifluous, Jamaican-accented English, a toast and a roast are not to be confused, though they often are.
A roast pokes fun.
A toast is sweetness and light and never, ever rude.


Commercial Property/Top 10 Deals;New York City Holds Its Own Against the Suburbs
IN one sense, it is just a list, nothing more, nothing less: The 10 biggest deals of 1995.
Not necessarily the most complicated or the most lucrative; not even necessarily indicative of anything other than the square footage leased, or important to anyone other than the parties involved and those with a Lettermanesque addiction to Top 10 lists.
But in another sense, the deals yield insights about how the city fared in the year that ends today.
They show a city that, at worst, successfully treaded  water, and held its own against tenant-hungry suburbs and nearby states.
As Carol Nelson, executive vice president of the Edward S. Gordon real estate firm, put it, "The exodus of companies out of New York finally stopped, and in that sense we gained a lot more than we lost this year."


Consumer Crusader Feels a Chill in Washington
AS the new year opens, Ralph Nader, consumer advocate and scourge of business, is well into the fourth decade of his crusade.
By now, the press has nearly run out of biblical metaphors.
David versus Goliath.
Avenging Angel.
Saint Ralph.
And, more recently, Lazarus back from the dead.
Methuselah may be next.
Mr.
Nader, a bald spot spreading at the back of his head, will be 62 years old in February, an age when many people retire and activists of a certain age have long since decamped to Wall Street or married Ted Turner.


POSTINGS: Limited-Equity Co-op to Rise in East Harlem;Three Bedrooms For $4,000
Maple Plaza, a subsidized 155-unit limited-equity co-op, is to begin rising on an empty, rubble-strewn square block defined by Madison and Park Avenues and  123d and 124th Streets in East Harlem next spring.
The co-op, costing $20.6 million, will be similar in financing and philosophy to the 135-unit Maple Court, a four- and six-story square-block complex just south of it.
Residents, mainly from the area, began moving into Maple Court this month.
Both are sponsored by North General Hospital and developed by the Sparrow Construction Corporation of the Bronx.
Maple Plaza, to be completed in fall 1997, will have six- and eight-story buildings.


Nine Suspected of Terrorism Are Arrested in Manila
Nine men suspected of being Islamic terrorists, including a man said to be the twin brother of Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, the man accused of masterminding the World Trade Center bombing in 1993, were arrested in Manila on Friday in raids that also netted an arsenal of weapons and explosives, Philippine officials said yesterday.
While only nine arrests were announced, intelligence officials said that 15 suspects had been taken into custody and that the other six arrests would be announced shortly.
All 15 were said to be part of an international network of Islamic extremists bent on terrorism in the Philippines and other countries.


Bookshelf
LIVES OF THE ARTISTS: Masterpieces, Messes (and What the Neighbors Thought).
By  Kathleen Krull.
Illustrated by Kathryn Hewitt.
Harcourt Brace. $19. (Ages 8 to 12) The creators of a book on musicians and a book on writers follow the same format to present an album of chatty profiles and amusing portraits of 20 men and women from many countries whose lives were spent making art.
An entertaining survey, of interest to adults as well as children.


A PLAN TO RETURN FEDERAL WORKERS CLEARS THE HOUSE
By a unanimous voice vote, the House approved a plan today that would bring all 260,000 furloughed Federal employees back to work immediately but without pay.
Even though House Democrats went along with the bill, they warned that it was doomed in the Senate, where Democrats oppose a provision to limit debate on  the ultimate budget proposal.


Search for the Alchemy of a Champion
Football winds down in December, while pro basketball and hockey heat up.
For Division I college basketball players, December is a busy intersection of high hopes and soul-searching.


New York's Violent Crime Rate Drops to Lows of Early 1970's
In a dramatic acceleration of a four-year trend, New York City's crime rate in 1995 registered its steepest drop in 23 years, belying commonly held fears of wanton violence that were most recently stirred by the deadly assault at a Harlem clothing store and the killings of five people at a Bronx shoe store.
Coming on the heels of a sharp decline the year before, the rate of violent crime in New York City is now at its lowest point since the early 1970's.


Books in Briefs: FICTION &amp; POETRY
THE OFF SEASON A Victorian Sequel. By Jack Cady. St. Martin's, $23.95.


Budget? What Yankees Budget?
Damn the payroll, full speed ahead.
Taking a cue from Admiral David Glasgow Farragut, who was associated with ships about 100 years before he was, George Steinbrenner sent that signal late last week as he took off in full-blown, high-speed pursuit of a free agent left-handed pitcher.


Let's See Tom and Huck Get Out of This One
Grumpier Old Men Walter Matthau, Jack Lemmon, Sophia Loren, Ann-Margret, Daryl Hannah, Kevin Pollak, Burgess Meredith Directed by Howard Deutch PG-13 100 minutes


Dean Martin: Myth and Man
It's unlikely that Dean Martin, Hollywood's quintessential lounge lizard, who died on Monday at the age of 78, will be remembered as a great musician or actor.
But as the host of his own variety show in the 1960's, he slyly and hilariously exploited the myth that his supreme relaxation was the result of slinging back a few too many highballs.
In fact, he was a master of the insinuating ad lib and a natural at self-parody.


Met Magic and a Multitude for Mahler
THE METROPOLITAN OPERA got so many things right this year that even its most  tenacious critics had to smile.
The appropriate singers appeared.
Designers and  directors figured out how to make the Met's incomparable facilities work for it; they also showed a lot of imagination in dealing with the problems of a too-big  house and a too-big stage.
The Met orchestra, led by James Levine and others, has gone on as usual.
In past years, even when we didn't like what was happening on stage, there were still those marvelous musicians to ease the pain.


Here's the Future. Look Familiar?
ONE book under a lot of Christmas trees this year was Bill Gates's "The Road  Ahead," which opened -- to borrow a term appropriate to its publishers' aggressive marketing strategies -- at the top of the best-seller list, and promises to remain there long after the last pine needles have been swept from the hearth.
And why not?
Mr.
Gates's book is ideally suited to this season of good cheer: In his view (a view no doubt shared by the stockholders in his flourishing Microsoft Corporation), the road ahead is paved with gold.
"The network will draw us together, if that's what we choose, or let us scatter ourselves into a million mediated communities."
Not everyone shares Mr.
Gates's optimism.
Consider the rival scenario advanced by Kirkpatrick Sale, whose "Rebels Against the Future" contains the pointedly ominous subtitle "Lessons for the Computer Age." Where Mr.
Gates revels in the sheer ingenuity of invention, overjoyed by a device that can list  "all the stores that carry two or more kinds of dog food and will deliver a case within 60 minutes to my home address," Mr.
Sale is troubled by a world in which  technology is a harbinger of social disintegration.


Grim Data on a Crash
An American Airlines jet that crashed in Colombia Dec. 20, leaving 160 people dead, was probably not a victim of sabotage, mechanical error or navigation system problems, the Colombian Civil Aviation Administration indicated last week, as it reported early findings that point strongly in another direction: error by the pilots, who became lost.


Talbott Bryan, Jack Maxey
Elizabeth Talbott Bryan, a daughter of Mrs.
William Gordon Pannill of Palm Beach, Fla., and John Stewart Bryan 3d of Richmond, is to be married this evening to Jack Forrester Maxey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Fleming Maxey of Berwyn, Pa.
The Rev.
Dr.
Thom William Blair is to officiate at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Richmond.
The bride, 28, is known as Talbott.
She is a graduate of Washington College in Chestertown, Md.
She received a master's degree in social work from Widener University.
Her father is the chairman, president and chief executive of Media General Inc., the communications company in Richmond.
The bride's paternal grandfather, David Tennant Bryan of Richmond, is a founder of Media General and  the chairman of its executive committee.


Different Theory
To the Editor:
I think that the reactions to "Nixon" are going to be of a different nature than questions of accuracy.


Two Loaders Evicted From the Fulton Market
In the insular world of the Fulton Fish Market, Elio Albanese and Carmine Russo are familiar figures who have long run parking and loading businesses important to the market's smooth operations.
Until Friday, when the city evicted them.


Singapore's Hip Snack? Termites, of Course
Singaporeans have been flocking to a nearby Malaysian town to feast on what is becoming a fashionable but expensive snack: termites.
The termites have been selling for up to 18 Malaysian ringgit, or $7, for a prime queen termite, which is about two inches long.
People have been eating them in the belief that they relieve headaches and muscle pains and generally improve health, the Strait Times said today.


The Year's Champions;Who, What and Witch of Irish Hurling Hex
No one in Boston would say it is Biddie Earley's curse that has haunted the Red Sox since they traded Babe Ruth to the Yankees in 1920.
No one in New York blames her for that long dry spell cast upon the Rangers, whose thirst between drinks from Lord Stanley's cup lasted 54 years.
But in Ireland, hurling fans are sure of one thing: It was Biddie Earley who  placed one of the most wicked curses in the history of sports on County Clare.
The team ended 81 jinxed years of heartache and frustration by defeating Offaly  to win the All-Ireland hurling championship in September.


Several Strides Forward, and an Explosive Setback, for the Environment
Not nearly as bad as it could have been: that's how environmental groups in New Jersey summed up 1995, even as a national trend toward deregulation threatened to weaken the programs responsible for much of the drop in pollution  (and proliferation of red tape) of the past two decades.
Here are some environmental developments in the last year.
DEVELOPING THE MEADOWLANDS In April, officials proposed a new management plan for one of the state's most bitterly contested environmental battlefields, the 20,000-acre Hackensack Meadowlands.
The new plan calls for filling in 840 acres  of marsh to build several large commercial projects, with the developers paying  for the restoration of 3,400 acres of damaged wetlands.


Casinos May Find Adversity A Boon
By the end of this year, it seemed appropriate that the most powerful company in one of the wealthiest industries in the country -- gambling -- was called Mirage Resorts.
After gambling grew rapidly in the early 1990's, the industry's success started to vaporize in 1995.
The spread of casinos to new towns screeched to a halt because of popular resistance, Congress threatened new regulations, gambling stocks got clobbered and the Harrah's Jazz Company, which was building  a big new casino in New Orleans, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in November.
The stock market seemed like the only place left for an honest wager.


QUEENS SCENE: Hello Bollywood, Goodbye Scholz
People, places and things that appeared on, or disappeared from, the Queens scene in 1995:
IN...


Fighting a Paralyzer of the Face and Eyes
ON an icy Sunday morning earlier this month, Kathi and Rich Campbell of Larchmont sat among 200 other parents and squirming, festively dressed children  in the darkened Emelin Theater here.
Their 3-year-old son Douglas sat quietly in his mother's lap, watching one of three "Sing Along With Santa" shows his parents had helped organize that day as  part of a fund-raiser for the Moebius Foundation.
Douglas was enjoying the Christmas carols and an appearance by Santa Claus, but because he suffers from the facial paralysis of a rare genetic disorder called moebius syndrome, Douglas could not smile to show his happiness.


A Reston Sampler
ON THE COLD WAR - I have no doubt whatsoever about the outcome of the cold war.
No handful of men in the world are smart enough to run this vast Communist empire.
The thing is against human nature, and its inner contradicions will bring it down if we are strong, vigilant and patient.


The Year In Review;Heroes and Villians, Big and Small
In sports, 1995 was the year of the good, the bad and the ugly.
And the sad.
But through all the gloomy clouds of distrust and distaste and death, some good  guys glowed.
Cal Ripken Jr., the Baltimore Orioles' shortstop, lapped the field in Camden  Yards after surpassing Lou Gehrig's consecutive-game record.
He's now at 2,153 and counting.


A Young Mayor Offers Tough Love for Waterbury
IT took him only two and a half years to get a bachelor's degree in political science from the University of Connecticut, most of the time making the dean's list while also working in a grocery store 35 hours a week.
Then he went to Thomas M. Cooley Law School in Lansing, Mich., because it had three semesters a  year instead of two, and knocked down a law degree in another two and a half years.
He does not require a great deal of sleep, he says, going to bed at 12:30 or 1 A.M. and popping up again around 5:30.
Is this guy driven, or what?


Taking a Tougher Stand on Crime
In 1995, the legal landscape in New Jersey was dominated by the debate over whether parents' desires to protect their children's safety outweighed the constitutional rights of convicted sex criminals.
"Megan's Law," passed in October 1994 shortly after 7-year-old Megan Kanka of Hamilton Township was raped and murdered by a neighbor who was a twice-convicted sex offender, gave prosecutors the power to classify released sex offenders as being at low, moderate or high risk to strike again.
Under the  law, the names and addresses of those deemed low-risk are given to the local police.
Details about those said to be moderate-risk are provided to schools and other children's services, and information about high-risk offenders is circulated communitywide, through posters, mailings and information provided to  the news media.


The Strange Politics of Immigration
EVERY other week between April and mid-November, an odd mixture of interest groups met in Washington to plot strategy on how to defeat Congressional proposals to overhaul the country's immigration policy.
Dubbed the "Left-Right Coalition on Immigration" by one of the participants, it contained organizations that seldom see eye to eye on anything, and, indeed, are often barely on speaking terms.
Among those in the meetings: the Institute for Justice, a conservative civil  rights group that strongly opposes affirmative action; Americans for Tax Reform, an anti-tax, anti-big government group; the Home School Network, a Christian fundamentalist group; the American Civil Liberties Union, and the National Council of La Raza and the National Immigration Forum, both of which oppose attempts to scale back legal immigration.


'Big Boxes' Are Going Strong; Homes and Offices Barely Pass the Gate
It was a slow year for development in New Jersey, the latest in a string that began during the recession of 1991-92, from which the state has never fully recovered.
After a frantic boom in the mid- and late 1980's, new housing slowed to a crawl, and office complexes sprouted "for lease" signs by the dozens.
Only in 1995 did development start to pick up a bit, thanks in part to a recovering economy, lower mortgage rates and changing consumer demands.
But there are no predictions of a boom anytime soon.


A 48-Hour Maternity Law Has Exceptions
Gayle Korley was pregnant with her second child when Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman signed legislation in June requiring insurance companies in New Jersey to pay for two days of hospital care for mothers and their newborns after a normal vaginal delivery.
But after giving birth to her son, Alex, at St.
Peter's Medical Center in New Brunswick in November, Ms.
Korley learned that a loophole in the law had left her with only 24 hours of paid coverage.


Warhol Foundation Lawyer Respond
This firm has been the Andy Warhol Foundation's general counsel since February 1990 ["Warhol Legal-Fee Fight Is in Court Again," Dec. 3, and Letters,  "Executors Mishandled Two Artists' Estates," Dec. 17].
Ever since April 1992, when Ed Hayes sued his client, the Warhol estate, seeking legal fees of at least $12 million, he has endeavored to distract attention from the only issue in the  case, the value of his services, by trying to put the "victims," the estate and  the foundation, on trial.
It is particularly disheartening to see a writer of Lee Seldes's talent repeating totally false allegations floated by Mr.
Hayes in  court and in the press when there is ample factual evidence available to refute them.
To counter a few of his misrepresentations that she relied on:


Marilyn F. McCauley and C. J. Quinn
Marilyn Frances McCauley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John McCauley of Whitestone, Queens, is to be married this evening to Christopher John Quinn, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Edwin Quinn of Lancaster, Pa.
The Rev.
Francis Shannon is to perform the ceremony at the Queenship of Mary Roman Catholic Church in Plainsboro, N.J.
The bride, 35, is a production services director at The New York Times.
She graduated from Queens College.


Texas Roster Scam Is Alleged
A Texas player accused of being an imposter skipped town on the eve of the Sugar Bowl, and school officials intend to turn over information gathered during their investigation to the F.B.I.
The player, known to the Longhorns as RON McKELVEY, was really RON WEAVER, 30, a veteran of six football seasons at two California junior colleges, The Californian of Salinas, Calif., reported yesterday.


Corrections
A front-page article last Sunday about housing for the mentally ill referred  incorrectly to the Waynewood Hotel, a residence in Asbury Park.
It is a Class C  boarding home -- not a rooming house -- and is not required to provide meals.
But such homes, like the Waynewood, often provide support services.
The Waynewood's owner, Jacob Cohen, said these include visits from a nurse, money management, room cleaning, help with bathing and dressing and transportation to  doctors' appointments.
Rooming houses are not required to provide such services.


DIARY
BANKING Tough Talk in Tokyo The Ministry of Finance announced changes in how Japanese banks are regulated, hoping to end a series of financial disasters and restore foreign confidence.
The guidelines call for banks to bolster their internal inspection and control systems and to draw up more detailed policies for risk management and control.
Announced by the Finance Minister, Masayoshi Takemura, the guidelines also address how much of a bank's assets can be lent to a single borrower.
In New York, a Federal grand jury indicted the former manager of Daiwa Bank's New York branch, Masahiro Tsuda, on charges that he had conspired with other bank officials to defraud the Federal Reserve by concealing trading losses.
Federal and New York State regulators had previously ordered Daiwa to shut its United States operations.


At Midnight, Baby Boomers Start Turning 50. The Arts Will Feel It.
Whatever else 1996 may bring, the New Year promises one frightening mathematical certainty -- the now famous statistic from the National Council on  Aging: starting at midnight tonight and continuing through the year 2014, a member of the baby-boom generation will turn 50 on the average of every 7.5 seconds.
That adds up to more than 75 million voters, consumers and employees (boomers make up more than a third of the nation's population of approximately 250 million).
The impact of this demographic milestone has been much explored in economic and social terms.
But its effects on culture promise to be no less momentous.
Could classical music's popularity suddenly soar, as millions of baby boomers finally admit that they don't feel angry enough for rock anymore?
Will this notoriously self-absorbed generation remain smitten with its lost youth, as evidenced in the pop music, movies and television shows it favors, or will it confront society's conflicting attitudes toward aging?
Perhaps we'll see more starring film roles for performers over 50, in tales of love and other new-found happiness among the middle-aged. (Maybe Meryl Streep and Clint Eastwood in "The  Bridges of Madison County" were only the beginning.) The New York Times asked six notable people in the arts who will turn 50 in 1996 to reflect on the possibilities.
Page 24.


Seoul Eases Conditions For Aid to North Korea
South Korea today appeared to ease its conditions for resuming food aid to North Korea, calling on its Government to prove that it is facing a crisis and to guarantee that donated rice will not be for the military.
The comments by Foreign Minister Gong Ro Myung could open the way for shipments of rice to North Korea by South Korea, Japan and possibly the United States.


Gotcha! Gang Strikes Again
YOU, OF ALL People," begin the letters from the Gotcha! Gang, a hardy tribe obsessed with accuracy and a lust for catching error in others.
As longtime readers know, I occasionally stud my language and political columns with "mistakes" to see if anybody is paying attention, or to draw mail.
It's a trap, of course.
Here are answers to some of those caught in it during 1995:


Judy Polacheck, Jonathan Rosand
Judy Lynn Polacheck, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Larry Polacheck of Milwaukee, was married there last evening to Dr.
Jonathan Rosand, a son of Dr.
Ellen Rosand and Dr.
David Rosand of New York.
Rabbi Jay Brickman officiated at the Milwaukee Athletic Club.
The bride, 30, is an associate at Schulte Roth &amp; Zabel, a New York law firm.
She graduated from Harvard University and received her law degree from Columbia  University.
Her father is a pediatrician in Milwaukee.
Her mother, Roberta Polacheck, is the guidance counselor at the Brown Deer Middle School in Brown Deer, Wis.


Devils Squander Late Lead
So what is wrong with the New Jersey Devils?
Is it a lack of scoring punch?
Is it the aftereffects of winning the Stanley Cup last summer?
Is it the absence of Claude Lemieux, who is now busy being a pest with the Colorado Avalanche?
Whatever it is, the Devils can only hope they begin the new year in better shape than they are ending the old one.
On Friday night in Winnipeg, they had a  3-1 lead over the Jets with less than 10 minutes to go in the game and managed to lose, 5-3, allowing 4 goals by the Jets in seven and a half minutes.


The Lives They Lived: Edward L Bernays and Henry C. Rogers;The Fathers of P.R.
LUCKY STRIKE CIGARETTES had a problem.
Women, an increasingly important market, were not buying Luckies in the expected quantities because, surveys in the 1930's showed, many felt the forest-green package clashed with their wardrobes.
The obvious solution would have been to change the color, but George  Washington Hill, the president of American Tobacco, adamantly refused, claiming he had already spent millions of dollars to advertise that green package.
What to do?
"If you won't change the color of the package, change the color of fashion -- to green," advised a young public relations man named Edward Bernays.
And Bernays systematically set out to make green the fashion color of the 1934 season.
Under the auspices of a local charity, Bernays planned a Green Ball and dispatched a well-connected society matron to the Paris couturiers to coax them  into providing green gowns for the event.
He convinced a leading textile manufacturer to sponsor a Green Fashions Fall luncheon for fashion editors and invited an art historian and a psychologist to expatiate on the significance of  green.
He organized a Color Fashion Bureau, which disseminated trends to the press, naturally emphasizing the popularity of the color green.


Alexandra Shear, David Blumenthal
Alexandra Shear, a daughter of Dr.
Ione M. Shear and Prof.
Theodore L. Shear  Jr. of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to David Benjamin Blumenthal, a son of Jennifer Blumenthal and Dr.
Ralph B. Blumenthal of Holmdel, N.J.
The Rev.
Leslie Smith performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in Princeton.
The couple graduated from Harvard University.


Cheap and Tasty Lamb Shanks
LAMB shanks are a very inexpensive cut of meat, and they make delicious winter stews.
They are especially good baked with white beans or lentils, which  absorb their flavor, or braised in white wine with orange peel and rosemary and  served with soft polenta.
Osso buco, the hind shank of veal, is more often sawed into thick pieces, tied with string to keep the meat from falling off the bone and cooked with vegetables and herbs.
The marrow inside the bones is a great delicacy.
Long, narrow silver spoons are made for extracting it, but a small knife or coffee spoon will work just as well.
The meat, however, should be tender enough to eat  with a fork.


BELITTLED BIG MEN
I am sick of reading about how universities exploit football players ("Belittled Big Men," by Pat Jordan, Dec. 10).
A pox on both; they use each other.
From the age of 12, athletes allow themselves to be recruited by the best high-school programs in the hope of getting into one of the best football factories, where they will have a chance of being drafted by the National Football League.


Small Town In Quebec Just Awaits Next Vote
The "little salon" is a refuge of counter stools and ungainly chairs in the cluttered rear of the Tabagie Grand-pere, a tobacco, coffee and news shop on Boulevard St.
Laurent, where everyone meets.
Until recently, the arguments were so heated in Louiseville's version of a country store on Main Street U.S.A. that the Tabagie's owner, Michel Ringuette,  had to pull customers apart.


No Free Rides;Generational Push Has Not Come to Shove
WAS 1995 the first skirmish in the great generational war?
If so, many analysts suggest, Americans have little stomach for it.
For years now, an influential group of academics and political theorists has  been predicting this clash: As a great wave of baby boomers begins to retire in  the next 15 years, generational tensions will come to drive American politics just as race and class and ethnicity have in eras past.


Books in Briefs: FICTION &amp; POETRY
NOBODADDY'S CHILDREN By Arno Schmidt. Dalkey Archive, cloth, $32; paper, $13.95.


Surprising St. Peter's Is 8-1
The best college basketball team in the New York area? Maybe it's St. Peter's.
On Friday night, Mike Frensley scored 18 points to lead St.
Peter's past Wichita State, 56-48, in the championship game of the Cessna Classic.
The first-year coach, Rodger Blind, has guided St.
Peter's to eight victories in its first nine games this season.


Toward Greater Efficiency and Safety in a State Perpetually on the Move
Few issues stir as much passion in so many communities as the simple act of moving from place to place: from home to work to the mall and home again.
So 1995 brought sharp disputes, in cities, towns, counties and the state as a whole, over a host of transportation issues: new highway construction, train connections, light-rail plans, pedestrian access, employee car pools, the 55-mile-per-hour speed limit.
But there was not much controversy over a technical but major change in the way the state pays for transportation.
In November, voters overwhelmingly approved the dedication of a bigger portion of the gas tax to the Transportation Trust Fund, the pool of money from which the state pays for highways and mass transit projects.


SWEATER GIRL
Knitting has got me through good times and bad.
It has helped me learn the lessons of "doing it right," "correcting your mistakes" and patience.
My Christmas gift to the young people in my extended family this year was needles,  yarn and a knitting lesson.


The Lives They Lived: JAMES RESTON; Scooped, Again
HERE'S HOW JAMES RESTON could exploit a young reporter's dream of becoming James Reston.
I rushed into his Washington bureau one night with the scoop that Bobby Kennedy was flying to Indonesia.
"Hmm. Let's think about that," Scotty said -- always said.
"Why would the President waste his brother's time on a tinhorn like Sukarno while he's toe to toe with Khrushchev in Berlin?" "Yeah," I finally allowed.
"Indonesia could be a feint to cover a secret stopover in Moscow." Scotty picked up the phone, and to my amazement, the Attorney General took the call.
"Can't give him time to deny it," Scotty whispered.
"Good evening, General. What on earth do you think you can accomplish in Moscow?" Kennedy's shocked silence confirmed our guess; we now knew his mission no matter what else was said.
My back-page paragraph was suddenly front-page news -- which caused the Moscow side trip to be canceled.
Fast of foot and always thinking, Scotty Reston was the best reporter of his time because he knew what he didn't know and he knew how to make smart people tell him.
What's more, he fortified their best ideas with crisp and witty prose.
He forced the editors of The Times to value his facts, even if he failed to name his sources, and to welcome his prose, even if it broke every rule in the stylebook.


Here's A Bowl, There's A Bowl
If college football's New Bowl Order confuses you, here's some help: CBS, not NBC, will show the Fiesta Bowl, which is now sponsored by Tostitos, not I.B.M.
OS/2.
The Orange Bowl has also made the shift from NBC to CBS, but Federal Express is still the Miami game's sponsor.
ABC continues to telecast the Sugar Bowl, but Nokia, the Finnish cellularphone maker, is its corporate backer, not U.S.F. &amp; G. Insurance.
The three games will not all be played on New Year's Day let's do parens here and use the emdashes later in the piece, where they're abolutely the right  choice. (when the Orange and Sugar bowls have often been scheduled directly against each other) but on consecutive days: the Sugar tonight, the Orange tomorrow night and the Fiesta Tuesday night.


84-Year-Old Finds the Joy Of Reading a Good Book
When Ruby S. Williams was coming up, there wasn't much time, or much need, for book learning.
Her place, according to her parents and the white man whose farmland they tended, was in the fields, chopping cotton, cutting asparagus, picking peaches and clearing brush.
She took the three-mile hike to school only sporadically, and quit by the time she was 14.
Although she was two generations removed from slavery, it was hard to tell: she was black, poor and virtually illiterate.


A Reprise of 1995's Stories: Happy, Sad, Still-Unfolding
BLITHELY predicting the future is every stock columnist's birthright, or so we like to think.
But for many companies featured in this column over the last year, the future has arrived.
So, before plunging into 1996 in search of the market's horror and success stories, let's walk down memory lane for an update on some companies we visited in 1995.


For Black Women, a Movie Stirs Breathless Excitement
Waiting to Exhale," the movie, is rapidly proving to be "Waiting to Exhale," the event, as African-American women across the country pour into theaters to see the film about the lives of four black professional women.
In a year when events like the O. J. Simpson trial and the Million Man March  have focused attention on black men, along comes a movie that centers on black women.
The film, the moviegoers say, celebrates the trials and triumphs of black career women -- a much-missed reflection of their lives, their concerns and their desires -- and offers a loving portrait that has nothing to do with racism, interactions with whites, or ghetto life.


Life Without Speed Limits: No Rush to the Fast Lane
Thousands of freshly painted signs with higher speed limits have gone up across the West in recent days, but traffic safety officials do not predict an upswing in the annual New Year's Eve traffic death toll.
Initial state traffic statistics do not show a rise in fatalities since Dec.  8, the day that marked the end of 21 years of the federally mandated 55-mile-an-hour speed limit.


Cubans Say Guevara Kin Will Decide On Remains
The Cuban Government says that if the remains of the revolutionary hero Ernesto (Che) Guevara are found, his family will determine what is done with them.
The hunt for the remains of Che Guevara and other Cuban guerrillas killed 28  years ago during a failed insurgency in the Bolivian mountains began after a retired Bolivian general said last month that Guevara was buried in a mass grave by an airstrip in the Bolivian town of Vallegrande.
On Friday the Communist Party newspaper Granma, in the first such information provided to Cubans, gave details of the search, which was ordered by the Bolivian Government.


Unfounded Theories
To the Editor:
One recurring theme for all bashers of Oliver Stone is Mr.
Stone's penchant for conspiracy theories.
Americans operating shadow governments?
You've got to be kidding.
United States-backed hit squads in foreign lands?
Impossible.
U.S. corporations influencing foreign policy?
Come off it.


The Lives They Lived: Orville Redenbacher;Our Inner Nerd
ORVILLE REDENBACHER originally called his popcorn Red Bow, a discreet reference to his own name and that of his partner, Charlie Bowman.
A Chicago advertising consultant decreed that the product would sell much better if it was called Orville Redenbacher's Gourmet Popping Corn, and sent the men a $13,000 bill for the insight.
Thus Redenbacher's name ascended into the pantheon of great American Living Trademarks, while Charlie Bowman's went the way of the fifth Beatle.
Like other immortals -- Colonel Sanders, Frank Perdue, Dr.
Scholl -- Redenbacher had a negative glamour that inspired trust.
He looked like a man who would spend 40 years crossbreeding 30,000 popcorn hybrids in search of "the perfect kernel." Redenbacher's version, which he didn't perfect until age 63, popped up twice as fluffy as the competition's.
It also had fewer of those unpopped kernels, which Redenbacher called "the shy fellows." Hunt-Wesson, which bought the brand in 1976, was canny enough to keep Redenbacher as company spokesman.
He became one of the best-known human logos in American commerce, more sympathetic than the Smith Brothers, less politically correct than Ben &amp; Jerry.
Perhaps his lanky frame reminded people that popcorn is a relatively low-calorie snack (though not when presented, as a Redenbacher cookbook suggests, in the form of Indiana Farms Blue Cheese Balls).
Maybe his prewar hair style, bow tie and spectacles called up a sympathetic response from the inner nerd in all of us.


BENEFITS
Support for Harlem Hospital TODAY -- H. Carl McCall, the New York State Comptroller, and Caroline R. Jones,  an advertising executive, will be honored at the Support Network's annual New Year's Eve party.
The evening's proceeds will go to Harlem Hospital.
Cocktails at 10:30 P.M. will be followed by dancing, entertainment and a late supper, all  at the Puck Building, 295 Lafayette Street (Houston Street).
Brenda Joyce, a singer, will perform.
Black tie.
Tickets, $200, at the door.
Information: (212)  685-8503.
Jersey City on the Danube TODAY -- The Foundation for Young Artists With Disabilities will hold a party at the City Hall of Jersey City with the theme "A Night in Vienna." The evening, which begins at 9:30, will feature dancing, a buffet supper and a modern-dance performance.
The organization, which is raising money for an art therapy program for children in St.
Petersburg, Russia, will ask guests for a donation of $25.
Information: (201) 332-5203.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A Malone Passes 22,000 Points


French Labor Feud Is Still Bubbling in Marseilles
The disruptive strikes that pitted the French Government's calls for austerity against popular support for the welfare state ended nearly two weeks ago -- everywhere but here.
The city bus and subway system in this sprawling and anarchic Mediterranean port has been shut down since Dec. 7 and could remain closed into the new year unless the authorities try to force parts of it open under police protection.


Uganda Struggles Back
OUR entry into Queen Elizabeth National Park could have been scripted by the  Minister of Tourism.
We'd driven no more than five minutes from the gate when a  huge bull elephant came lumbering out of the bush.
Three more elephants trooped  across the road, followed by several babies.
It looked like the parade from a circus train, except that this group hadn't been tamed.
When we inched our Nissan van close for a picture, the lead bull flapped his ears, raised his trunk and made a run for us.
"He's charging!" gleefully cried our guide, Drake Serunkama, and gunned the accelerator.
At a safer distance we stopped to watch the elephants give one another dust baths in the road.
"Seen enough?" chuckled Drake.
"Are we ready to  go home?"


Reform Fratricide in Russia
Moderate Russian political leaders ought to study George McGovern's disastrous 1972 Presidential campaign.
Disorganized and crippled by dissension within the Democratic Party, it could be a preview of the way Russian democrats  fumble their chance to win Russia's presidency in June.


Relief in the South Bronx After 2 Violent Drug Gangs Fall
A measure of relief came to the South Bronx in 1995.
For nearly a decade, vicious drug gangs ruled a swath of the borough with a combination of fear, violence and munificence.
In a seven-block stretch around Brook Avenue, 139th Street and St.
Ann's Avenue, it was the C &amp; C gang, whose leaders strutted around like feudal lords, flinging cash to gain favor and ordering executions to generate fear.


Departures and Arrivals
MOVING FROM THE SOOTY city to the windy one, a favorite New York troupe officially changed its name to the Joffrey Ballet of Chicago.
There was no more  significant symbol of the flux in which the dance world found itself in 1995.
At a time when the entire field was experiencing financial problems and a single esthetic no longer held sway, the Joffrey's reorganization as a Chicago-based company was emblematic of a search for new solutions.
Cents and sensibility obviously motivated relocation to a city that promised  increased financial support, not to speak of new studios and offices.
Nonetheless, the move was a watershed for New York, where the Joffrey was founded in 1956.
Change was a leitmotif in 1995.


An Economic Messiah for Harlem?
Skeptics could be forgiven for having little faith in the Federal Empowerment Zone; it has been kicked around as a concept since a group of conservatives introduced enterprise zones during the Reagan Administration.
Since then, it has apparently amounted to little more than a political football -- alternately embraced and abandoned by each party -- and some studies have raised questions about its potential efficacy.
Now, after a year of planning, $300 million in Federal, state and city funds  is about to be directed toward Upper Manhattan and a sliver of the South Bronx over the next 10 years.
What difference this will make in a particularly impoverished swath of the city is still unclear.
But the political benefits are  clear: minority politicians can appear proactive and white Republicans like Mayor Giuliani and Gov.
George E. Pataki can trumpet concern for the inner city  while promoting free enterprise.


Michelle Borkowf, Jonathan Aufzien
Michelle Borkowf, the daughter of Dr.
Anne Borkowf of Milwaukee and the late  Dr.
Harold I. Borkowf, was married on Wednesday to Jonathan M. Aufzien, the son  of Norma and Alan Aufzien of New York.
Rabbi Nachman Levine officiated at the Phister Hotel in Milwaukee.
Mrs.
Aufzien, 26, teaches kindergarten at the Hillel Academy in Milwaukee.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a master's degree in public affairs and policy analysis from the University of Wisconsin at Madison.
Her mother is a professor of anatomy at the University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee.
Her father was an obstetrician and gynecologist in Milwaukee.


Q and A
A Place to Stay in Mexico


The Lives They Lived: Jerry Garcia;The False Notes He Never Played
HEY, JERRY -- What's happening?
I caught your funeral.
Weird.
Big Steve was good.
And Grisman.
Sweet sounds.
But what really stood out -- stands out -- is the thundering silence, the lack, the absence of that golden Garcia lead line, of that familiar slick lick with the up-twist at the end, that merry snake twining through the woodpile, flickering in and out of the loosely stacked chords . . . a wriggling  mystery, bright and slick as fire . . . suddenly gone.
And the silence left in its wake was -- is -- positively earsplitting.


Rustic to Elegant In the East 50's
BICE ** (212) 688-1999; 7 East 54th Street; $$(c) all major credit cards


Nigeria Pulls Out of Tourney
Nigeria announced yesterday that its national soccer team would not travel to South Africa to defend its title in the Africa Cup of Nations.
JIM NWOBODO, the  Minister of Youth and Sports, said at a news conference that the Super Eagles were withdrawing from the games because South Africa could not guarantee the safety of Nigerian players.
Relations between the nations have soured greatly since NELSON MANDELA, the  South African President, led the international condemnation of Nigeria after its military government executed nine human-rights activists last month.
(AP)


Let's See Tom and Huck Get Out of This One
Cutthroat Island Geena Davis, Matthew Modine, Frank Langella Directed by Renny Harlin PG 123 minutes


The Shrinking City: Who's Feeling the Pinch
Mayor Giuliani took an ax to the city budget in 1995, and the state and Federal governments followed suit.
The Mayor said his $1.1 billion budget cut, the largest since World War II, would barely be felt by most New Yorkers, but its effects were everywhere to be seen.
There were faded traffic signs and permanently broken playground swings, overcrowded classrooms and longer waits in emergency rooms, service cuts and higher fares on subways and buses, overflowing garbage cans because of fewer pickups and delays in the start of payments to welfare recipients.


Court Case Nudges Goetz Out of Cocoon;Subway Gunman Back in Spotlight
Bernie Goetz tried in vain to coax the chinchilla out of its hole.
"Come on out here," he said, rattling one of the cages lining the hallway between the living room and bedroom.
"Get out of here."
He scooped up the chinchilla, seemingly displeased and sleepy, in his hands.
He held it aloft and then against his chest.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15


Corrections
An article on page 27 of the Arts and Leisure section today about a new film  on the life of Picasso misstates the title and site of a Picasso exhibition last year.
The show was "Picasso and the Weeping Women: The Years of Marie-Therese Walter and Dora Maar," not "Picasso's Weeping Women." It was at the Metropolitan Museum, not the Museum of Modern Art.


The Lives They Lived: Herb McCracken;Football's Best-Kept Secret
THINGS TO BRING TO A football huddle: A play.
A breath mint.
A low voice.
A quarterback.
The huddle was invented 71 years ago by a paranoid coach and, remarkably, it  is still the sport's most sacred place.
Without this mini-board meeting, the game of football would be without its defining attribute: the secret.


Eva Jeanette, Jason Farrar
Eva Marie Jeanette, a daughter of Steve and Constance Jeanette of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., was married yesterday to Jason Harold Farrar, the son of John and  Heide Farrar of Suffern, N.Y.
The Rev.
Geoffrey B. Curtiss performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Englewood, N.J.
The couple, both 27, are graduates of Trinity College in Hartford.


If You're Thinking of Living In: Lenox Hill;Fast-Paced, Often Noisy, Young at Heart
TO most New Yorkers, the Upper East Side's reputation is more stodgy than lively.
But you won't find many fur-clad matrons walking Scotties in hand-knit coats in Lenox Hill.
The neighborhood, east of Park Avenue in the 60's and 70's, tends to attract youthful residents and youthful spirits to its brownstones and  high-rise buildings.
The area is one of the most densely populated in the city, and it is also thick with bars, restaurants, boutiques and retail shops.


Clearing the Streams of New Haven
STANDING on an iron footbridge spanning a sandy bottomed brook winding its way through a dense stand of oak and beach trees, Peter Davis spread out his arms and grinned widely.
"Who would think you'd find something like this in New Haven?" Mr.
Davis said.
The sound of an occasional truck passing by on Whalley Avenue, just out of sight over a small hill, is the only reminder of the urban setting.
"If you were in a canoe or rowboat, you'd think you were in Vermont," he said.


German Pornography Laws Determine What America Sees
Compuserve Inc., the nation's second largest on-line service provider, decided last week to block more than 200 sex-oriented electronic discussion groups and picture data bases in response to an order from a German prosecutor in Munich who said the material, available in 140 countries on the global Internet computer network, violated German laws against pornography.
Compuserve officials said Thursday that they were suspending access to the sex-oriented groups while the company discusses the matter with the German police.
The company said that it was also exploring technologies that would permit Compuserve to tailor its services to the laws of each country it operates in.


Both Packers and Falcons Are Heavy On Offense
The Atlanta Falcons (9-7) at the Green Bay Packers (11-5) this afternoon is all about the quarterback challenge.
It is all about the ties that bind.
One quarterback used to play for the Falcons.
He will tell you that he is the heart and soul of his current club and, simply, that if he plays well his team wins and if he does not it loses.
He owns numbers to support that claim: seven 300-yard passing games this season, a league-most 4,413 passing yards and 38 touchdown tosses.
He is the National Conference Pro Bowl quarterback.
He is Green Bay's Brett Favre.


Hail to the Pet Taxi and the Deli Poets
WE sculpt alloy in SoHo lofts and scour the streets for edgy Nikon images and fill sleek galleries with retro, po-mo P.C.
TV installations.
But the true art of New York is more prosaic.
It lies in making a buck.
Like most art, a business scheme is an alchemy of varied elements.
Think of the refrajo, a drink that mixes champagne sodas and beer and is carefully marketed to the Latin American population of Queens.
Or the cybercafes, blending Silicon Valley with Seattle grunge to attract Flatiron 'Net surfers.
Or the Korean deli that has poetry nights.
Or the Indian restaurant that goes kosher.


Elissa Hagopian, Robert Hambrecht
Elissa Marie Hagopian, a restaurateur in Barcelona, Spain, is to be married today to Robert Henry Hambrecht, an associate at the Unterberg, Harris investment bank in New York.
The Rev.
Jim Lawrence is to officiate at the Swedenborgian Church in San Francisco.
The couple graduated from the University of California at Berkeley.


Spiritual Quest Starts Here
FAITHFUL GARDENER A Wise Tale About That Which Can Never Die.
By Clarissa Pinkola Estes. 81 pp.
San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco. $14.
THE SOUL IS HERE FOR ITS OWN JOY Sacred Poems From Many Cultures.
By Robert Bly. 268 pp.
Hopewell, N.J.: The Ecco Press. $20.


Mediated Divorce May Be the Healthiest Option
To the Editor:
William A. Galston's proposal for "a not-so-fast divorce law" (Op-Ed, Dec. 27) strikes an emotional chord at first.
Upon reflection, it makes no sense at all.


Spots to Avoid
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.
1.
ROUTE 46 Montville, at the Passaic River Bridge.
One lane closed in both directions through mid-January.


A Day for Feathers and Tenor Saxophones
NEW YEAR'S DAY, we're going to the Mummers Parade," I announced to my wife. This was back in August, before she had a chance to get any ideas about some fancy New Year's vacation. We were dozing on a beach, and I figured maybe I could sneak a slider by her.
Not a chance.
"You want me to stand all day in the freezing cold on some Philadelphia street watching 15,000 people in feathers and 'Cage aux Folles' costumes playing banjos?" she asked.


Janet E. Komorn, Daniel I. Kleban
Janet Elizabeth Komorn, a daughter of Judith and Dr.
Robert Komorn of Houston, was married last evening to Daniel Ian Kleban, a son of Carol Kleban of Larchmont, N.Y., and Donald Kleban of New York.
Rabbi Jack Segal officiated at the Beth Yeshurun Synagogue in Houston.
Mr. and Mrs.
Kleban, both 25, graduated from the University of Michigan.
The  bride received her law degree from the University of Houston, where the bridegroom is a law student.


Bare Pantries In New York, As Cuts Loom
The demand for free food at soup kitchens and food pantries across New York City has surged in the last year, forcing centers to turn away the hungry even as proposed cuts in Federal and state aid further threaten the insufficient supplies.
The independent food bank that supplies the city has faced an escalating demand for emergency food since the middle of 1994, supplying 28 percent more food to the 789 city pantries, kitchens and shelters, food bank officials say.


A Historic Year's Highlights
AS another year passes into history, it is time to look at some of the outstanding events of the last 12 months.
The Westchester Hudson Opera Company began with a Spring Opera Gala, then gave its first full-length production (Puccini's "Tosca") in October.


Inspired by a Foolhardy Detroit Guarantee, Eagles Light Up Scoreboard
On a day when the Detroit Lions and the Philadelphia Eagles combined to score the most points ever in a National Football League playoff game, the Lions learned two painful lessons.
The first, which applies to tackle Lomas Brown, is when you feel you have a superior team, keep your mouth shut.
The second, which applies to the Detroit owner, William Clay Ford Sr., is when you give a coach an ultimatum to make the  playoffs or else, make sure you add, "And win a playoff game."


The Lives They Lived
What in 1994 began as an experiment today becomes a tradition - devoting the  Magazine's year-end issue to reflections on some lives of accomplishment that ended during the year.
The response to our first effort was strong - and enduring.
One letter, about an article on Kathryn Clarenbach, and early feminist, arrived just three weeks ago.
Such positive reaction encouraged us to  do the same for 1995.
The aim now, as then, is not to reghearse celebrity but to celebrate achievejent.
In these pages, we call attention to 51 people who were not well known but who deserved to be or who were well known but about whom there is more to say.
We do not try here to review every important death, like the shattring assassination of Yitzhak Rabin, Israel's Prime Minister, gunned down in a racist act that has elicited a continuing tide of sorrow, condemnatin and tribute; this story is not over.
The deaths of 168 innocents in Oklahoma City cast a long shadow over the year, emblemized by the iconic photograph of a fireman bearing the body of the 1-year-old Baylee Almon.
But from the first minutes, that tragedy, too, was the subject of exhaustive reporting.


A Big Purple Haze Covers Hollywood
They have sportcoats, E-mail and no suntan.
Northwestern will not be playing  its look-alike in the Rose Bowl; Harvard isn't eligible.
The Wildcats are here for the first time in a half-century, thanks to either  running back Darnell Autry or their longtime alum, Moses.
A year ago this week,  one of their leading tacklers was giving Penn State a Disneyland tour; a year ago this week, the school had only a top 5 ranking in theater and communications; a year ago this week, the city of Beverly Hills was not painted  purple.


Robyn Schecter, James H. Park
Robyn Elizabeth Schecter, the daughter of Lani and Philip Schecter of New York, was married last evening to James H. Park, the son of Julie K. Park of Orange, Conn., and the late Rev.
Harold S. Park.
Rabbi Charles D. Lippman performed the ceremony with the Rev.
Jung Song Kim,  a Methodist minister, at the Parker Meridien Hotel in New York.


